# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0047.01  
##  : with Gyedong Nyila [Tib. རྒྱས་སྟོང་སྙིང་ལགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 23 January 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Gyedong Nyila [Tib. རྒྱས་སྟོང་སྙིང་ལགས]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 64  
**Date of Birth:** 1930  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyedong Nyila [Tib. རྒྱས་སྟོང་སྙིང་ལགས] was the wife of (Amdo) Gyedong Tsering (H.0026). In this interview, she talks about her husband's involvement in the Second People's Association, including going on the Association's welcome delegation to Dartsedo in 1955. [Note: Nyila was basically a term of address for the wives of traders, but was also used in a manner similar to wife or Mrs. In this case, she is Mrs. Gyedong]. She also discusses her husband's contacts with Phala and Phala's contact with Jenkhentsisum, and especially her husband's work of secretly taking the Association's documents to Jenkhentsisum in India in 1956. She also talks about Alo Chöndze's detention and her role in talking letters and messages to him from her husband in India and about the conflict between Alo Chöndze and Jenkhentsisum in India.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0047_01/H_0047_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In October 1950, Chamdo was lost, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Just after that the Dalai Lama took the religious and the political power and went to Yadong. Where were you living at that time?   

**A:**  At that time, I was in Lhasa and I was young. Probably, I was 19 years old then and I was not that attentive [to events].   

**Q:**  Were you married at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, I got married when I was 19 years old; my husband was 36 years old.   

**Q:**  At that time, your husband, Jinda [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] was in Lhasa, right? [Note: Jinda is a title that means "patron." Her husband's name was Gyedong Tsering, but was commonly known as Amdo Gyedong]   

**A:**  Yes. He was born in Amdo, in Chone [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་ཅོ་ནེ] and probably he was 22 years old when he came to Tibet and became a monk in Sera Monastery for a couple of years. After that, he did some trading with another trader and was staying in Lhasa. We got together in 1949-50.   

**Q:**  How was the situation then in Lhasa? Were you attentive about the situation? At that time, the 17-Point Agreement was signed and Zhang Jingwu came via Yadong. After that, a large number of Chinese soldiers arrived at Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When we heard that the Chinese were coming we were very scared. Even though I was young, the elders told us that it won't be good and it will cause hardship if the Chinese come. I went to watch them when they were coming through Thepung Gang [Tib. ཐལ་ཕུང་སྒང] at the east side of Lhasa City. They were marching carrying their guns on their shoulders. When I first saw the Chinese I felt very frightened and scared. Although I was young at that time, I have never forgot that. At that time I didn't know much about the politics, but my husband was starting to do a little bit of secret work from that time.   

**Q:**  Did he start in 1950?   

**A:**  Yes. In 1954, he started making an organization though he didn't oppose [the Chinese] openly.   

**Q:**  In 1952, there was the People's Association called the Water-Dragon [Year] People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ]. In it there were Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] and the Tshawa Trunyi [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག]. At that time, did your husband have any relations with them?   

**A:**  He knew about that, but he didn't have relations with them. This was the first association and he started from the second People's Association led by Shigatse Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག] and, I forgot their names.   

**Q:**  Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད] was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and there was another person?   

**Q:**  Was it Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར]?   

**A:**  Yes, he was there, but he wasn't imprisoned. There was Jayan Dawa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ].   

**Q:**  Jayan Dawa was also in the first, right?   

**A:**  Yes. My husband took the main responsibility in the second one. He was very brave. Before Alo Chöndze, Jayan Dawa and Lhabju were arrested, they and my husband had made a pledge which was sealed by passing the seal to all the members [Tib. ཐེལ་རྩེ་ལག་སྐོར]. When they started the Association, they ground tsamba and gave it to the beggars on the 8th, 15th and the 30th [Tib. ཉ་སྟོང་རྒྱས་གསུམ] of the month. Like this they held the meetings.   

**Q:**  Would you explain that again?   

**A:**  When they passed the seal to all the people and put their seals on an oath to oppose the Chinese, this meant that whoever would be arrested, the others would follow them. All together, there were 30 some people. After that, they discussed how to do their work, so outwardly they had to show a nice appearance [Tib. འདྲ་ཆགས་པོ] so they said that it was an charitable association for giving tsamba to the beggars. Quite a lot of people were organized in that and they pooled things and did that.   

**Q:**  If they would set up an association openly, the Chinese won't let them do it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, although the Chinese didn't have the full power, they were causing a lot of trouble for the Tibetan Government saying that they are not behaving well and setting up associations. So they were unable to set up the association openly because there were many people keeping a lookout over us.   

**Q:**  At that time, where did the charity association meet?   

**A:**  Mostly they held it in our house. Sometimes, they also held in Andrutsang [Gombo Tashi]'s house [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང]. At that time, Gombo Tashi [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was acting as a main person and he was very enthusiastic. He and my husband were very close.   

**Q:**  At that time, Andrutsang probably didn't have the thought of setting up Chushigandru [Tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག], right?   

**A:**  It was long after that did they set up Chushigandru. At that time they held many internal talks about submitting a petition to the Chinese and setting up the charity association for giving tsamba to the beggars. Later, they came out openly and submitted the petition to the Chinese official who was then living in Somphü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད]. Some of them were living in Yuthok. They submitted the petition on which seals were also placed by turns saying, "Please, you Chinese go back to China. We don't need your help." There might be many words in the petition, but I didn't know them because I was young. At that time, they planned that 3-4 persons would submit the petition. If they would be arrested, the others promised that they will continue to do the work.   

**Q:**  Later, what else did they do after setting up the association?   

**A:**  Each person pooled 1,000 dotse [Tib. རྡོ་ཚད] and left it as a trust fund from which they bought barley and ground it into tsamba and gave tsamba to the beggars on the three holy days. Later, the Chinese became more and more powerful and they told the Dalai Lama that he should go to China. At that time, they [the people in the association] were saying that this is very dangerous and the Chinese will not let the Dalai Lama come back to Tibet. They will keep him in China. So they submitted a petition to the Chinese and the Tibetan Government saying that we, the representatives of the people, will go to China. At that time, they internally planned that in case the Chinese didn't let the Dalai Lama come back to Tibet, the people's representatives will protest [Tib. སྐད་རྒྱག] against the Chinese and make connections with the people in Tibet.   

**Q:**  At that time, all the people were thinking that the Dalai Lama would not be able to come back, right?   

**A:**  Yes. People had that doubt. Although the abbots of the three great monasteries and the monk and lay officials of the Tibetan Government went to China [to welcome the Dalai Lama back], they [the people's association leaders] said that there should also be representatives of the people. Later, Alo Chöndze and my husband went to Dartsedo [Tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ] and they were able to bring the Dalai Lama back. After that, they discussed performing a longevity ritual for the Dalai Lama [Tib. ཏེནཤུག]. Probably that was before he went to China. At that time, the people pooled things and also collected donations and offered the longevity ritual. Like this, the People's Association became more powerful and there were a lot of people making donations and people used their strength and made a great effort. Therefore the Chinese became more suspicious and they also set up spies at the front of our house. After that, the association became more and more impertinent [Tib. རྫབ་ཆེ་རུ] [to the Chinese] and it also became more and more dangerous. Later, Alo Chöndze and three of them were arrested because they submitted the petition. At that time, the Chinese bothered the Tibetan Government very much saying that they are going to arrest them, so the Tibetan Government implemented their policy and said that we will handle our own people. The Chinese don't need to handle them. And they were shut in the Police Station barracks of the Tibetan Government. It was just a kind of house [token] arrest. Internally, they were staying there happily and carefree. The Chinese did not come to watch inside the Police Station though they kept watch from outside. At that time, my husband was making connections with those in the prison. I was sent to deliver letters to them when I was going to bring them food. I used to put the letters in the food container.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did they talk about with you when you went there?   

**A:**  My husband used to go to Norbulinga riding his bicycle to make the connection with the Drönyerchemmo [Phala] and he would tell the other members whatever the Drönyerchemmo told him and they would discuss that. At that time, Alo Chöndze was very good and enthusiastic and sincere.   

**Q:**  At that time, did your husband tell them in the prison what the Drönyerchemmo said?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, Drönyerchemmo probably had relations with Jenkhentsisum [Tib. gcen mkhan rstis gsum] who were Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ], Tsipön Shakabpa [Tib. རྩིས་དཔོན་ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ], and Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. མཁན་ཆུང་བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན]. The Drönyerchemmo contacted us [the association] and discussed what should be done because they were the leaders of the People's Association. After Alo Chöndze was arrested, he told Amdo Lekshey [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་ལེགས་བཤད] that he left the oath document that had the seals of about 30 people with us. Then Lekshey la came to get that pledge. I never can forget this. My husband told him, "How could we dare to keep that? I tore it up because Alo Chöndze was arrested." At that time, people were a little bit suspicious of Amchi Anan [Tib. ཨེམ་ཆི་ཨ་ནན]. Probably, now he has died. He also came to get that pledge document saying that it is very dangerous. My husband told him the same thing. After that, we hid the pledge amidst the small pieces of wood placed in the rafters. There were many other documents about the Tenshug ritual and those things. Then we dug a pit in the storeroom at night and hid them underground. Usually, we kept them in the cupboard. At that time, we were afraid that they might come to search the house, but they didn't come to search the house. After that, it was said that a meeting of the UNO is going to be held so we needed to send the documents of the People's Association to the UNO.   

**Q:**  Did they receive a letter from Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes. The Drönyerchemmo received the letter. At that time, we were told that we should send the documents. But at that time we were keeping the documents secretly. My husband regarded the people in the jail as trustworthy people so they discussed that they needed a person to go to deliver the documents [to India]. At that time, it was also scary to hold meetings because the situation had become kind of tense. My husband said that they held an internal meeting, but nobody came out and said that I will go to deliver the documents. Then my husband consulted with people like Lhabju who were in the jail and told them there is nobody coming out as a volunteer and they urgently needed the documents, so maybe I will go to deliver the documents. Later, it was decided that my husband will go to deliver the documents. Then Lhabju cried a lot and said, "You have children, but you are sacrificing all of them for religion and politics. This is very good." Then the Drönyerchemmo told my husband that he should leave soon. My husband told him, "I can't leave right away because I will not be able to come back and I have to clear up my debts. So I will try to leave in one month." At that time, I was young and my husband was telling me to go to deliver the letters. But I myself was not that enthusiastic. Though I was doing whatever he told me to do, sometimes I used to complain to him that you are making me have a hard time. I was young, but in that year I had a serious pains in my back. Probably, it was getting worried and having anxiety that caused the back pain, but at that time I didn't know that anxiety would cause back pain. I never will forget that. At that time, I was just murmuring to myself that I have gotten a very bad sickness that I never had before. Anyway, my husband had to go to India and we stayed behind. They had set up an association [Tib. ཚོགས་པ] in Kalimpong, but my husband didn't join that association right away. The documents of the People's Association were sent through the muleteer of a Nepalese trader named "While Hat" (Shamo Garpo [Tib. ཞྭ་མོ་དཀར་པོ]). We said that it was religious texts and we paid the transportation fee. There were many documents. At that time, the traders were going back and forth to India and many Nepalese traders and muleteers were also going to India because travel was not stopped. The main [oath] document was stitched in one of his [my husband's] silk wadding trousers. When he arrived at Shigatse, he said that they [Chinese] had told the lodging inn to submit the names of the travelers. So he was very scared, thinking that they might have got a message so he told the lodging inn a false name and loaded his gun. At that time, there was a trader from Tö called Karkog Tashi [Tib. དཀར་ཁོག་བཀྲ་ཤིས] who was living in another lodging place. They [Chinese] were not suspicious of that person, so my husband sent his silk wadding trousers through him and told him, "If something happens to me, try to deliver this pair of trousers to Jenkhentsisum. Karkog Tashi was a trustworthy person. My husband also told him, "The other documents were sent through the Nepalese trader Shamo Garpo. Perhaps they will arrest me." He [my husband] told me that he thought that he will be arrested and he loaded his gun and he thought of killing several of them and then die. He made up his mind not to surrender to them right away. The next morning he left at dawn and walked the whole day and when he got to Nathu la [Tib. སྣ་སྟོད] mountain pass he felt relaxed, thinking he could get through this. Before he got to the mountain pass [to Sikkim], he said that he was always scared of being seized. That's how he went to India.   

**Q:**  After that, you stayed in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Later I heard from my husband that the Kungös told him, "Do not join the association in Kalimpong until your wife can come to India. Otherwise, if you join the association in Kalimpong, there would be a danger for your wife." At that time, I received a telegraph from my husband telling me to get a passport for a pilgrimage and come to India. My older daughter was going to the Chinese school as a day scholar so he said, "If you bring your older daughter with you, the Chinese will be suspicious and they will not let you go. You can get her afterwards. So you should come along with your mother and two small children." So I applied for a passport for a pilgrimage and took my mother and two small children with me and went to India. I didn't have any problem.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1956 when the Dalai Lama went to India?   

**A:**  Yes. When I went to India, they [Chinese] were kind of suspicious and stopped me for a short time in Sharsingma [Tib. ཤར་སིང་མ], but probably they didn't receive any message. I told them, "We are going for a pilgrimage and I am breast feeding my small children and I left my older daughter in Lhasa. She is going to school there." That's how we got through.   

**Q:**  Before you left for India, what happened to the people who were in the prison? Did they contact the People's Association?   

**A:**  Yes. I forgot to tell you that when Alo Chöndze was in the prison, my husband was going to India for trading back and forth and doing secret work and he went to India several times and came back. I received letters from my husband and I used to go to deliver the letters to Alo Chöndze. When he went with the documents, it was the time when he left for good. As soon as Alo Chöndze was released, he told me to send a telegraph to my husband saying that the price of the gold is confirmed. This meant that he was released from the prison. At that time, when they printed some documents and send them to Lhasa, they sent a telegraph saying that the roll of the prayer flag was sent. The documents were the posters thrown during the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ].   

**Q:**  Probably, there was a printing machine in Shakabpa's house and they printed some posters and sent them to Tibet to be thrown during the Mönlam. The posters were delivered to the Drönyerchemmo's house, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There was an Amdo selling sweets near the gate of our house. He was keeping a lookout over us. So whenever I received a letter and I had to go there [to Alo Chöndze]. I used to be very scared of being seized when I put the letter in my pouch and went there. When Alo Chöndze told me that the price of the gold is confirmed, Phöba Dorje [Tib. བོད་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ] was there. Although he was among the 30 people who placed their seal on the pledge, they were a little bit suspicious of him. So I was afraid and thought that he said this in front of Phöba Dorje. At that time, I knew right away that he meant that he was released. I used to go to deliver letters to Alo Chöndze in the prison and also to his home after he was released.   

**Q:**  Later, when they were released, the monasteries acted as their guarantor, right?   

**A:**  I heard that the three great monasteries acted as a guarantor and they signed a document to guarantee that they will not do anything like this in the future.   

**Q:**  How big was the People's Association in Lhasa? Were there also associations in Shigatse and Tö?   

**A:**  Yes. They had connections everywhere and in Shigatse there was Bisu. At that time he was very enthusiastic and one of the persons who sacrificed their property and worked for religion and politics. He also went to China to welcome the Dalai Lama. But poor thing! He became like this after he came here. Later it became more and more dangerous and Andru (Gombo Tashi) led his people and went out [from Lhasa].   

**Q:**  In 1956, the People's Association ended, right?   

**A:**  Yes, because it became more and more dangerous, it became kind of scattered at the end of 1956 and they were unable to use their strength. But probably they were still doing a little bit of secret work. However people were very afraid. When Alo Chöndze was arrested, people were saying that things won't work out well and then Lhabju died in the prison.   

**Q:**  In 1956, you came to Kalimpong for good, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where was your husband then?   

**A:**  He was also in Kalimpong. After I arrived in Kalimpong, he joined the association in Kalimpong and worked for it. When the Dalai Lama came here for the Buddha Jayanti, the association in Kalimpong told the Dalai Lama not to go to back to Tibet. Before the Dalai Lama came to India and probably before I went to Kalimpong, I heard that they gave some secret training to some people and planned to bring the Dalai Lama to India secretly all of a sudden by a silent [Tib. སྐད་མེད] airplane. Later, the policy was changed and Nehru made the policy for inviting the Dalai Lama for the great anniversary and for a pilgrimage. They [the association in India] talked internally with the Indian Government and planned for the Dalai Lama to stay in India. The association also told the Dalai Lama not to go back. At that time, Zhou Enlai came to India and was very anxious. The representatives of the People's Association: Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར] la, Shelkar Chandzö [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར] and my husband followed wherever the Dalai Lama went spending all the travel expenses by ourselves. The Dalai Lama stayed in big hotels. At that time, we were thinking that we could gain independence soon and we never thought that it will take such a long time and we spent a lot of the expenses. We submitted the report wherever the Dalai Lama was going and requested him not to go back. We planned to make a situation wherein the people would stop the Dalai Lama from going back, but Zhou Enlai knew that and he came and insisted that the Dalai Lama go back and so he had to go back. At that time, the Dalai Lama was thinking that if he didn't go back, the people in Tibet would suffer and he thought that it would be better to go back.   

**Q:**  Who were the representatives of the People's Association who followed the Dalai Lama wherever he went?   

**A:**  The representatives of the People's Association were Jayan Dawa, my husband, Shelkar Chandzö and Bisu Jola. There were also three monk officials; Thubden Nyinji [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད], Jampa Wangdü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུས], and Jampa Tsündrü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས] who had come from Tibet.   

**Q:**  In 1956-57, probably Alo Chöndze was also in India, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was probably in 1958. After he [Alo Chöndze] came to India, he showed the appearance that he didn't like the work. In the beginning, probably he asked Shakabpa to lend him some money and Shakabpa refused to lend him the money. Then the government said they are going to pay a salary to the people who came there and Alo Chöndze and those people were paid 150 Rs per month. My husband said, "Now we have a little bit to spend, so I am not going to take the salary because the government is in a difficult condition. In the future, if I would have some problem with my children's education, then please help me." At that time, Alo Chöndze said, "150 Rupees is not enough even for buying my cigarettes. So I am not going to accept it. I am following another path." He was unhappy at that time. At that time, the (Princess) Phünkang Lhajam [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་ལྷ་ལྕམ] of Gangtok was starting to do another kind of work. I heard that Alo Chöndze had (political) relations with her. So the other path he mentioned was to contact Phünkang Lhajam. From that time, Alo Chöndze didn't behave well. This was just after he arrived at Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Did Alo Chöndze come on his own or did Drönyerchemmo [Phala] sent him there? Did Drönyerchemmo say that it would be good for him to go to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes. They had been talking about this. At that time, Drönyerchemmo and those people trusted Alo Chöndze and we received many letters saying that Alo Chöndze is coming to India and they also went to receive him from a long distance and it was well prepared. They also held many meetings. There was also Dadang [Tib. མདའ་ཐང྄] Kungö who had previously came to India and they had an association where Phünkang Lhajam was doing something. They didn't get along well [with the Jenkhentsisum].   

**Q:**  I didn't understand about this clearly. At that time, Yuthok Kalön and Drunyichemmo Angula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] were also there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Dadang Kungö was also there.   

**Q:**  Later, Lukhangwa [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] was also there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The main thing was that Jenkhentsisum and Phünkang Lhajam didn't get along well, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What happened at that time, how did Phünkang Lhajam get involved with the relations with America? Did she get involved through Yuthok or what?   

**A:**  In the beginning, Phünkang Lhajam came nicely where all of the old government officials were gathered together. She was powerful from the Sikkim side, so they thought that she might be useful for them.   

**Q:**  At that time, Phünkang Kungö was also alive, right?   

**A:**  Yes. All of the old government officials got together and she was the Lhajam of Phünkang so she came to them. The old government officials didn't know the [foreign] language and Phünkang Lhajam was very good in languages and she was also good in making connections. Probably, that's how they had the relations with her. Later she used a lot of strength and she wanted to possess all of the power and she herself made a different kind of plan. She didn't give them [Jenkhentsisum] any power and she just put forward her plans. On this matter, they didn't get along well. Alo Chöndze was backing Phünkang Lhajam.   

**Q:**  Before the Dalai Lama left for Tibet, probably they left Yuthok and Drunyichemmo Angula behind in India to do some special works, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that they stayed behind purposely.   

**Q:**  Did the government leave them there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

