#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0017.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 23 November 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན] was a monk official who had served as the district head [Tib. འགོ་བ] of Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན]. In this interview, he discusses the Reform Office [Tib. Legjö legung] that was started by the 14th Dalai Lama and the reforms it implemented concerning how districts were managed. He talks about the trial democratic reform program started in Tselde Dzong in 1956 and also about the activities of Chushigandru and his role in recruiting fighters from Karkhang in 1959.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0017_04/H_0017_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time, we talked about the Democratic reforms, but I also remember about the Reform Office of the Tibetan government. When the Dalai Lama took the religious and the political responsibilities in 1950, did he have any thoughts of doing reforms?   

**A:**  He said that he had the idea of doing reforms at that time.   

**Q:**  What was he up to in terms of reforms? If he couldn't do much and had some kind of troubles, what kind of forces were blocking him?   

**A:**  The reason for establishing the Reform Office was because the Chinese had arrived in Tibet and they set up the Tibet Autonomous Region. The essence of setting up the Tibet Autonomous Region was to implement Democratic Reforms. The Chinese reforms entailed a complete new social system. At that point, the Dalai Lama was thinking that it would not be right if we didn't reform the social system of Tibet before the Chinese implemented their reforms. He was thinking that to do so ourselves would be better than wait until the Chinese reforms were implemented. At that point, he didn't openly say that, but probably he had that kind of idea. He set this it into action and after discussions regarding reforms at several meetings, finally it was concluded that we should set up the Reform organization and have them make plans for implementing [changes to] the social system of Tibet. It was the same way of talking at the meetings, regardless of the new and the old system.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  I am not sure.   

**Q:**  In October 1950, Chamdo was lost. So was it in 1951-52?   

**A:**  Probably, it was in 1956.   

**Q:**  I think it was before that.   

**A:**  It was probably in 1956.   

**Q:**  What was the year when you were in Yangpajen?   

**A:**  I was among the first batch of district heads after the Reform Office was set up. I stayed 4 years in Yangpajen. Probably, it was in 1955.   

**Q:**  At that time, the districts were managed by the government, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I was among the first batch of district heads after the districts came to be managed by the government. The Reform Office was set up in 1954 and I went to Yangpajen in 1955. All the district heads were also sent in that year. In 1958, I was transferred to Lhodrag Lhagang [Tib. ལྷོ་བྲག་ལྷ་ཁང] district. The revolt took place when I was in Lhagang in 1959.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama took the political responsibility in 1950 and the Reform Office was set up in 1954. During those 5 years, didn't they have any talks regarding doing reforms?   

**A:**  Actually, the Reform Office was set up in 1953-54 [Note: This is the correct date.]. From 1950-53, the government had to think about the plans of the reforms and the Dalai Lama was also busy for his monastic [geshe degree] exams that were to be taken in 1958. At that time, the Chinese were also bothering the Tibetan government because during that period the Tibetan government and the Tibet Autonomous Region [TAR] both existed. [Note: the Preparatory Committee for the TAR started in 1956] [ [Note: The subject asks his neighbor in his office] Do you Draktenla remember when the Legjö office was set up? Draktenla: The Tibetan government managed the districts from the Fire-Monkey year [1956]. I was the tax collector in Nyalam [Tib. གཉ་ནང་ཤོ་པ]. My colleague, the lay official, had a problem on his way back to Lhasa and I went to the Reform Office to clear the accounts. That was in the Fire-Monkey year. You can also ask Changtre La [Tib. བྱང་བཀྲས་ཁང] and Tempa Söpa [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ].   

**A:**  Five years had passed when the government took over managing the districts. That was in 1954 and the Reform Office was set up in 1953. The most important reform was that the Tibetan government took over the management of the districts and the district's estates. Before that, the government didn't manage the districts, but the districts also were not absolutely given to private individual. They were kind of owned by the government, but were not so well-organized. The income from the districts was set, but any surplus income was kept by the district heads since they didn't receive any salaries. That was why officials tried to get the districts with better income since that would enable them to get compensation for the losses they incurred when serving in positions like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་བཞེས་པ] The person in charge of the Tsamshe Legung [tib. རྩམ་བཞེས་ལས་ཁུངས], the treasury for collecting tsamba used for ceremonial ritual purposes.">Tsamshepa</a> [the tsamba supplier for the Mönlam Festival] and the Tsanyer [Tib. རྩྭ་གཉེར] [the Hay Supplier]. The government reorganized the management of the districts and paid salary in money and barley to the district heads. In return, the district heads had to deliver all the surplus income [all that was left from what was collected after the set expenditures were paid by him] to the government, This was called "putting something in a vase" [Tib. བུམ་པ་སིབ་བླུག]. So the district heads were not allowed to embezzle surpluses any more. Also, the representatives of the people such as the village headmen or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ] 1. An area in the Tsang region of Central Tibet. 2. Ocean.">gyatso</a> [gembo] were instructed to supervise the accounts of the district head to check whether they were correct or not. They had to sign his accounting statement. Those local officials knew what income the district actually got. If the accounting was not overseen, the district head might tell lies regarding the income they collected. So, [due to the reforms], they could no longer tell lies because local officials were supervising them. From the income the district got in a year in substances like barley, butter and animals, they would pay the expenditures for things like religious rituals and deliver the required items to the government according to the record books and then report the surplus they had. After that, the accounting should be shown to the governor-general of their area such as the governor of Ü (the Üji [Tib. དབུས་སྤྱི]), the governor of the Kongpo area (the Kongji), the governor of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [the Tsangji], and the governor of the north [the Changji]. The governor-general(s) had to investigate the accounting with representative of the people and the headmen and make a note on the accounting report that they had investigated the accounting. Then the accounting had to go to the Reform Office and this office investigated whether there were any incorrect things. If the accounting was correct, the Reform Office would tell the district head to store the surplus grain in the local granary and add the number of animals that had increased to the animal list. This was the reform that we [the Tibetan government] did externally at that time. Internally, reforms were implemented in offices like the Nyertsang Legung which was the office in charge of offerings, and the Trede Legung [Tib. འཕྲལ་བདེ་ལས་ཁུངས] which was the treasury office in the Potala, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> treasury office in the Jokhang. In these offices, the unnecessary expenditures were eliminated and investigation was also done regarding the positions inside those offices like the Serpön [Tib. གསེར་དཔོན] (the gold collector) and the government traders [Tib. གཞུང་ཚོང] and so on. They were made to report their accounts to the Reform office. Similarly, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung, which was the treasury office in Shöl, was also made to report the income they got in things like barley, meat and butter, and about their expenditures like providing the supplies for the Dalai Lama's kitchen and for the morning tea ceremony (the Drungja), as well as the surpluses they had on hand. At that time, however, nothing was reformed regarding the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> (serfs/bound peasants). Do you know anything about its [Shöl Legung's] districts?   

**Q:**  I know there were 18 districts under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung.   

**A:**  You are right. These districts belonged to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung and they would give orders to them. And there might be more sources than those, where Shöl Legung got its income. In those days, the district heads would give orders to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and implement the laws on the miser. There weren't any organized judges. Everything was done by the district head. The minor cases would be settled by the district heads and the bigger ones were handled by the Kashag. When there were cases in the monasteries, the district heads were allowed to settle it. but when there were important cases, it was handled to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Office, which was called "the chief office over all the monks [Tib. སེར་མོ་བའི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] . At that time, the reforms were only implemented on the estates owned by the districts [the government]. It was not implemented for all the other miser [who were subjects of aristocrats and monasteries/lamas]. The Chinese implemented democratic reform for all the people under the aristocrats, the monasteries and the Tibetan government. These (democratic) reforms were done even on their food bowls [Tib. ལྟོ་ཕོར] [livelihoods]. We didn't do that. We just left the people regardless of whether their conditions were good or bad. Some of them had many fields and they were obliged to pay or work for many taxes. Some of them had a small area of fields and they had to pay or work for a little bit taxes. At that time, the government had never imposed a large amount of taxes on people who had a small amount of fields. That was why it was known that the Prime Minister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] had weighed the stones and measured the earth in the bo [Tib. འབོ] [measuring container] when distributing the lands and he wrote the investigating documents like the Iron-Tiger Land Investigation decree [Tib. ལྕགས་སྟག་ཞིབ་གཞུང]. Those were done for the people when the lands were distributed, and the taxes were imposed according to the amount of seeds sown on the fields.   

**Q:**  In 1950, the Dalai Lama had the idea of doing reforms, but what was the general thinking of people at that time? Were the people saying that it would be good to do reforms or what? Before that, there had been a lot of troubles during the reign of the regents. Were there any hindrances [Tib. འཐུས་ཤོར] on the work of the government during that period? Generally, the monasteries and the estate owners disliked economic reforms, right?   

**A:**  The situation had remained the same in Tibet since the implementation of the Iron-Tiger Land Settlement [of 1830], so we were thinking that we should do some reforms by ourselves, because the Chinese were saying that they are going to come to implement reforms. But we didn't get the time to do that. When the government implemented the reforms on its own districts, nobody said anything because it was good for the government. Before that, the district heads were keeping the surpluses of the districts for themselves, so [after the reform] their [the <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>'s] living conditions became better. Otherwise, they didn't oppress and exploit the people. If they did that, the miser would accuse them.   

**Q:**  Last time, we talked about the trial reforms done in Tölung Tselde district [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་ཚལ་བདེ]. At that time, did the Youth League and the Women's Association go to the countryside and say that we should implement the reforms and go onto the socialist system?   

**A:**  The Chinese were talking about Democratic Reforms and they were saying that they will reform [the system] into a socialist one. They were saying that they will reform the majority of the people. At that time, many meetings were held and the officials on the Tibetan government side were saying that the reforms should be delayed because if the reform were implemented suddenly, the people will be frightened and worried about that because their level of understanding is low. They will be frightened because even their food bowls would be collected. From the Communist side, they were saying that the society is going to be changed because the present society is not good. They will not take away things and use them recklessly. They were saying that the people should be organized to be the government. As I mentioned last time, the reforms were delayed and a trial experiment was done. At that time, the duty of the Youth League was to do publicity for politics. They were teaching the people about the [socialist] social system. That was the system of the communists. They had to go to publicize things because their organization was set up to do that.   

**Q:**  Did they go to other districts?   

**A:**  Yes. They went a little bit to places near by, though they couldn't go long distances. They also showed movies in those places and they publicized that the people had been suffering under the tyrants and they were telling lies that the aristocrats were sucking their blood.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes. It had a little effect on the people when they told them that like reciting scriptures.   

**Q:**  On one side, since the Chinese government was saying that the (democratic) reforms are delayed, was it okay for them to show movies and publicize about the reforms?   

**A:**  They said that they are going to do the trial (reforms).   

**Q:**  But they also went to other districts and publicized about the reforms, didn't they?   

**A:**  That was because the Chinese were saying that they have come to implement the reforms. So although they didn't implement the reforms, they were trying their best to lure the people. But some of the thoughtful people were saying that the Chinese were telling lies and the society they were talking about was just mediocre [Tib. ཐབས་ཆགས]. For example, the biggest household in Tölung Tselde was called Setrong Yume [Tib. གསེར་གྲོང་གཡུ་སྨད]. When this household knew about the democratic reforms after the Chinese arrival, they divided their lands among their servants and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> [Note: Setrong is interviewed in H.0000.01-07]. At that time, the people were saying that it was bad to implement the reforms. At that point, the reforms had not been implemented in society, so they implemented it on their own small households. They divided the lands and animals among the misers and told them [that it was because] you had been working as a servant for us from generation to generation, but now that kind of society has ended. They didn't have that kind of thought from the beginning. That was due to the publicity. So wouldn't the Chinese feel glad when they heard about that reform? Actually, they didn't feel glad. They said that the reforms should be implemented in the whole society not on a particular group of people. If they implemented the reform on those people, those people will become rich and there would be trouble. If the reform was implemented on the [whole] society, the people would be left on a dry place [Tib. སྐམ་ཐེར], so the people would have to adhere to whatever the society told them to do. This is the system of the communists. At that time, some people didn't like the reforms at all and were saying that people will not have a good time if the reforms were implemented. The people, like the beggars, were saying "It would be good if the poor people would become rich".  

**Q:**  At that time, did they tell you to join the Youth League?   

**A:**  No. At that time, the Youth League was set up as the pioneers of the communist system and they were doing the experiments. Their duty was to develop their organization. They were trying to get more members in their organization. When they held the meetings, they were telling each of the members to bring their relatives and friends to the next meeting or show. So they took their relatives and friends to the next meeting or show. In this way, they could double the number of members. The government was not doing that. The education of the communists made the people as if they were drunk. At that time, Representative Zhang [Jingwu] also educated the Tibetan government officials and said "communism will be spread all over the world. You should not hesitate about that. Even if the people would not go all over the world, the political ideology will be spread all over the world." He was saying that communism was so powerful. He was brain-washing people in this way and said that the people of the world are going on that path. At that time, we were not educated, so we thought probably it might be true. But actually, it wasn't like that. There were also some people saying that communism is not good. At that time, the communists were saying that socialism is like the heaven that was mentioned in religion. So wouldn't it be better to go to heaven rather than suffering under suppression and exploitation. When they talked about that many times, even if some people liked the old society, it might have some effect on their minds and they didn't think the Chinese were lying.   

**Q:**  When Zhou Enlai met the Dalai Lama in India and told him that the reforms can be delayed, what was the situation like inside Tibet in 1957? I saw in the Dalai Lama's book that the Chinese told him if he didn't go back to Tibet soon, there would be disturbances and trouble inside Tibet." Actually, what happened at that time?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama was invited by the Indian government. So the people welcomed it and they didn't do anything because India was the land of Buddhist saints [Tib. འཕགས་པ]. Before he returned to Tibet, there weren't any incidents in Tibet. People felt that for sure that he will return to Tibet and they didn't think that he will not come back. At that time, the people around the Dalai Lama were thinking of the political point of view and whether he should return or not. The (common) people were not talking about whether he should return or not. The Chinese might have told the Dalai Lama casually that there are disturbances in Tibet.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> organization was set up in 1958, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, the Dalai Lama had already returned to Tibet. [Note: Chushigandru started in 1957.]   

**Q:**  In that year, the meeting was held for calming down the disturbance of the Khambas, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you attend that meeting?   

**A:**  No. At that time I was working in the district.   

**Q:**  You were in Yangpajen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there any disturbances in that area?   

**A:**  No, there weren't. Later on, at the beginning of 1959, the Khambas fought with the Chinese in Nyemo and many people were killed. [Note: this fighting took place in September-October 1958.]   

**Q:**  At that time, were you staying in Yangpajen?   

**A:**  I had been transferred to Lhagang. That was in 1958.   

**Q:**  Where was that place located?   

**A:**  The fighting took place in the place called Karkhang [Tib. བཀར་ཁང] which was located in the upper part of Yangpajen. It belonged to Yangpajen. Karkhang is located in the south of Yangpajen. When you go down from Karkhang, you will reach Tshurphu. When you go to the south from Karkhang, you will reach Nyemo Shuyaga [Tib. གཞུ་ཡ་གག]. When you come downwards you will reach Yangpajen.   

**Q:**  The Khambas fought a battle in Nyemo, right?   

**A:**  No. It was in Karkhang. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> went to Karkhang via Tshurphu. They came from Lhasa. If they had to come to Karkhang from down there, there were many Chinese on the road from Qinghai to Tibet. So they couldn't come from that area. They gathered in Lhasa and went to Tshurphu.   

**Q:**  Did the Khambas go to Lhasa from Drigutang? They went to Shang Ganden Chöngor, right?   

**A:**  That might be a separate thing. In Ganden Chöngor there was an arsenal that belonged to the Tibetan government. They went to get those weapons. I am not sure whether they went from Lhasa or Drigu. Probably, it was in 1958 when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> fought in Karkhang and many people were killed on both sides. At that time, the Chinese fired cannons and the Khambas were scattered. Later on, the Khambas went via the Shugola Pass to Namru [Tib. གནམ་རུ] near Lake Namtso [Tib. གནམ་མཚོ]. They didn't go to Markyang. From Namru, they went down. At that time, the district head of Namling [Tib. རྣམ་གླིང] was a monk official called Champa Thubden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཐུབ་བསྟན]. Once I saw him going to the Kashag to report that the Khambas had robbed the weapons from Ganden Chöngor. This was before the Karkhang battle.   

**Q:**  What were you doing in 1958?   

**A:**  I cleared the accounts of Yangpajen. That was the time when the Dalai Lama took his exam in Sera and Drepung, and I went as his attendant.   

**Q:**  So, you were in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was attending the morning tea ceremony [Tib. དྲུངཇ] every day. After that, I also attended the Mönlam Festival at which the Dalai Lama took his exams. Soon after that I left for Lhagang district. When I was about to reach Lhoka, the revolt took place in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What did you hear about the revolt when you were in Lhoka? What were the people thinking in the countryside? Were they saying that they are going to join the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>? Or were they saying that are going to flee?   

**A:**  The people in Lhagang were frightened, but they were not saying that they were going. They were just frightened and staying home. They were frightened and thought that there might be a big disturbance in Lhasa. They were worried that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> might come [here] and cause suffering on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>. They were more worried about that. At that time, there were many Chushigandru in Drigu, Darma [Tib. དར་མ], Lhagang and Dowa Dzong. At that time, the representatives of Chushigandru came to Lhagang and we discussed the situation. I told them, "We will give you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> or barley if you want, but do not send wanderers [Tib. མི་འཁྱམ] to this place." At that time, the people of Chushigandru were just asked for certificates from Drigu [not money] and they were sending single people like beggars in groups of 15-16 to Dowa Dzong and those people were saying that they came for pilgrimage. They were causing suffering on the miser and saying that they want this and that. I tried to stop those people from coming and we set up a Payroll Office [Tib. ཕོགས་ཁང] in Darma and made an agreement for transporting tsamba from Dowa Dzong to that place. When we heard that the revolt took place in Lhasa, we thought that there might be some connection with the Chushigandru and we supplied tsamba and exchanged rice to supply them. If the government had existed, a (trade) fair would have taken place. We couldn't stop holding the fair thinking that the revolt would take place. People were also thinking that the Tibetan government might not have much problems and if it still existed, they might make the people suffer. At that moment, the Bhutanese were also coming to trade and people were trading with them. At that time, in Lhagyari, the tsipön and the Khenjung [Namseling and Trekhang] came and became like general leaders [Tib. སྤྱི་འདོམས] and they sent an edict to Lhagang telling us to recruit people between the ages 18-60. At that moment, there were 25 volunteers from Lhagang and we made them brand new clothing and shoes, but they didn't have any weapons. We made beer and gave them a party and worshipped the deities and asked the oracles to go into trance. We sent them to Lhagyari and they were supposed to go wherever they were needed from Lhagyari. Those were just untrained militias. Later, when everyone fled, they also came back home.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was in Drigutang they needed foodstuffs and then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola had also arrived. So did the districts support Chushigandru in terms of food because they thought they were fighting for religion and politics or did they [Khambas] send kind of orders from Drigutang? Did Phala Drönyerchemmo tell you to support the Khambas?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. At the beginning, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was saying that they are for the religion, so the people were supporting them with whatever they wanted. But they were just forcing people to give them things so people didn't have any choice but to give them the things they wanted. The Khambas were not talking about giving them things from the government owned granaries and the government didn't tell us to give them government grain. The government couldn't say that because the Chinese were watching them closely. But some of the district heads just took out grain from the granary and gave it to the Khambas. Other of the district heads didn't dare to give grain to the Khambas, but in the end they also took out barley and ground it into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and gave this to the Khambas. Some of the Khambas also caused suffering on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> (serfs) even when they got tsamba salary from the government. After the war took place in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, nobody was taking possession of the stores [of grain] because the war was made between the Chinese and the Tibetans.   

**Q:**  At that time, couldn't the district heads give grain surreptitiously?   

**A:**  No, they couldn't because the district heads had to look at the situation in Lhasa. If the government still existed, they would punish the district heads. In the end, the grain in the storerooms was left for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> until the Chinese came to that place because the people who were (normally) in charge of the storerooms had fled.   

**Q:**  Did you receive the order from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola regarding the recruit of militia?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you hold meetings after that, and to whom did you tell that volunteers should come out?   

**A:**  I told the people who were under the jurisdiction of the district.   

**Q:**  Did you call the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> (the important households in the district)?   

**A:**  Yes. And they told the people. I told them, "Now the situation has come to a critical point. If we stay like this, the only thing that will happen is to be eaten by the Chinese. Now <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and all the people in the districts in Lhoka are working hard to stop the Chinese. So if we also don't go to work hard with them, it is not right. The government is getting lost, and if the government is lost we wont have any support". When I told them like this, the volunteers came out one after another. Then the society pooled money and made clothing and gave them the travel expenses and appointed some leaders and sent them to Lhagyari. They had to give salary from Lhagyari. But after that, nobody took care of them, so they came back.   

