# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0017.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 10 November 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན] was a monk official who had served as the district head [Tib. འགོ་བ] of Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན]. In this interview, he discusses the Chinese arrival in 1951 and their construction of highways and their accommodations in Lhasa. He discusses Zhang Jingwu arrival and talks about the People's Association and Chushigandru. He also describes the trade between the Yangpajen nomads and the Chinese 7.1 and 8.1 State Farms. He concludes with a discussion of the Dalai Lama's negotiations in China in 1954-55.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0017_02/H_0017_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  After signing the 17-Point Agreement, many Chinese soldiers came to Tibet. At that time, probably the Tibetan government had to receive them, right? At the beginning, they came from Nagchu, right? What were the people thinking at that time? Did they just watch them or what? Where were you then?   

**A:**  At that time, I was in Yangpajen. It was when Zhang Guohua and Wang Qimei came up.   

**Q:**  What did you hear about that?   

**A:**  The highway was built by the Chinese from Chamdo to Lhasa and they also built a highway via northern Tibet that was called Tshobö Langkhor Drolam [Tib. མཚོ་བོད་རླངས་འཁོར་འགྲོ་ལམ]. The Chinese were coming up while building the roads. Before the troops arrived, the roads were being completed. [Note: he is confused about the roads which were only completed the end of 1954] The northern highway was built through Nagchu and Yangpajen. At that time, the Kashag sent an order to me saying the Chinese are building the road so you should help them with whatever they need like firewood and dung." The Chinese had requested the Kashag to send that order for help. When I received the order, the road in Yangpajen area had already been built. At that time the Chinese said, "The highway from eastern Tibet will be completed and the vehicles will arrive at the front of Potala on the 15th of December. So the highway from the northern route should reach Lhasa on the same day. It is very difficult to accomplish this and at present the road is being built on the northern area, but we should make a leap forward and build the road day and night. They just lied. Actually, the highway was already built up to Yangpajen and they were going down to Tölung Tshelde [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་ཚལ་སྡེ]. They completed the road building by the fixed date. At that time, it was said that highways were built all around Tibet and it was great. They made an announcement that they had made a great leap forward.   

**Q:**  What year was that? I think that road building was done later on.   

**A:**  Probably it was at the same time.   

**Q:**  I mean, didn't the Chinese soldiers arrive in Lhasa for the first time in 1951?   

**A:**  At that time, the road was already built.   

**Q:**  Were you in Yangpajen in 1951?   

**A:**  Yes, when the Chinese came for the first time, I was in Yangpajen. [Note: in a later interview he corrects this and says, accurately, that he was sent there in 1954 as district head. That makes him there when the road was completed at the end of 1954.]   

**Q:**  Then you stayed for a long time, right?   

**A:**  I stayed for 4 years. They led the troops from Chamdo. They didn't lead the troops from the north. The Chinese soldiers stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Gungtang [Tib. ཚལ་གུང་ཐང]. When the Chinese first arrived at Lhasa, it was arranged for them to stay in the place where the monk officials used to go for picnics [Tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིང་ག]. Later, this became the [Chinese] Military Headquarters. When they arrived at Lhasa, they marched while beating gongs and drums and carrying the photos of the four Chairmen. After that, probably, they went to the Potala Palace for a short time. At that time there were no houses over there and they dug pits and put up tents. The soldiers were facing the east and singing before drinking tea just like we pray before drinking tea. The soldiers stayed in tents for about 5-6 days. Before that, the Chinese officers had arrived and they bought and rented some houses like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a>'s house [Tib. ས་འདུ] and they also requested quarters from the government and got houses like Yamön [Ch. ya men]. They moved the soldiers into the houses gradually. When the second group and the third group of soldiers arrived, they stayed in tents in that place. After that, they got Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག] [a swampy area opposite Drepung monastery] and they sent soldiers there.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the Tibetan government tell the big households to rent their houses to the Chinese?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**Q:**  Did they just give the houses for rent? Actually they might not like to rent houses to the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  At that time, the Chinese said that they were going to build houses in Nortölinga and they requested that the Tibetan government give them that place. So the government didn't have any choice but to give the space to the Chinese. The Chinese also requested that the Tibetan government rent them the Magar Sarpa [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ] (the New Military Headquarters) for their regimental headquarters and Yamön and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི]. When there were some vacancies, they had to rent them and they were also renting and buying houses from the other big households. Mostly, the Chinese were telling the owners when they wanted the houses. When some of owners were kind of stubborn, probably they requested the Kashag to tell them to sell or rent the house. They bought a lot of houses like Surkhang's. And the government didn't have anything to say about doing that. [Surkhang sold his house much later in 1956]   

**Q:**  At that time, the main representative of the Chinese, Zhang Jingwu, came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> [in 1951]. What happened at that time? Were you in Lhasa at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, I was in Lhasa. At that time we heard that Zhang Jingwu came as the representative of China with an interpreter and that he had arrived at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> via the sea route [India]. Whatever main things he had to do was done in Yadong because the Dalai Lama was there. We didn't hear anything about that. We just heard they were coming [to Lhasa]. At that time in Lhasa there were the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and the Acting Kashag Kalön. They had to make preparations for his house and such things. They prepared <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s house for Zhang Jingwu probably because the house was big and good. It was not so elaborate as nowadays having chairs and tables, but the government did their best, for example, white washing the house and so on and used the best cushions. After the Chinese came, they told the government whatever they needed and the government supplied them with it.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Chinese told the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> that they should come and receive Zhang Jingwu a long distance from Lhasa, but the Tibetan government didn't receive him well. Did you hear anything about that?   

**A:**  Probably the Chinese said that.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrival, there were changes in the economy and in 1951-52 the prices of foodstuffs went up. Secondly, there were political problems with the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>. In 1952, The Water-Dragon Year People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ] rose up. At that time, I heard that when they held their meetings in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a>, there were also the representatives of the soldiers [Tibetan army] and there were also some of government officials in that association. The Chinese were saying that the sitsab instigated the People's Association. What happened actually at that time? How did the People's Association rise up? Did they have any relations with the government? Where did they hold their meetings? I heard they held the meetings in Shide [monastery].   

**A:**  They didn't hold the meetings in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a>; they held them in Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] monastery. Probably, the meeting were held in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. chöra (ཆོས་ར)] The walled-in grove in monasteries (monastic colleges) where monks go to study/practice debating.">dharma grove</a> [Tib. ཆོས་ར] of Tsomönling. I don't have much idea about the People's Association. It was the ordinary people in Lhasa who were in the People's Association. They had voluntarily joined the People's Association because of loyalty [to the State]. They might have sought out some kind of instructions for the sake of one's state, but they rose up voluntarily. There were some good persons in it like managers (Tib. chandzö), who had good knowledge in writing and reading. So they just submitted a petition to the Chinese. Otherwise, they didn't do anything.   

**Q:**  Were you especially involved in the People's Association?   

**A:**  I didn't have relations with it.   

**Q:**  Is there anybody who had attended the meetings of the People's Association?   

**A:**  When those managers attended the meeting   

**Q:**  Do you mean Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚྭ་བ] A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tshawa</a> Trunyi [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག], the clerk?   

**A:**  Yes. I didn't know that there were government official in that association. The Tibetan government officials wouldn't attend those meetings because they had to attend the government meetings. It was not right for them to attend those meetings. Therefore, they were not doing that openly. The people and officials were different.   

**Q:**  I mean secretly. I know that they couldn't attend it openly.   

**A:**  All of the officials might have secretly attended it.   

**Q:**  Do you mean all the officials?   

**A:**  Yes. I am serious. They [People's Association] were doing that for the sake of Tibet. So when they asked the officials to do something, they would do it secretly. I think these are kind of unimportant matters. More than that, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> held meetings in the teaching grove of Tsomönling [here he is talking about 1957]. At that time, Andru (Gombo Tashi) and the young men/bodyguards who were accompanying him [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག] held their meeting in Tsomönling's teaching grove. The Chinese were not attentive about that. The reason for holding the meetings in the teaching grove was because it was quite safe since when the door to the [wall around the] grove was closed [no one could see what was going on inside the wall]. They held many meetings in that place and consulted about going to Lhoka and the north. Chushigandru was started to oppose the Chinese, not to submit petitions like the People's Association. The People's Association didn't say anything about rising up [militantly].   

**Q:**  At that time, it seems you were living both in Lhasa and Yangpajen. Was Yangpajen near to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. It is a two days journey on horseback from Lhasa to Yangpajen.   

**Q:**  At that time, you didn't stay there all the time, right?   

**A:**  I had to stay there all the time.   

**Q:**  Couldn't you stay in Lhasa for a few months and leave a representative in Yangpajen [on your behalf]?   

**A:**  Yes. I could do that. But according to the regulations, I had to stay there. In Yangpajen we didn't hold any meetings with local people to tell them anything from the Chinese. Yangpajen was a place where three roads intersected. One was the road to Lhoka, one was to the west crossing the Shugola Pass and the other was the road towards Lhasa. In Yangpajen, the Chinese set up two State Farms; the 8.1.State Farm [Ch. ba yi nong chang] and the 7.1 State Farm [Ch. qi yi nong chang].   

**Q:**  What does nong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> mean?   

**A:**  That means house, mess hall, guest house and office. The 7.1 State farm was managed by cadres exclusively.   

**Q:**  Did they set up those State Farms in 1951?   

**A:**  Yes. The 8.1 State Farm was managed by the Army. That was the Army mess and the office. When the troops would travel, they would go to eat in the 8.1 State Farm and cadres would eat in the 7.1 State Farm.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese built roads and built many houses in Yangpajen, the local people might have become rich because they got many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> [silver coins in pay], right?   

**A:**  Yes, they became much richer.   

**Q:**  At that time, the ordinary people might not be thinking much about politics, so were they thinking that it is good to get some money? What was their thinking?   

**A:**  At that time, people were not thinking much about the politics. Especially, in Yangpajen, where all the people are (northern) nomads [Tib. ཧོར་པ]. How could they think about politics. People in the northern area were kind of poor in thinking about politics. They were doing quite well for themselves, but they would not meddle into the matters relating to the Tibetan government. They were just paying taxes. But basically, they were very smart. At that time, they had a good business selling firewood and cow dung to the State Farms. The two restaurants there had to be prepared because they didn't know when the soldiers would come there. So the restaurants needed the firewood and dung. In the beginning, the Chinese had to buy all of that stuff, but later they could manage to get those things by themselves. The Chinese regiments in Lhasa especially would come to Yangpajen to buy animals for slaughtering and other necessities. They would buy about 50-60 yaks or 100-200 sheep for slaughtering. At that time, the people in this area didn't know about going to work for the Chinese and getting wages. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> [serfs] in Yangpajen lived in a remote mountain area and there weren't any villages in that place [they were nomads living in tent encampments]. When they needed something, they would go to the villages near by to get them. At that time, the Chinese were doing a lot of ordinary businesses like bringing barley from Siling in trucks. Once they transported 50-60 truck loads of barley so they just had to pile it up in the open ground. The barley brought from Siling was a kind of bluish in color. The barley was just left there, but no one stole it. Probably, there were some people keeping watch on it. The barley was paid for with yaks for slaughtering and firewood. Back then, it was great for the nomads to get barley because they didn't have fields. At that time, they got plenty of barley for making <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and beer. When the nomads didn't want barley, they were paid for with boxes holding a thousand dayan. Once, I distributed 15 such boxes to the nomads.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese needed people to work for building roads, did they have to tell the district about that and then did the district head talk with the leaders of the people?   

**A:**  They didn't make our people work on road building. They brought prisoners in trucks from Siling to build the roads and the soldiers were standing on guard. Even during the coldest season in winter, they were made to work in cold weather and they were making them suffer. Even at that time, we had already seen those events. After the road was built, they didn't give the prisoners tea to drink and just put them in trucks and took them wherever a road needed to be built. In the north, they didn't need to build roads very much because most of the areas was pasture land [flat]. But there were many simple bridges that needed to be built.   

**Q:**  Probably, in other areas in the countryside, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> [serfs] had to build the roads.   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**Q:**  Yes, the Chinese paid them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> for building the roads.   

**A:**  There weren't any <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> working on the roads in our area. But when the airport was built there were people conscripted even from the Lhoka area. The airport was mainly built by Tibetans, although there were a few Chinese. And the roads in Phembo were built by Tibetan prisoners. Tenzin Phüntso [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་ཕུན་ཚོགས] said that he was there.   

**Q:**  In 1952-1953-1954 the Youth League was established in Lhasa and the Chinese schools were also set up and many children went to the Chinese school. At that time, what was the general thinking of the people regarding the Women's Association and the children going to the Chinese schools? I heard that the monks teased [Tib. བརྙས་བརྐོ] them. At that time, were the people thinking that the government is doing well by making relations with the Chinese? Or were the people thinking that it is not right to make relations with the Chinese?   

**A:**  If I may talk exclusively about the schools, at that time the Tibetan government set up schools and told the people to join it and they were enrolling students in them. But the people didn't like that. Though I can't state definitely, I think they were not thinking that the school is good and the children would get a good education. Some of them were forced to join the schools and some of them were thinking that they could learn something if they sent their children to the school voluntarily. The people who didn't send their children to the schools were saying that if the children were sent to the school and got <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> they would become Chinese and it would not be good. At that time, when the Youth League was set up, their way of organizing was different than us. Especially, they let the boys and girls play and dance together and made them feel happy. That was done in order to lead them into politics. After about 15-20 days, the boys and girls had already changed their ideology in a happy atmosphere. At that time, the parents never thought that it was good and they were regarding it as a bad thing. Actually, in general the people were thinking that we had already lost because the Chinese had already arrived at Tibet and we didn't have anything to do with it. The Chinese could do whatever they wanted to do. Some people were saying that the Chinese are bad and the people would become Chinese if they have contact with the Chinese. There were also people working for the Chinese and eating from the Chinese and they were holding revolutionary thoughts, and they were talking somewhat impudently [Tib. སྐྱག་ཁྲལ] to the other people.   

**Q:**  At that time, there were also students going to China, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were also Tibetan government officials going to China.   

**Q:**  There were some monk officials like Ngawang Thöndrub [going], right?   

**A:**  There were about 5-6 monk officials who went to China.   

**Q:**  Did they go by themselves or what? What were they thinking? I heard that they opposed the Chinese when they got there.   

**A:**  They didn't do any opposing. They were just staying there. Among the monk officials, they were the younger ones and they were quite smart and they were regarded as people who could think a little bit better. At that time, I heard that Representative Zhang [Ch. Zhang Dai Biao] said that if there were people going to study, we will help you. So they just agreed spontaneously and went to study. They told Representative Zhang that they were going to China and the Chinese paid all the expenditures and sent them to China. They learned Chinese well and came back to Tibet. I heard from them that later on they were not regarded as highly as when they first went to China and the Chinese were suspicious of them because they told the younger students about our culture a little bit. The Chinese regarded that as a wrong thing. The Chinese were very sensitive even on very small matters. So later they had to flee up [back to Tibet] slowly and they were barely able to get out.   

**Q:**  In 1954, when the Dalai Lama went to China, what were the government officials talking about? Did they say it would be good for the Dalai Lama to go to China or what? Actually, he went to attend the meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he went to attend the national assembly [National People's Congress].   

**Q:**  According to the 17-Point Agreement he had to go to the meeting so what were the people saying about that?   

**A:**  When he went to China the first time, he was granted the title of the Director [Ch. zhu ren] and the Committee Member [Ch. wei yuan zhang] of the State Council [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང] [note: he was the given the title of Vice Chairman of the National People's Congress] and the next title was given to the Panchen Lama. The first visit of the Dalai Lama went very well and Chairman Mao came to see him at his residence. He appreciated seeing the Dalai Lama and the Dalai Lama also offered him Tibetan New Year's cookies. That [face-to-face contact] was never heard of before.   

**Q:**  Do you remember about the meeting held in Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] for 3-4 days after the Dalai Lama came back and Ngabö gave a talk about what he did in China?   

**A:**  That was not after the Dalai Lama came back. That was after the 17-Point Agreement was signed and the meeting was held in Trede Linga [Tib. འཕྲལ་བདེ་གླིང་ག] after they came back.   

**Q:**  I heard an announcement was [also] made in 1955.   

**A:**  I don't have any ideas about that. When Ngabö gave the talk, it was said that the meeting was a symposium [Tib. bzhugs mol tshogs'du]. Before that we didn't know about that kind of meeting. We were told that we don't need to wear the uniforms of the lay and monk officials. So the lay officials wore Tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ] dresses and Indian [British] hats. Ngabö talked for 3 whole days regarding the signing of the 17-Point Agreement. I was at the meeting, but I couldn't talk much. I was just there to listen and I was not attentive because of being still very young. I also have forgotten the content of the meeting because it has been so many years. Since then, the people regarded Ngabö as an excellent and proficient speaker. Usually, Ngabö was quite brave and decisive. After that, he became more famous. Though he talked for the whole day, he didn't have problems speaking.   

