# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0017.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** November 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན] was a monk official who had served as the district head [Tib. འགོ་བ] of Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན]. In this interview, he discusses the preparations of the Tibetan government in 1950 to confront the Chinese and the general attitudes of the populace about the Chinese threat He also discusses the 17-Point Agreement and the first meeting of the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama. He also talks about the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region and the plans for trial democratic reforms in Tölung Tselde Dzong.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0017_03/H_0017_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Where were we last time?   

**Q:**  Yes, last time I was asking you about the time the Dalai Lama went down to China. I said that when the representatives went to Beijing and then returned, for 3-4 days they explained fully what had taken place. You said that it probably wasn't during this time and must have been the time Ngabö and Kheme, etc. returned after the 17-Point Agreement. This took place either in the Trungji Linga or the Tsidrung Linga.   

**A:**  It was the Tsidrung Linga. Yes, Ngabö spoke.   

**Q:**  So then let me ask you a bit about this. Now we are back in 1951 so when they spoke were they just reciting what took place or were they presenting things in a positive light; that discussions took place between the Tibetan Government and Labrang, etc. So were they saying that it was good. What was the mood? The 17-Point Agreement had already been done a long time ago and now the only question remaining was how to implement it, right? So what was the mood? So were people saying that maybe it wasn't so bad to implement it?   

**A:**  Now you are talking about the 17-Point Agreement, right? With Ngabö talking, etc.?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  During this time we did not take much interest in politics because we were young and had just joined government service. So when it was said to meet, we met and listened when we were told to do so. Other than that, we had no experience and not much education in politics. However, when one examines the situation, Ngabö and the others went to China and returned and what transpired down there was told like a "daily diary entry" [Tib. ཉིན་ཐོ]- they told about what happened; they told all about the 17-Point Agreement. So they were announcing a summary of their work [Tib. ལས་སྡོམ] from the period when they went to China until their return. Since there were so many things mentioned, I can't specifically remember everything. Anyway, since you asked about the mood, at that time it was kind of about security. It was an emergency situation. There was war. That had been decided and all the preparations were being made for war, at least whatever preparations we could do. A lot of work was done. As much as was possible in those days. They also performed the exorcism ritual [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག] where necessary. Soldiers were mobilized and they were practicing the drills and some of them were also send down (to Chamdo). We didn't have vehicles and things like that, and no matter how much we wanted to do, it was difficult. So compared to this, and even though it was certain the Chinese would come, there was a sense that a peaceful agreement had been reached and at least for then, things subsided. And it may have even been the Dalai Lama's desire not to have war too. If there was war, then there would be so many casualties. So things were to some extent considered not bad. There was to be peace after the 17-Point Agreement. Otherwise it was said that they were going to forcefully invade and their numbers are so great. At that time there were no vehicles and things, and in terms of arms, it was also difficult, though we did what we could---what was possible in those days. For example, regarding rituals [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན] tens of thousands of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> (money) and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grains were spent. I myself asked all the lamas and deities for divination. A Buddhist country has to fight a war and also to perform rituals; the latter were to gain the support and to avoid the war. No matter how much was done, this time it was not (effective). Like one's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> and like the sun shining [it was unavoidable]. However, on account of doing the rituals, things just didn't go completely haywire. Towards the end, in 1959, they did reforms and things changed. But when they returned from China [the representatives] there was no change in Tibet. The Chinese didn't do much and didn't change things. When the Chinese came they asked for housing and they bought houses, and so since we were not forced to do things, it stayed like that [like it had been]. So that was the mood. At that time the mood was good, because there was peace even though it was sure that the Chinese were going to come. So the unsettled feeling ceased. So when they met us and related the events, we were not involved in this work because we were brand new [officials]. We were told to come to meet them in unofficial dress, to meet without formality. If you wanted to listen you could or you could leave to urinate. So this informal gathering from that time on was called a Shugmöl Tsondu [Tib. བཞུགས་མོལ་ཚོགས་འདུ] (a symposium/seminar).   

**Q:**  What kind of meeting?   

**A:**  A symposium, Shugmöl Tsondu. Everyone sort of just sitting and meeting.   

**Q:**  Regarding this period, I have something to ask you that many have not heard about it. After Ngabö returned, I presume he would have had to relate what took place at Beijing and I hear a meeting was called. I can't tell you whether it was a Full Assembly or Abbreviated Assembly meeting (<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> gyepa or hragdu). Regarding this, though you may have been young, you may have heard about it later. So at the meeting he explained everything about the 17-Point Agreement and said that that was all that could be done. I heard Lhautara has written about it though I myself have not seen the article. So it was said that that's all there was to do and we have no regrets and will accept whatever punishment you give. So the tsondu recommended that maybe it was a good idea to accept [17-Point Agreement]. Later the Chinese published a telegram from the Dalai Lama in which he said he accepted it. After that, on or about May 20th, I don't recall now, Mao sent a reply saying that its good that you have accepted this. So have you heard anything about this?   

**A:**  Today things are being published and so one hears about it. At that time it was something that ranking officials [Tib. གོང་རིམ] must have discussed, but we heard nothing about it. If we had gone to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> we would have known. If not, then we would not hear right?   

**Q:**  Since there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, weren't you an official at that time.   

**A:**  Yes I was an official.   

**Q:**  That was 1951, I think 1952. No, No, sometime in 1951. So I was wondering how this came about. Since the Chinese published a telegram, it must have been sent, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it should be.   

**Q:**  So I was wondering if a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> was held, then you may have heard about it.   

**A:**  Yes. It would seem that regarding this matter they would have had to meet, though I don't know. However, the 17-Point Agreement itself, the way it came about, there was the necessity of negotiations and so the Dalai Lama was consulted and from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> Kungö Lhautara went. Likewise Thubden Lengmönla and others went. So they went and got together. So its not possible that they did not have some power. So with that power they were the negotiators. On the other side, demanding that an agreement must be implemented, were the Chinese and so they met together. When this happened, what they [delegates] said was that whatever articles the Chinese put forth that was it. Unlike today, the various discussions one has in a democratic society, that was not possible. Neither would they listen. They said that the Chinese brought out the discussion agenda [Tib. གྲོས་གཞི].   

**Q:**  Yes, a 10-point article.   

**A:**  They said that if you want to listen to this then it's good, if not then it's not okay. So when they said that it became difficult. So based on that, they said a couple of things. If we disagreed, then it was not possible to have an agreement, right? And so they went to make an agreement and if they could not, then it wouldn't be okay. So there were a lot of problems. For example, Kungö Lhautara even said, "Regarding Tibet's currency, we thought that they will disagree [to allowing it to continue], but they did not." It is not in the 17-Point Agreement. So they were worried about that and since they did not say anything, it stayed that way. Later, since this was not in the agreement, after the Chinese arrived, we used Tibetan currency and not the Chinese. Even the People's Liberation Army had to use Tibetan currency. Likewise they said they were going to use the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> coins and since it was silver, people were sort of happy. And so the government sent an edict saying that the dayan should be accepted at the exchange rate of one for 15 srang. So good things like that came about too. So it was whatever they [Chinese] wanted and if one went to make a lot of alterations, then - for example in 1959 [date mix-up] if they did what <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> did and started fighting, then there was no way at all that there would be any agreement. So he [Lukhangwa] was very hard-headed [Tib. མཁྲེག་པོ] and so if they did like he did, then the agreement would not be possible. So that is why today we say that the 17-Point Agreement was agreed to under the bayonet of the gun [Tib. མེ་མདའི་རྩེ་གྲི]. So when we say that it was signed under duress, it is as I have said just now. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> [representatives] said, "It was whatever they said, and there wasn't much [for us] to say." So it was done carefully, different from today's situation where one side says something and the other replies in an equal position. So they said that this was difficult. So this everyone knows about. After they came up and did this and that, and the question of everyone getting together and [Ngabö] relating everything, well, that too was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> (Assembly meeting), wasn't it?   

**Q:**  In a book it is written that a meeting was called. I don't know whether it was a Full Assembly or what. So there he spoke and said that's all there was to do. And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> recommended to the Dalai Lama that it would be good to accept the 17-Point Agreement. So since then a telegram was sent, it's said. And Mao sent a reply telegram saying that its good that you have accepted. So there was this talk.   

**A:**  I see. That probably is so. They must have asked [the Dalai Lama]. Those who went down must have said that that's all they could do. If [the Dalai Lama or Yadong] said that you should think about doing more than that, then the agreement would not have been possible. It's possible that [the Dalai Lama or Yadong] could have said that I guess that's all we can do for the time being. Now regarding this, I don't have much to say, but if it is in a book then it must be so.   

**Q:**  The book is based on what Lhautara has said from Tibet. The telegram was published by the Chinese. So I was wondering how this came about and if you have heard anything about it.   

**A:**  I guess it must be so. After the agreement was established, they must have consulted [with Yadong] and the Chinese must have said that if you agree with this then that's it, if not, then we don't have any more to think about. So there was this talk, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. What shall I say, as I see it, the 17-Point Agreement was already implemented.   

**A:**  They were still discussing it.   

**Q:**  No, I'm talking about after the agreement. After the 17-Point Agreement was finished and everything was done, then Ngabö came up and then it is said that a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> was called. Then there was another talk from our government side that it was not okay. Now what they have signed down there lets consider that that was all signed and done with, right? Even if the representatives were sent down, those who were on this side [in Lhasa] had not accepted the agreement, right? Those who were at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and at Lhasa, the Dalai Lama, did not agree to it. Only those who went down. So there is talk that later the telegram was sent saying it was accepted. So I'm talking about after the 17-Point Agreement. After it was agreed and then finally after they came up. Then the tsondu was called. Actually speaking, the fact that after the 17-Point Agreement was signed, that didn't that finish it. Were the Chinese [still] insisting that the Dalai Lama had to accept?   

**A:**  This they were not saying, at least I don't think so. We ourselves must have asked him. That the Chinese were saying roughly [Tib. སྤོམ་རྩིས] such and such and so they must have asked him and its possible that an order was given. [note: he is still taking about when the 17 Point Agreement was in process]. So after the agreement, it's possible that they sent a telegram. The Chinese like to say things like that. That this time we did great things. That it was great to have a peaceful agreement between China and Tibet. Now after they came up, the question of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, its possible that a tsondu was called and also the meeting that we went to, the Shugmöl Tsondu, where [Ngabö] announced things. So that was a meeting too.   

**Q:**  I was thinking that when they came to Lhasa, there were a lot who did not like it, right? For example, the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were there, and they could have asked, "What kind of work did you all do down there?" They were not accepting it.   

**A:**  No, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> -- how did that happen? [he was a little confused]   

**Q:**  The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were in Lhasa at that time, right? The Dalai Lama and the Kashag were at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, right? Ngabö and the others were at Beijing, right? So after the 17-Point Agreement was agreed to there must have been many that were not happy or did not accept it, right? The two sitsab were not accepting it, right? So from this perspective, is it possible that the Chinese were saying that the two sitsab must accept the agreement and that the Dalai Lama also must? I feel that could be.   

**A:**  No. There wasn't anything like that. So at that time there was no talk like that. It is true that there were those who did not like it, but at such an emergency time we can't be so upset with those who went down [to Beijing to discuss this] since that was like throwing water on a fire after the fighting at Chamdo to make things peaceful. They never said they wanted to go [to Beijing], but rather they were sent there according to the order of the Dalai Lama. So they were told to go and discuss and when they went there, it's like today, the Chinese can do what they like. So there wasn't much that we could say. The Chinese told us and related how things should be. This was related by those who went down to discuss this. When we got down there, it was whatever they wanted to say. They [the representatives] could not say what was on their mind, because if they did, then there was no way to have an agreement.   

**Q:**  After the 17-Point Agreement was discussed, the Chinese brought up the issue of the Panchen Lama; that the Qinghai candidate must be recognized. So regarding this, there seems to have been a lot of discussions and problems later when the Panchen Lama came up [to Lhasa]. I think we talked about this already?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  Didn't the [Panchen Lama] come straight up?   

**A:**  Who?   

**Q:**  The Panchen Lama.   

**A:**  Last time I talked about when Panchen Lama came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Yes. He was coming from Beijing. Did he go straight to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, to Tashilhunpo.   

**Q:**  Not to Lhasa?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  I thought he came to Lhasa and then to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>?   

**A:**  No. No. (Draktenla [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན་ལགས], an old official who was working at the next desk overheard this and said "Did he come to Lhasa?")   

**Q:**  Yes, he did. Didn't he?   

**A:**  Draktenla: He came to Lhasa and then went.   

**A:**  No, no, no. I was Yangpajen [as district head] and he came by plane and arrived at this place, what's the name of the air strip?   

**A:**  Draktenla: It was Dam [Tib. འདམ].   

**A:**  Yes, at Dam. From there Ngabö went to receive him. At Yangpajen there was Kungö Thönpa and, whats his name, the one who was staying at Dalhousie? [Anyway] he was there from the lay official side. A <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> were sent. The two of them were in charge of the reception at Yangpajen [Tib. ཕེབས་སྒྲིག་དོ་དམ་པ]. So from there [Dam] they arrived at Yangpajen and then they crossed the Shugola pass, and went to Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] and then to Rimpung [Tib. རིན་སྤུངས] and Shigatse. I myself was involved in this, but if he did go twice [to Lhasa] then I don't know about it. So what I'm talking about is the earlier [first] visit. So in this visit he arrived at Dam and Ngabö met him. Now I didn't see it, but that's what I heard. He came in a car and greeted him and then Ngabö returned. There were a number of Chinese officials and they also returned. So from Dam he came in a car up to Yangpajen. Under the Shugola pass there is an flat area and that was where the first reception committee from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> met him. [Note: This is actually about the return of the Panchen Lama from India in 1957. The airport at Dam was only finished in 1956]. So we helped with the reception and we got the corvée horses and the transport animals and people [Tib. རྟ་ཁེ]. So when he arrived there they had his tent and everything up [provided by Tashilhunpo]. There was a place for the audience and on the sides there were places to sit. Since he came to this place in a car, there were bodyguards. There were two bodyguards. The internal one and then the Chinese one. There must have been around 100 Chinese bodyguards. The representative of the Chinese was Jin Siling, a young-looking man who was a Commander-in-Chief [Ch. si ling yuan]. He must have been in his mid-twenties or early thirties,. He was a very pleasant looking person. So he was the main person and under him there were about 100 soldiers. Then they had their own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and Siling bodyguard and he stayed at Yangpajen for two days. Then he went on horseback. The horses had come [from Tashilhunpo]. The Panchen Lama rode on a mule. The rest were horses and mules. Where it was insufficient, we provided [the animals]. We, the three districts of Yangpajen, Namru [Tib. གནམ་རུ] and Nyemo, got together and provided whatever we had. Whatever they wanted we had to provide it for them right? Then he went to Markyang [Tib. མར་རྐྱང] and stayed the night there at the place called Takdruka [Tib. སྟག་གྲུ་ཁ]. Then there was a boat from there and then one reached Nangkartse. Then to Rimpung one passes via the Wangden [Tib. དབང་ལྡན] area. That's how they got [to Tashilhunpo]. So he went this way. Its was on horseback, nothing else. There were about two huge buses which they asked us to keep at the monastery. It seems they were Chinese vehicles. I do not know what happened to them. It seems they returned. The buses were full of their items. They were kept at the monastery at Yangpajen. A way was made for them to go to the monastery and it was kept there for a while. Then after the Panchen Lama arrived at Shigatse, the Chinese built a road over the Shugola pass. They made it in such a hurry that later when the Panchen Lama went to Lhasa he was able to go by car.   

**Q:**  So he came from Shigatse to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When he arrived at Lhasa and when he went to meet the Dalai Lama, the Chinese were saying that they wanted equal seating, right?   

**A:**  Regarding this it was all signed in the 17-Point Agreement? [he misunderstood]   

**Q:**  Finally, when the audience took place, was it done in the traditional manner?   

**A:**  Generally, when the Dalai Lama gives an audience it was done in the West Room. When the Panchen Lama arrived it was done in the East Room. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཇ] The daily meeting of Tibetan government monk officials (tsedrung) at which tea was provided. However, unlike the collective meetings of monks in monasteries, there was no collective chanting of prayers at the Drungja. The event started at around 9 a.m. and lasted for about an hour. When the Tse ga (the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat) was in the Potala, it was held there, and when it was in the Norbulinga Summer Palace, it was held there. All monk officials in Lhasa were expected to attend.">drungja</a> tea ceremony took place in the East Room. Whatever we did, we did it as usual [traditional] so there was no pomp [Tib. རྒྱས་སྤྲོས]. However it was said that when the audience took place, they sat on chairs. Since we did not go inside, we don't know. Probably its true. We were at the drungja just adjacent to the Dalai Lama's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> gaa (Secretariat). Then the Panchen Lama was called into the room and food was served and they met. While the meeting was taking place, the soldiers did not listen [to us]. The drungja took place from the East Room's end to the other side. The soldiers [the bodyguard soldiers of the Panchen Lama] came with their guns and sat right in the middle between the East Room and the end. So nothing was said to them and the matter was just left unsaid. So that left a very bad impression on everyone. The way they behaved. Yes, the Chinese taught them, but even the Chinese were not behaving so badly. Internally, among themselves, they made things seem such an urgency and acted as if there was really something alarming. We didn't care. More than that, since so many Chinese had already arrived we were used to this. So for the attendants and the entourage, we had set aside a separate place with rice and tea and carpets. They were to be served there. Since this problem arose, the carpet setters served some, but we did not and just let things be. Then after some time when the Panchen Lama was leaving, and they all had to leave in a hurry, right? So that was about all that took place, nothing else. They and the soldiers remained standing. It was said that that is what took place inside. Generally, when such a ceremony takes place, everyone is present. It was not a situation like this with the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama staying alone. Various ranking officials were on both sides of them. Whenever a drungja was to take place, that's how it happened. So this had to be done right. In the outer area the common monk officials and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> [Tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] had tea. So it had to take place there. Not like today, having an audience in a separate place. It was done at the drungja. The reason for this is that we did things according to the traditional entitlements [Tib. གོ་བབ], whatever was done earlier. From the Panchen Lama's side, they were thinking in a new way, like shaking hands and sitting on a chair. So regarding the relative rank between the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama, it was clearly spelled out in the 17-Point Agreement. So things were signed and no argument occurred over this. That is what happened.   

**Q:**  Yes, Kungö. Now we have come to 1954-1955, which is what I really wanted to ask you about. After the Dalai Lama returned in 1955 [from Beijing] and the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region started, during this time were you at Yangpajen?   

**A:**  When the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region started, I was at Lhasa.   

**Q:**  After [the Dalai Lama] came back in 1955-1956, the uprisings in Kham were just about beginning, right? So what was the political situation in the Central Tibetan area? Was the situation getting worse and worse. Now in 1955, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region started.   

**A:**  In 1955, things were staying like that right? There were the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> [Note: they actually had already been dismissed in 1952] and there were talks back and forth between the kalön. They were talking a lot about starting the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region (PCTAR), but things got postponed and finally the Chinese were saying that things have to be implemented according to the 17-Point Agreement. They said one just can't stay like that [doing nothing] and there was no use in even the People's Liberation Army being in Tibet. So since the 17-Point Agreement said that the Military Administration Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] had to be started, but if not it, then the Tibet Autonomous Region should start. So whatever you wish to start, it is up to your thinking. However, if we don't start something then no work will be accomplished. We [Chinese] have come to Tibet, but there is no work. And whether it is help or whatever, we are not able to do anything." The reason for this was that when they went to do something, the Local Government [Tibetan Government] had to be approached and this was not alright with them. They wanted a separate organization in the form of the Tibet Autonomous Region; one which did not need the permission of the Local government. They wanted something new. So this is what was in their minds for the future. During our time we didn't know anything. So from the Chinese side this was what they were saying. And since they said that, a Tibet (Böjong [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས]) Assembly was called. There would naturally be a lot of talk there, but the substance of the meeting was that they were saying that the Military Administration Committee should be started, but we were saying that we can't do this. We don't know what that would be about. What we know is religion and those who believe in religion cannot think about war. But we will do the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. So we decided on that.   

**Q:**  So when the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region (PCTAR) began there must have been a huge meeting.   

**A:**  Yes, a big one.   

**Q:**  A lot of people must have had to speak too. Like Ngabö? the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, Ngabö. The Dalai Lama himself came I think. At that time Chen Yi came as the representative [of the Chinese government]. We said that we are going to start the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> and it was decided. It was started, and there were 14 Offices. All the offices began operating mostly in the Jangsebshar [Tib. ལྕང་གསེབ་ཤར]. You must know this. If there were 10 Chinese in one office, there would be 5 from the local (Tibetan) government and from Chamdo and Shigatse there would be 2.5 each. So this was established. Half of the positions were taken by the local government, and half by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and Chamdo. So in the Tibet Autonomous Region there were 3 divisions, the local government, Chamdo and Tashilhunpo.   

**Q:**  Weren't there Chinese in the offices too?   

**A:**  Now there's no point talking about the Chinese because they are the heads anyway. Whether it is one Chinese or a million, the fact that they are there is something given. Actually there is no need for them to have more than the local government. In the first place, the whole of Tibet was under one [Tibetan] government and never two! But they did not do that and they created three governments. So in addition to the three, the Chinese were also there on top. No point in talking about them since they were the leaders. When they made the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> in three parts what was happening was that the counterpart of the Chinese was made up by the other two. So the reason why they did that was to divide Tibet into three parts. How this worked was that the other two were pushing their power to be equal with the local government. What the local government was doing was just pushing for Tibet, in development, etc. Whether they were doing things in the old days or the new times, their aim was the same. What the other two were doing was that, even though they were Tibetans, the Chinese put them there and so they had no choice but to support the Chinese. So when the time came to vote, the two, along with the Chinese comprised three [vote] and Local Government only one. For example, if we said something, then there would be 3 "nos" and since they were the majority, that was it. This is to give you even a small example. So this was their thinking and that was the reason why they wanted to divide it into three parts. Other than that, they were not saying anything else. Regarding Chamdo, they were saying that Chamdo has been liberated and so they had to be included [in the PCTAR as a separate entity]. The reason why Shigatse and Labrang [the Panchen's administration] were included is because they said the Panchen Lama is of equal status and all that stuff- and this was also included in the 17-Point Agreement. So this is how it was formed. But since the local government is the main one and if it did not move [on issues], then it would be difficult [to do things]. The other two were stating a lot of opinions, but it was difficult [to force things] since [the local government] is the [holder] of all the areas right? Now before the Tibet Autonomous Region began, it was only the local government and no one else that was "touching hands" [doing things], even the Chinese were not. Unless they did things by force, they could not do things. Now after a consultation with the local government, the Tibet Autonomous Region was started and now that it was a government by itself the various districts and the surrounding areas were getting further and further away [coming more under Tibet Autonomous Region's influence]. And then the question of destroying them [districts] came into being. And so things like democratic reforms were coming under this. So at this time it was decided that the Tibet Autonomous Region was to begin. So after the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was agreed, the main representative of China, Chen Yi arrived. Along with him there were many leaders. A meeting hall was built and meetings took place and food was served in the Shugtri Linga park. At that time it was a grand occasion. Meetings were taking place here and there with dining. Over a thousand people dined including the Chinese. The Chinese gave meals to the Tibetans and the local government or the Dalai Lama gave meals to the Chinese at the Jensel Phodrang [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་ཕོ་བྲང]. It was all done in the "parks" (Tib. ལིང [གླིང་ག]) as there was no way to fit everyone into any of the halls. Tents were pitched [in the parks] and the kalön and everyone were there. At the meeting, it was also said that if you have any opinions then please give them. At that time Tsarong got up and said something. He got up in the middle of the gathering and said something.   

**Q:**  Do you remember what he said?   

**A:**  He said something [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  I heard he said something short. My grandfather's speech style is "short" [Tib. འདུམ་འདུམ] (also here conveys blunt]   

**A:**  At first, Chen Yi and the others spoke. Then Tsarong said, "It's said that in Tibet there are imperialist forces. I have now reached a ripe old age and Tibet has always been Tibet and there never was a time when we were under the imperialists." Most probably, I think this is what he said: "Tibet never existed under forceful occupation. So this idea of expelling the imperialists is not correct. So you all are saying this and this is not so". Besides this, he also said something else. At the meeting, the person who really did say something was Kungö [Tsarong]. We were seated close by him. We didn't know anything, but since we were government officials we had to go [attend]. So the minutes of the meeting were "read" and a resolution was passed. So now the [Preparatory Committee for the] Tibet Autonomous Region was established and ceremonies took place. Planes flew over and flowers were dropped. Speeches were given. There were representatives from the various regions who were transported in buses. One bus was kept at the Sungjöra and the other at Gyambumgang. So in the mornings that is where they went and from there they were bused to Shugtri Linga. [Note: During a tea break I mentioned that the lay official Mayala said that my grandfather (Tsarong) said, "Yes, one must go the democratic way, but we have something called religion which is in the 'space' [Tib. བར་སྣང་གང]. So we must hold on to this and whoever harms the religion, harm will come to them." Champa Yöndenla said that now he remembers that Tsarong said that. Draktenla, a desk away, joined in and said that the Chinese have published a booklet on all the speeches during the Tibet Autonomous Region meetings, but what Tsarong said would not be included in it. Not only was his utterance inappropriate, but he spoke from the floor when it was asked if the attendees had any opinions. After this interview, I went to ask Ngawang Rigdrol but he said he couldn't recall now, but Tsarong did say something about how he had now reached quite an old age. ]   

**A:**  Now in the case of Tsarong, it was a situation where all of a sudden he stood up from the midst of the meeting and spoke. It was not prepared.   

**Q:**  So were they asking what opinions people had?   

**A:**  Yes, something like that. He sort of said it straight out. So he said it all of a sudden. ... There were not that many that spoke on this occasion. Tsarong did. Finally the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> was all done and established and in addition to that, they were saying that democratic reforms must begin. So what were democratic reforms and what actions did they entail? It was the reforms that must be established among the people. So they just said reforms, but it was difficult to gather what it entailed. So regarding this, a discussion took place. A small tent was pitched and a discussion took place before the main meeting. They brought some documents with them. On the paper : a) Should democratic reforms be done and b) should they not be done. So for those who said that it should be done, a discussion took place. The same with those who felt that it should not be done, citing the reasons why. The meetings were arranged in many groups that consisted of 10-15-20 persons in each group. So all the opinions were gathered and collected and it seemed that that was what they were going to go on. At that time, from the [Tibetan] government side, the officials and everyone said that the time had not come to start reforms. If they were done, it would not be in accordance with the wishes of the people. The reason was that if reforms were carried out all of a sudden, then it was said that the people would be wondering [what was going on]. They don't have education and so it is better to postpone and do it gradually. So it is better to request a postponement. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> said that it is a good idea to do democratic reforms; I'm quite sure that was the case. I think they also said that if the democratic reforms cannot be implemented [all over], then there should be an trial to do democratic reforms. Finally, when they took all the opinions it seems that the majority wanted a postponement. So they said that they will request a postponement from Mao Zedong. So the reply was that if it cannot be done this year then leave it for the next. If it is not suited next year, then leave it for the next, and even the following year. So leave it for a while and then they [the Tibetan] themselves will realize that they want democratic reforms. So it was left for a while. From the other side [Tashilhunpo], there was strong movement for doing trial democratic reforms. Since that was the case, at Tölung Tselde Dzong [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་ཚལ་བདེ་རྫོང], it was decided to have an experiment in implementing Democratic Reform. So this was passed at the meeting. There was to be an a trial implementation. [Note: This was not passed at the meeting, but did take place after it. For a firsthand detailed discussion of the trial reforms in Tölung see H.0017.01-07]   

**Q:**  So the place of the experiment was to be Tölung Tselde Dzong?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So what did they do? How was the experiment done? Who was the district head there?   

**A:**  At that time, the district head was Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས], the one who always speaks over the radio.   

**Q:**  You mean these days?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I don't know.   

**A:**  Before Bumtang Kungö became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, he stayed in China for a while. Gyentsen Phüntso was with him, acting like his servant. So he had studied in China and stayed for a long time and knew and spoke Chinese very well. After the Chinese came to Tibet, he was the interpreter for Zhang Jingwu. Gyentsen Phüntsola was a monk official and his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> (monk household) was Bumtang. However, his mind had changed totally and like Shölkang Jedrungla, he loved revolutionary things. Those kinds became actually "living Chinese" [Tib. རྒྱ་མི་གསོན་པ], , completely "living Chinese". What they were thinking in their minds was to do reforms and "develop" Tibetans. The way we perceived it, we were sort of clumsy [Tib. ཁོབ་ཏོ], but they had changed and become "living Chinese." So he was the one, and that was the place where the trial reforms were to be done (in Tselde Dzong).   

**Q:**  How did it happen that this place was chosen? Did he say he wanted to do?   

**A:**  No, No. How can [one say that]?   

**Q:**  Was the reason that this place was headed by someone who liked the Chinese?   

**A:**  The Kashag and the Chinese discussed the place where the trial reforms were to take place. Now it seems that they [the Chinese] were in cahoots [Tib. ཁ་མཐུན] with the [pro-Chinese people in the Kashag] and since Gyentsen Phüntsola was very keen on changes they appointed him under the cloak of him being a monk official. [In other words to make it seem] as if he was not on the Chinese side. So he had been appointed head of Tselde Dzong and was doing the district's work and not saying anything about anything else. So the Kashag and the meeting [PCTAR] agreed that Tselde Dzong was to be the place for the trial. The ones who will do it will be the Chinese, so that's it. So that's how it happened. So the reason why they did Tölung Tselde Dzong is because Gyentsen Phüntsola was there. That was part of the reason. The fact that they first wanted to do [reforms] there was because he [Gyentsen Phüntsola] was there and we suspected immediately that they had sent him there [as the monk official district head] from the beginning for this reason. He was a real People's Liberation Army [type]. He was educated in this way. So it was decided to do the experiment there and so an edict was sent and it said that Tibetans and the Chinese had agreed to do the experiment at Tselde Dzong and so Tselde Dzong was asked to make preparations soon. [Note: This was not agreed to by the Kashag. See H.0017. 01-17 for an accurate explanation pf these reforms.] Whether it was said by the Kashag or whoever, but that was said. He also had nothing to do except to make preparations and stay like that. For the preparations, what was necessary from the Chinese side was that youth had to go there. That was the first.   

**Q:**  The Youth?   

**A:**  Yes, the Youth of Lhasa [the Youth League]. They went to Tselde Dzong, showed movies and made preparations at Tselde Dzong. They stayed in the district headquarters and gathered all the people of Tselde Dzong and showed them films and gave lectures, saying that till now you have suffered and that the people now must rise up and do things, and that the land must be reformed [redistributed]. [They said] that the poor must be made better. They were giving all this advice. So the Tibetan Youth were instrumental. Now they had already been educated by the Chinese [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱོང་བཏང]. One can't say all of them came, but they were the ones that came and they took over the whole of Tselde Dzong. The actual district head just stayed in the kitchen in another part of the district and he was not up there [in the main part]. So he and they, well, they were the same. Anyway, the whole district was handed over to them. So everyday the Youth held office there and in addition to that. the Chinese were there. So the people and the representatives were all called there and they had meetings. At meetings the only work was to talk and there was no other work right? So what they were talking about was that Tibet must be improved, that the poor must be improved too, that the PRC is great and big, that they are helping and that there is no need to fear anyone, that everyone is equal and can say whatever they like. That no one can punish them and that they have their backing [the communist party] so can say whatever you want and then the poor will rise up and you will show your strength. So they gave lectures like this. In between the meetings, food was served and they did whatever they could to make them happy. So the majority [Youth] just stayed and played football. So then after the education sessions and the lectures, they would say: "Among you there are large families and even just one family has so much land. So up to now they have held such land and till today what do you have to show for it? The poor have only so much land and still they are working so hard. Tell us how hard you work and so compare the two. So what are you going to do? So the Chinese will say all these things. So they would say things like this. So among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>, the worst elements [Tib. སྡུག་ཤོས], the beggar types would say, "Till now you guys have eaten so much and even when the liberators have come at your door, you are still thinking of eating some more. So don't you think you have to use your heads. Now we are poor and we don't have anything to think about." So in the name of the Tibetan people they degraded them and so they [the wealthy] said that they are going to give their lands to the cooperative.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes. That they are going to give to the cooperative [Tib. མྱམ་ལས]. The elder ones said that. Then the ones who did not wish to give up their lands, the ones who kept quiet and did not say anything, they were specially singled out at the meeting and asked, "What are you guys going to do? Without speaking how can we have a meeting?" Having eaten till now, what have you to show for it? What work?" So they insulted them, falling just short of doing a struggle session. So between the poor people and the usual village [elites like the] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> and headmen there was this much difference . The poor people stayed up there [above] and the headmen and the tsodrag down there [below]. So now there was nothing to do. That's it. Now the poor had risen up so much that now they could speak. And with their arms out of their dress sleeves [Tib. སྟོད་ཧྲང་ཕུད] they began to speak and there was not a thing that could be done. So from the behind - they [Youth and Chinese] were there. And they were told to say they had to speak out. So in this way they choose the more articulate [Tib. ཁ་བདེ་པོ) persons and they spoke and ཨིནསུལྟེད་ཐེམ [ཐེ་ཨེལིཏེ]. So most probably they all [the elite families] said they would give their lands to the cooperative. Unless one agreed to do that, there was no other way. Now this was wide ranging. In this area there were many estates that belonged to the monasteries. The monks and all their representatives were called to the meeting and were being told these things. They were told that if they don't want to join the cooperative and don't want to change, then let us see you guys stand up and show yourself [to the masses], if you are indeed able to show yourselves.   

**Q:**  Traditionally at Tselde Dzong were there all three kinds of estates--government, aristocrats and estates that belonged to the monasteries?   

**A:**  Yes, all three.   

**Q:**  Traditionally, there was the district head, the staff [Tib. ལས་སྣེ], etc. Under them there were the headman and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a>, the ones who did the things at the village level right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So now in this [reform organization] the district head was involved and so were the Youth League members. so was it that then the headmen and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> had no power?   

**A:**  They were loosing it.   

**Q:**  Had they lost it?   

**A:**  Yes, they had lost it.   

**Q:**  Then the poor people were called up?   

**A:**  The headmen and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> were there.   

**Q:**  I see, they were there together?   

**A:**  Yes they were there together. While they were together, the poor stayed at the top and lectured them and when they asked, "So what is it going to be?" the headmen and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> could not say, "Kei [Tib. ཀས], don't talk that much." [shut up] The Chinese are there to tell them to say it and the Youth League members were there. Everyone was gathered, so what could they say. They could not say that.   

**Q:**  If the reforms were to take place, what was going to happen to the traditional tax income?   

**A:**  There wasn't to be any! Once the fields were given up, there would be nothing to give. It would have become socialized. When it became a cooperative, it became socialized.   

**Q:**  So had it already become cooperative? Had they decided to start or what?   

**A:**  They were in the process of starting do that, but the actual cooperative had not yet started. They were experimenting, right? So I'm telling you roughly. I doubt you will find many who know about this because at that time cooperatives had not started. The cooperatives occurred when the democratic reforms began. Towards the end, as they were making preparations [for the trial cooperatives], problems increased and people were getting fed up because the beggar types [Tib. སྤྲང་པོ་རྐྱང་རྐྱང) were sitting at the head and the better off families were being bashed about [Tib. གཏིབ]. They were not happy, right? and so they were left sitting below. It did not go to the extent that they used their hands and beat them up, but since the common people carried it on, it was sure that the preparations were going to take place [eventually]. So before this took place, the 1959 uprising began. I think it was something like this.   

**Q:**  So this was begun in 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So from 1956 to 1959 , for 4 years it went on like that?   

**A:**  Yes, it stayed like this for a few years. At first the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> began with sorting out the organizational things, etc. Then the experimental things began. That too took time. So gradually they allowed it to begin. So what I described just now took place. So when a year or two passed they were able to do some things and people got alarmed. While things were in that state, the 1959 uprising began.   

**Q:**  Now if we examine this time period, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> began in 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So when did the trial reforms take place at Tselde Dzong? About how many months after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> began did it start?   

**A:**  That I don't know since I was not in Tselde Dzong.   

**Q:**  I was just wondering for how many years it stayed like this? Like 1957 or 1958.   

**A:**  It went on only for a year or two. Then the 1959 problem began [the uprising]. Today you do not specifically hear that democratic reforms were carried on at Tselde Dzong, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, right.   

**A:**  The democratic reforms were started by the Chinese after 1959 and not before. So there is not much talk about it, but they were already laying the foundations for it at Tselde Dzong. At Tselde Dzong within one or two years they had already witnessed that. The various offices [the PCTAR ] were called preparatory. The actual trial [Tib. dnogs gzhi] began and the work that had to be done was democratic reforms. It did not remain for long, just 1-2 years. The Youth [League] members stayed there too for 1-2 years. Most probably after the work began, they stayed there. I think it was like that. the Youth members remained at the offices. In addition to that, during normal times [of no urgency] the representative of the 14 offices [of the PCTAR] came. For example, among the offices, let's say the Education Department. When they got there, they would start a school and gather the students. So in this way they had great plans, but they didn't get time. For example, the most important issue was land reforms. No one is going to specifically ask for land reforms. It would not be right for the poor to request reforms. However, they had to say that they wish to start the cooperative system. Once the cooperatives had begun, then it is not one's own and you have to give to others, right? So cooperatives is socialism [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས], right? And socialist - the communist party is socialist.   

**Q:**  Now regarding the fields, did they say that they were going to give it to the cooperative?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying this. If they say that they will not, then they will belittle them [Tib. དམའ་འབེབས་བཏང]. For example, if there is a person from the estate like the manager who said that he will not do it, then he would be made to stand up at a meeting and answer, "Why don't you want land reform? You have eaten so much and yet are still thinking about yourself rather than the society." So he would be belittled. So they would not be not left alone and such persons could not say anything. He could only say he is going to work together. If he said otherwise, then they will <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> up on him and treat him badly.   

**Q:**  Where is Tselde Dzong? How large are the estates that belonged to the monastery, aristocrats and government estates? Which were larger? How many people, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> were there?   

**A:**  Quite a lot. Tselde Dzong is that way and [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  In Tölung right?   

**A:**  Yes, from Lhasa one goes to Dongkar. It's called Shün Dongkar [Tib. ཤུན་གདོང་དཀར]. All this comprises one area [Tib. སྡེ་སྐོར] under Dongkar District. After this area, there are the three areas (<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོ] A group, an administrative unit, a nomad group.">tsho</a>): the lower tsho (Tib. meytsho [སྨད་ཚོ], the middle tsho (Tib. བརཚོ [བར་ཚོ]), and the upper tsho (Tib. tötsho [སྟོད་ཚོ]). These were part of Tselde Dzong. Its a large area. If one rides, it takes one day to get from one end to the other.   

**Q:**  For example, what monasteries were there?   

**A:**  Oh, many.   

**Q:**  Like?   

**A:**  Dingka [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁ], Chubsang [Tib. ཆུ་བཟང], Tshurpu. Quite a lot of others.   

**Q:**  How many aristocratic families were there?   

**A:**  What I told you earlier about the estates belonging to the monastery, I think you may be thinking about these monasteries. When I told you about religious estates there, I was talking about the Big Three 3 monasteries, Drepung, Sera, Ganden, and the Upper and Lower Tantric colleges (Gyüdö and Gyüme). I can't say exactly, but they were there. The monasteries I'm mentioning now are small ones. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] The monastery that is the sea of the Karmapa Lamas in Tölung County.">Tshurpu</a> was the largest of these and they had estates.   

**Q:**  What aristocrats were there?   

**A:**  Many. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང], Barshi [Tib. བར་གཞིས] and others, since it was close to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Is the area mostly agricultural?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Are there <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་མ་འབྲོག] A type of agro-pastoral subsistence mode that combined farming with the substantial use of sheep, goats and yaks.">samadrok</a> (agro-pasturalists) in the upper reaches?   

**A:**  Yes, there would be some, but it was basically agricultural. Beyond Tselde district was Lungpa sampa [Tib. ལུང་པ་ཟམ་པ]. Then Yangpajen where there were many headmen and some fields. but it was mostly nomadic. The winters were cold and there was a possibility for only one planting season. They had good manure. Beyond that, it was all nomads in areas like Namru, Betsang, Dam, Nagchu. If you go past (south of) Shugola Pass, then it was difficult for nomads, and Nangkartse, Rimpung, and Shalu [Tib. ཞ་ལུ] were all agricultural.   

