# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0017.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 8 November 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན] was a monk official who had served as the district head [Tib. འགོ་བ] of Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན]. In this interview, he talks about the recruitment of monk soldiers and how the Dalai Lama was given political power, as well as about the early 1950s in Lhasa. He also discusses the first meeting of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0017_01/H_0017_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Where were you living in 1949-50? The time when Chamdo was lost.  

**A:**  I was living in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What were you doing at that time?   

**A:**  At that time, I was working in the Yigtsang Office. That was the time when Chamdo was lost.   

**Q:**  In 1949, weren't the Chinese talking about liberating Tibet on the radio?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that.   

**Q:**  What was the thinking at that time in Lhasa? Were the people thinking that it would really happen?   

**A:**  Yes. They were thinking from the radio that the communists are going to liberate Tibet. When the people in Lhasa heard about that, not only the people, but the situation was tense for the Tibetan Government also and they set up a radio broadcast station and invited Sri Ford [to operate it]. The government was giving whatever answer should be given to the Chinese side on the radio broadcast. At that time, the foreigner Ford was an educated person, so he gave all the instructions and the Kashag discussed that and they gave the answers. At that time, all the people who had radios knew about that. At that time, Rasa Gyagen [Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན] was the radio announcer.   

**Q:**  Was he in Nagchu at that time?   

**A:**  He was in Lhasa and he announced on the radio from the Magar Sarpa [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ] ("New Military Headquarters"). That place used to be the Regimental Headquarters of the Jadang or the Tadang regiment of the Tibetan Government. At that time, the soldiers had gone [returned home], so the radio station was set up in that place.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese came to Chamdo, Lhalu was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, the troops sent to defend were still there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, did they send any special [soldiers] from the Tibetan Government?   

**A:**  Yes. They were sending special troops to Chamdo, and they had sent the army soldiers and the monk soldiers as far as Lharigo, but then they didn't need to go down further [as Chamdo was lost].   

**Q:**  At that time, there were monk soldiers [Tib. སེར་དམག], right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were not only from Sera, but probably from all three monasteries [around Lhasa].   

**Q:**  Was that after Chamdo was lost?   

**A:**  The preparations were done before Chamdo was lost. Before that, when they were talking a lot about the liberation [of Tibet], the dugö [Tib. འདུ་འགོད] economic management system was set up [in the Tibetan government]. That was a kind of economic reform. The leader [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན] was Surkhang. They printed the three sang coin [Tib. སྲང་གསུམ་སྒོར་མོ] to pay the salary and the expenses of the military.   

**Q:**  Did they set up the dugö office because of the danger from the Chinese side?   

**A:**  Yes. It was set up for economic purposes. When there was the serious danger from the Chinese, the Tibetan Government recruited the Drongdrag [Tib. གྲོང་དྲག] ("Better Family") regiment and so forth. At that time, all of the soldiers were in Lhasa and they were trained there. Probably, there were about 10,000 soldiers. They were doing a lot of preparations. For that, they need financial sources for their salary. And if the war took place, we needed financial sources like money and grain. At that time, the people were thinking that there would be trouble, because the Tibetan Government was in a tense situation and doing many things according to the situation like giving harsh answers to the Chinese. When the Chinese were saying that they are going to liberate Tibet, the Tibetan Government announced on the radio, "If the Chinese come on our soil we will fight till the men are killed and only the women are left [Tib. ཕོ་ཟད་མོ་ཐུག] and [we will fight] till the hands are cut off and only the shoulders are left [Tib. ལག་ཟད་དཔུང་ཐུག].   

**Q:**  I saw in Taktse Rimpoche's book that when he came to Lhasa, people told him not to talk like that [saying that the Chinese will attack]. They thought that the Chinese would never come because the statues of the Buddha and Avalokitesvara in Jokhang and the three great monasteries were still there. Therefore, nothing will happen. When I asked my father [Tsarong Rimshi] who was then in Drigung where they had recognized [his son as] the reincarnation of the Drigung Lama, he said that the people in Drigung were not at all nervous and afraid of the situation. That's why I am asking you about the thinking of people. In the historical record the Chinese had come to Tibet and then had gone back. What were the people thinking? Did they burn incense? How did the monk soldiers come? Did they decide by themselves to go?   

**A:**  No, the government recruited and organized them. At that time, the government restored the size of the incomplete regiments and added a lot of new soldiers. And they were trained for a couple of months. Anyway, at that time, the Tibetan Government was supposed to oppose [Tib. ཡ་ལན] the Chinese. At that time, the Tibetans were kind of stubborn [Tib. ལྐུགས་པ་དབུ་ཚུགས] and didn't know about the foreign countries. Actually, the higher authorities knew about the foreigners, but the subordinates were thinking that we have quite a lot of soldiers and they are quite courageous and they will do quite well. Actually, it was impossible to cope with the Chinese, but the people were not saying that and they were planning to fight. But, when Chamdo was lost, all of a sudden, people were not at all planning to fight. Therefore, according to the thought of the Dalai Lama, it was decided to accept [Tib. གཏན་འཁེལ] the 17-Point Agreement. After that, all the people became kind of calm or relaxed [Tib. ལྷིང་འཇགས]. That was strange. Chamdo was lost and the Agreement was signed. Hence we had to listen to whatever the Chinese said and there wasn't any chance to insist on something with the Chinese. As for the Taktse Rimpoche's book, at that time Taktse Rimpoche was sent by the Chinese to talk with the Tibetan Government. Whether they were calling it peaceful or liberation, actually it was because he was the brother of the Dalai Lama. Therefore, the person who came along to talk could only do like that since it was not right for him to cause a war. The only thing he could say was "It would be better to sign the peaceful agreement."   

**Q:**  Some people were saying that there were about 20,000 monk soldiers, but when they arrived at Lharigo, there were only about 70 of them left, was that correct?   

**A:**  Probably, it was like that.   

**Q:**  Do you have any idea about the number of monk soldiers?   

**A:**  I don't know the number.   

**Q:**  Probably, they were all volunteers from the different Monastic colleges, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Internally they might be volunteers, but basically the government recruited them. So the colleges divided the amount of monk soldiers [that were asked for] among the colleges and it became like a tax. If there were volunteers, they could come out as volunteers, but when the situation came to the critical point, it became like a tax. In olden days, the monk soldiers of Sera attacked the Chinese when they were staying at the sand dune area below Sera Monastery. So they came down and fought with the Chinese. But this time the situation was not the same as they needed horses because we didn't have vehicles. So it would cause a severe hardship for the miser (serfs) when the soldiers would travel [they would have to provide corvée animals). At that time we didn't even have a cart pulled by horses. If we had carts, one cart could carry 15-16 people.   

**Q:**  In 1950's when the Chinese were coming, at that moment, the Dalai Lama took the religious and political responsibility. At that time, probably, he sent a letter to China in which it was written, "During the time of the regents, the friendship between the Chinese and the Tibetans declined, but now I am going to restore the friendship." At that point, I heard that the Chinese policy implemented in Chamdo and those places became a little bit more relaxed or lenient. After the Dalai Lama took the religious and the political responsibility, how was the situation in Lhasa? Did the situation become sort of different? Or did the people show solidarity?   

**A:**  At that time, Nechung and Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང], the two protector deities, prophesied that it would be beneficial if the regent offered the religious and the political power to the Dalai Lama. At that time, Nechung prophesied, "I told you earlier that you should offer the religious and the political power to the Dalai Lama. Now it is the time to offer him the power." But it was said that they kind of delayed, saying that the Dalai Lama hadn't finished his religious studies. Nechung just prophesied once and later he didn't prophecy again because they didn't put into action what he had prophesied in the past. Actually, among the deities, Nechung had the political responsibility to prophecy because he was said to be the political protection deity. So if they had offered the power earlier, it might have had a result. But they didn't offer the power. If they offered the power, the regent would not have had the power. The kudrak did something internally and delayed the offering of the power. In between that, there was a lot of talk about Kapshöba [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] and those people. I am not sure whether it was false or true. So I am leaving those talks aside and in short, the situation became very tense. At that time, when they asked Nechung for a prophecy again, Nechung said, "I have already told you earlier that you should offer [the Dalai Lama] the power." After that, when they asked the protector deity Gadong for a prophecy, Gadong said, "It is the time for my savior [the Dalai Lama] to take the religious and political power [Tib. ང་ཡི་མགོན་པོར་རྒྱལ་བསྟན་ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་སྐབས་བབ་ཡོད]. So you should offer the power as soon as possible and ask Nechung again for a prophecy." At that moment, it was just after Nechung had given the prophecy. But when they asked him to go into trance again and they asked Nechung again for the prophecy, Nechung said, "As Gadong has told you, it is the time to offer the religious and the political power to the Dalai Lama. I told you earlier, but you didn't put that into action." Then, they offered the power soon after that. They didn't have any choice but to do that because the Chinese had arrived at Chamdo. When the regent offered the responsibility to the Dalai Lama, the people's dislike of the regent calmed down a little bit. This was because all people loved the Dalai Lama very much. Since then, people reported political matters to the Dalai Lama instead of the regent. So all people were united together and they were saying what would be the best to do [Tib. གང་དྲག་ཅི་དྲག]. They were not only just talking, they were doing something.   

**Q:**  After that, it was said that it would not be good for the Dalai Lama to stay in Lhasa and he went to Yadong with the Kashag, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, probably, there were Shakabpa and Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང], who went to Delhi to hold talks as representatives. I heard at that time that one group of people said that it would be good for the Dalai Lama to stay in India and another group said that it would be good to go back. Do you know what people were thinking at first when the Dalai Lama went to Yadong?  

**A:**  I don't know. At that time, regarding the matter of whether he went to Yadong without any problem or people said something about that, they held meetings and among the Tibetan Government officials, some of them said that he should go and some said he shouldn't go. Some of them were saying, "If he leaves, the country would become kind of empty" and it was also dangerous at that time. Finally, people talked a lot about the danger to the Dalai Lama saying, "If the Chinese come all of a sudden and we couldn't stop them, it would be dangerous." And some people said "For the purpose of politics, it would be good to go for a short time because the Chinese would keep watch on the Dalai Lama and if he stays at the border it would be easy to go out [of Tibet] if necessary. If he stays in Lhasa, it would not be easy to go out." The Tibetans were a little bit smarter than other people and they were not idiots. ....   

**Q:**  What was your thinking at that time? You were in the Yigtsang Office, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I was in the Yigtsang Office and we were talking about what I mentioned above. When people explained and said that it would be good to stay, I was also thinking it might be a good idea. When people said it would be good to go, I also thought that might be a good idea. At that time, I was young. I was in my twenties so I didn't have any kind of special thoughts. At that time, I was not capable and I was doing whatever the other people were doing.   

**Q:**  As I mentioned above, when the Dalai Lama was in Yadong, there were two groups and one of them said that it would be good to go and the other said that it would be good to come back, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it happened a little bit like that. At that time, when the Chinese heard that the Dalai Lama was in Yadong, the Chinese withdrew their troops a little bit. That was because they thought that he might go abroad. At that time, the Chinese had arrived at Chamdo and the main Commander [Tib. དམག་དཔོན] Zhang Guohua came long after they took Chamdo. Wang Qimei came earlier. He was also one of the commanders. He was a short guy. He was one of the officers who took Chamdo and he was the main Commander-in Chief [Ch. si ling yuan] of Chamdo. I heard that when Wang Qimei noticed that the Dalai Lama went to Yadong, he cried and said, "The Dalai Lama has had to face severe hardships. Actually, he doesn't need to go to Yadong." While saying that he cried and showed an appearance of having a deep faith towards the Dalai Lama. Probably, he really cried. People were talking about that. Though he was the Commander-in-Chief, look at him! How deceitful was [Tib. གཡོ] he? No matter whether he cried or not, the Dalai Lama went to Yadong and stayed there. At that time, Wang Qimei was accumulating soldiers and preparing for [fighting]. Then the Dalai Lama sent letters to the Chinese from Yadong and the Chinese agreed to the peaceful Agreement and the Dalai Lama sent representatives from Yadong and there were also representatives from Chamdo. At that time, the Chinese didn't come up [to Lhasa]. They were gathering soldiers in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  I heard that when they were talking about the agreement, the Chinese talked very severely about the recognition of the Panchen Lama. What did you hear about that?   

**A:**  I didn't know about that. At that time, they didn't make any kind of announcement. They just said that in Beijing, probably, Tashilhunpo was one of the reasons for the Chinese saying that they are going to liberate Tibet. Because they [Tashilhunpo] didn't like the Tibetan Government and they wanted to take revenge. Therefore, they surrendered to the Chinese and they were staying permanently in China and both of the [Panchen Lama's] dzasa were capable. So they did this and that and kind of opposed the Tibetan Government and repeatedly requested that the Chinese liberate Tibet saying that that would be good for them. So, the Chinese thought that it would be good if they could annex [Tib. ཟ] Tibet and they said that the Tibetan Government should treat the Panchen Lama well. Otherwise, there wasn't any reason to say that.   

**Q:**  The Panchen Lama came to Lhasa in 1952, right? At that time, the Dalai Lama had already arrived back from Yadong and Zhang Jingwu also had arrived at Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. That was the first time he came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was a lot of trouble regarding the manner of the meeting with the Dalai Lama, e.g., the height of the throne and so on, right? I read in a Chinese book that the Kashag and Nangmagang had an internal talk about the Panchen Lama standing near the throne of the Dalai Lama. Later, the Tibetan Government didn't agree to do that and made the height of the thrones very different. Actually, what happened at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. The Panchen Lama came by air up to the Dam [Tib. འདམ] Airport and then he sat in a car and came up to the bottom of Shugula Pass [Tib. ཤོག་བུ་ལ]. At that time, I was in Yangpajen. The vehicles could pass up to the bottom of the Shugula mountain pass. At that time, the highway was not built on the mountain pass, so he had to ride horses from Shugula up to Shigatse. At that time, the Tibetan Government said that the Panchen Lama is coming and they appointed Thönpa [Tib. ཐོན་པ] Khenjung and a Rimshi [Tib. རིམ་བཞི], a fourth rank lay official, as the liaison officer [Tib. སྣེ་ཤེན]. Two liaison officers came to Yangpajen. I was told to prepare horses and pack animals for the attendants and the soldiers. When I asked how could I find so many horses in Yangpajen the Kashag sent an order for me to collect horses also from Namru [Tib. གནམ་རུ] and Nyemo. These three districts should cooperate and provide the horses. After that, we consulted about dividing the number of horses that needed to be provided between the districts. At that time, the liaison officers put up tents for the Panchen Lama. We also had to supply fuel and other things that they needed. We also appointed representatives and supplied firewood and dung. We borrowed some tents called Gari gonag [Tib. དཀར་རི་མགོ་ནག]. They were tents with black top and white sides and we also put yak hair tents up around the others. Actually, the yak hair tents were for making fire (cooking). Tashilhunpo also brought a lot of tents from Shigatse because that was the first reception site [Tib. ཕེབས་བསུ་དང་པོ]. They put up a tent for the Panchen Lama and a tent for holding ceremonies. They put tents around those tents for the soldiers and the cadres. At that time, I was able to successfully do the work of receiving the Panchen Lama. At that time they held a simple kind of ceremony where the Yangjen Gopa [Tib. ཡངས་ཇན་འགོ་པ] and the liaison officers and some minor tsodrag officials had an audience with the Panchen Lama. I saw that the Panchen Lama was sitting on a throne. We offered the Mendredensum and we were served tea and rice mixed with butter and sweet potatoes. At that time, the horses and mules for the Panchen Lama were brought from Shigatse, but we supplied the horses for the soldiers and the attendants. There was also a person in charge of the horses and the pack animals called the Takhe Dodampa [Tib. རྟ་ཁེ་དོ་དམ་པ] so we consulted with him and made the arrangement for the horses and the pack animals. At that time, the Chinese were surprised to see that we provided the tents, horses and the pack animals for the Panchen Lama and they asked why the Panchen Lama didn't go to Lhasa. We told them, "Lhasa is the place for the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan Government and the Panchen Lama had his own monastery in Shigatse. There's is a relationship between a Lama and the government." But, since the Panchen Lama is a Lama, the Tibetan Government told us to provide all of those things. Then the Chinese asked whether these people are the miser (serfs) of the Panchen Lama. We told them these people are the miser of the Tibetan Government. The reason for the Chinese being surprised might be because the people of Tashilhunpo might have told them that Tibet belonged to them. At that time, the people in that area were not showing the appearance that they were the miser (serfs) of Panchen Lama. When we told the Chinese the truth, they believed us a little bit and they also knew a little bit. On the next day, Panchen Lama rode a horse and went to Markyang [Tib. མར་རྐྱང] where the second reception was arranged. And then he arrived at Shigatse. After staying for quite a long time in Shigatse, he went to Lhasa to have an audience with the Dalai Lama. At that time, the highway was built. So he just traveled by car and didn't stop at Yangpajen. When the Panchen Lama came to Lhasa, the Tibetan Government received him and entertained him in the room called Nangsi [Tib. སྣང་སྲིད] in the Jokhang. After that, the Panchen Lama had to go to have an audience with the Dalai Lama in the Potala Palace. It was the official ceremony for meeting him [Tib. གསར་འཇལ]. Before the Panchen Lama came to meet the Dalai Lama, the Chinese said a lot of troublesome [Tib. རྙོག་དྲ] things to the Kashag such as saying that the thrones should be placed the same height. They said that they want to follow the position mentioned in the Agreement about the relation between the 13th Dalai Lama and the 9th Panchen Lama. At that time, the Kashag didn't accept what the Chinese said and they had to consult about that matter. Later, the Kashag held meetings and said that it was not mentioned in our documents that the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama should have the thrones of the same height. So that would be impossible because the Panchen Lama has never been seated above the Dalai Lama. In the past, the Panchen Lama had been the tutor of the Dalai Lama and also the regent during the absence of the Dalai Lama. So the Kashag told them that it would not be right to have the thrones the same height. At that time, from the Tashilhunpo side, they were inciting the Chinese hard and insisted saying that they want the thrones at the same height. At that time, the Tibetan Government became the opponent of the Chinese and the Panchen Lama became the inciter of the Chinese. Finally, I heard that it was decided that both of them shall sit on chairs of the same height and meet each other.   

**Q:**  Sitting on the same [height] chairs?   

**A:**  Yes, probably, they sat on chairs facing each other. Actually on that day, they had to serve tea and rice to the attendants of the Panchen Lama. According to the custom, they would put common cushions and a rug near the Yigtsang and make them sit down and serve tea and rice. There was no custom for sitting on chairs like foreigners. On that day, the morning monk official tea ceremony, the Drungja was held outside and the audience was granted during that ceremony. At that time, we were at the morning tea ceremony drinking tea. When the Panchen Lama came to have his audience inside the room of the Dalai Lama, his soldiers accompanied him up to the door of the room in formation. His soldiers were holding guns and standing from the door of the room down to the stairs while the meeting ceremony was going on inside the room. Actually, they shouldn't have stood like that, but it was inconvenient to tell them not to stand there. They were just standing there like bullying [Tib. དབང་ཡོད] us. They were standing there and we were sitting there drinking tea just near to them. The morning tea ceremony was held at the east side [Tib. ཤར་རྒྱུད] of the Potala Palace. Usually, it would be held in the west side, but for the Panchen Lama, they held it on the east side. At that time, the Panchen Lama went in and offered the Mendredensum to the Dalai Lama and sat on the chair. After the tea and rice were served, probably the Dalai Lama invited him in his private room and served him a meal and two of them sat down like sitting in their own private rooms. Actually the attendants should be served tea and rice, but they kept on standing there and didn't sit on the cushions where tea and rice would be served. So nobody served them tea. At that time, the attendants were showing the appearance that they were great and stood there all the time, so the tea was not served for them because people felt kind of uneasy. At that time, the soldiers were standing amidst the officials attending the morning ceremony. So it was kind of a bad appearance. But, nobody fought or pulled them down and told them not to stand up. They were just left like this. After the ceremony the attendants went back with the Panchen Lama.   

