# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0005.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibetan Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1998  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Ben Jiao  
**Name:** Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee was a miser who belonged to the Lhalu aristocratic family and then became an estate manager for Lhalu. On this tape, he discusses his education at a school run by the Epa Clerk of the Tibetan government in Lhasa, and how afterwards, he became the shidö of Lhalu's Kongpo Garchag Shiga. He describes the estate's management during this time, including procedures set forth in the Land Enumeration Settlement of the Iron-Tiger Year [1740]. He also discusses issues such as tax collection, lending grain, and decisions made regarding property divisions. He talks about how he was in charge of collecting taxes on goods that businessmen took from China when the PLA was about to enter Tibet, and how Indian officials came to the estate he was heading in NEFA in 1951 to take over tax collection from him because they said this was part of India [due to the Simla Convention they said]. He also talks about how he was sent to Derge Gönchen in 1951 to collect taxes and later returned to Gamtog Drukha.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0005_01/OR_0005_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Shall I tell you from the beginning when I managed the estates of Lhalu and the name of my family?   

**Q:**  Yes, please.   

**A:**  My family belonged to the Lhalu [aristocratic] family and we were working for that household. We held the position of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> for this household. Lhalu had eight bigger households under it and the eight households were acting as the shidö of Lhalu's estates. My father was sent to Kongpo to be the shidö of the Garchag Estate [Tib. སྒར་ཆག] in Kongpo. It was located in the area of Tselagang [Tib. རྩེ་ལྷ་སྒང] Dzong. Because my father was managing this estate, I went there when I was 15 years old from school and I began to manage the Garchag Shiga from when I was 18 years old. This estate had 190 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱི་འདོན] An outer dön for which the taxes and corvée labor services were provided to the government as opposed to the estate lord.">chidön</a> on which they had to pay taxes to the government, but it only had 75 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་འདོན] An &quot;inner dön.&quot; Land from which taxes were paid to the immediate estate lord.">nangdön</a> of land from which inner taxes were paid [just ot the lord]. It was a big estate and had several small estates in the area that were under. Do you want to know the specific names of all of them?   

**Q:**  Yes, if you could.   

**A:**  The major estate was Garchag Shiga and its <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> was me. Under it, Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] had one estate there that was called Gyara Shiga [Tib. རྒྱ་ར་གཞིས་ཀ]. Another was called Barang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> [Tib. བ་རང]. It had about six <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> households. We collected the butter income of the Tsomönling estate and we handed [it] in into Tsomönling. Barang Shiga belonged to Lhalu. There was an estate called Bangtö [Tib. འབང་སྟོད] in the lower area of Kongpo and there was a Serdog [Tib. གསེར་མདོག] Shiga in the upper area. One was Bangkor Shiga that was located in the Kyemdong [Tib. སྐྱེམ་གདོང] area. I collected all the income for those shigas and I sent kind of servants to collect the income from those estates. I worked in this area for 19 years since the time when I was 15 years old.   

**Q:**  What was your rank at that time?   

**A:**  I did not have any rank. If [the estate] was under the government, some of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> were aristocrats. But because this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> belonged to the Lhalu family, it sent the shidö from among their servants. I was one of them.   

**Q:**  Were you the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> of the estate?   

**A:**  Yes, I was. The Garchag Shiga was given to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> family of the Dalai Lama. Normally, the estates that were granted to the Yabshi were called Khyongdeb [tib 'khyongs thebs], which means support for the Dalai Lama's family. These were under Tselagang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> which had 16 estates that belonged to the government, to monasteries and to aristocratic families. Among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> under this county, four of the major estate were called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a>. We, the Garchag shiga, were one of these major estates. One of these, the Horong Shiga, belonged to Shatra. One was Demo's [Tib. དེ་མོ]. Demo's estate was managed by a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> of the government. When dzong meetings were held, the four tsodrag would attend the meetings. Their position was just under the dzongpön.   

**Q:**  You said you went to the school when you were 15 years old. Which school did you go to?   

**A:**  I had studied in the school in Lhasa from when I was 7 years old until I was 15 years [old].   

**Q:**  Which school?   

**A:**  At first I went to the Tatongwa [Tib. རྟ་གཏོང་བ] School in Lhasa for several years. [Tatongwa was an official who was in charge of arranging horse corvée in Lhasa.] Then I studied under the Epa Clerk [Tib. ཨེ་པ་དྲུང་ཡིག] of the Kashag. His home was located behind <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Monastery. Then I went to Kongpo when I was 15 years old.   

**Q:**  What did you do when you managed the estate? I mean what things did you actually do during a year?   

**A:**  Mainly, I collected the grain and butter from those small estates. If the government sent a notice to collect money or something else as their taxes, I collected them from the local people and handed [it] in to the place where I should hand it in. I collected the grain and butter from those <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> under Garchag Shiga and handed it in to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Treasury Office that opened in the second floor of the Tsuglagang. I had to hand in one thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> [weight] of butter for one year. One thousand khe of butter was needed to be handed in to Lhalu. I also handed in to Lhalu two mules, some loads of peanuts and peaches, and ropes for tents.   

**Q:**  Didn't you hand in grain?   

**A:**  No, we did not. The major tax was butter.   

**Q:**  Did you have to send some firewood?   

**A:**  No, we did not have to. We also did not have to hand in money. One thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of butter was the major tax.   

**Q:**  I heard some talking about the different levels or positions for the local people like the Nangsen. I mean how many categories can the people be divided into in your place?   

**A:**  I had a higher position in that area at that time. I was acting like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> in my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>. Of course, the Governor General of this area was Tselagang. But because it was a part of the shiga for the household of the Dalai Lama, people called it Garchag Dzong and the house was much better than the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> government. But actually we were just the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a>. I was the shidö for the shiga and under this shiga there were several smaller shiga. There were four households like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> called Gadag [Tib. བཀའ་བདག], which meant land tenure document holders, and they were exempt from paying taxes.   

**Q:**  Do you know when they got it? During the 5th Dalai Lama or the 13th?   

**A:**  I do not know the certain time, but it was in very early times. I guess they probably got the land tenure document [Tib. བཀའ་གཏན] during the period of Desi Sanggye Gyatso [Tib. སྡེ་སྲིད་སངས་རྒྱས་རྒྱ་མཚོ] [During the era of the 5th Dalai Lama]. Those document became dirty and black.   

**Q:**  Didn't they have other documents?   

**A:**  No. They were called the Gadag and they got partial exemption from the taxes, but they had to pay some butter taxes to the Lhalu Household. They were in a higher position than the miser. Those households' names were Kaltong (Tib. སྐལ་གདུང), Matong [Tib. མ་གདོང], Lamdo Chugtar (Tib. བླ་མདོ་ཕྱུག་ཐར) and Shoka Sharchog [Tib. ཤོ་ཁ་ཤར་ཕྱོགས]. They were Gadag households and every [one] of them had one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལག] A traditional Tibetan unit comprising of ten transport animals. This term was normally used for mules and donkeys.">lag</a> of mules. When I needed to transport the two thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of butter to Lhasa, those four households would do it. I weighted it and gave it to them and they went twice to transport it. After they moved it twice, some butter still remained to move, and the major <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> would move it to Lhasa. It means that I myself had to move the remaining part of butter. However, the shiga had only five mules when I took the position. Usually, the taxes would be collected twice from the local people. The best butter would be produced in the 6th month, so we collected the first time in the 7th month and the second would be collected in the 10th month. We loaded all of that butter and then moved it into Lhasa. Mules were very popular domestic animals in the Kongpo area. So every year many mares would produce baby mules for a lot of families. We chose some baby mules from them and it was called, "tagba" [Tib. བཏགས་པ], which means to tie it up. One day, all the mules of the village, including the baby mules and their mother mares, would be brought together and I could pick out several from the herd according to the total number. I did not have to pay the real price, but only a part of it. Usually we paid six <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> and it was equal to 300 ngüsang. It was a pretty low price. I could pick out about ten baby mules every year. For the same reason, we could also pick some baby dzomo.   

**Q:**  After you picked those animals, who would manage them?   

**A:**  We would keep them. There were four government herders [Tib. རུ་པ] under my control. Those four herders were located in Nepar of Maru, Barang, Galtong and Nangdrog [Tib. ནང་འབྲོག], which was located very close to our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>. Every fourth month we made an accounting [record] for each herder for their female animals that would have calves. At that time, the policy of traditional lease called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱེས་མེད་འཆི་མེད] A system of leasing animals to nomads wherein the nomads had to pay a fixed amount of butter each year regardless of whether the number of animals increased or decreased.">gyeme chime</a> was used. So if the four herders increased the number of their animals, all of those additional animals belonged to me, but if the total number of animals decreased, I would pay it back. For the first several years, I had a very hard time because low quality animals were given to me when I began to manage those herders. However, because I had managed the four herders for a long time, I got a good income. When I left this position, I myself had two hundred yaks, including male and female yaks, and I could set up a private herd for myself. At the place where the shiga was located, there were only 18 households and this village was called Garchag <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་པ] 1. The Tibetan government office responsible for law and order in Shöl (tib. ཞོལ), the walled town beneath the Potala, as well as for 18 districts (tib. རྫོང) around Lhasa. It handled mainly criminal cases including murder. 2. The head of the Shölpa leygung.">Shölpa</a> [Tib. སྒར་ཆག་ཞོལ་པ]. This village had one Gadag household who was called Chukor Sharchog. The head of that household was called Sonam Dorje [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྡོ་རྗེ] and he was the gembo. There was another Gadag Household that was located behind this village. The name for this household was called Yeshe Tamdrin [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་རྟ་མགྲིན]. And this village also had one gembo.   

**Q:**  How many households would be there?   

**A:**  It only had about six households. One (Gadag) household was in the upper area and this area was called Kyemdong.   

**Q:**  Was it the place where they made paper?   

**A:**  Yes, it was. There was one household that belonged to us and at the upper village there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> that belonged to us. It was called Bangkor Shiga.   

**Q:**  Did you pay a tax in paper?   

**A:**  No, it belonged to the county. One of our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> and some masses located [resided] in their place. The lower area would be divided into three regions (Tib. ney [Tib. གནས]): Outer Ney, Middle Ney and Inner Ney [Tib. གནས་ཕྱི་ནང་བར་གསུམ]). Outer Ney included Garchag and the surrounding area. Then if you continued to go to the lower area, you will pass a bridge called Nelung Bridge and arrive in a village called Mola. It was the first village of Middle Ney. It had about one hundred (<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a>) and this village had one gembo. If you go behind this village, you will arrive in Barang Shiga. It had two treba. From this village if you go the upper area, you will arrive in Kasar village which had ten treba with one gembo. Then you will arrive in Bamtseg [Tib. བམ་རྩེག] Village. The whole name of this village is Bamrim Tsegpa [Tib. བམ་རིམ་རྩེག་པ]. This village had one Gadag Household whose name was Kadong because behind their home there was a rock that had the letter "ka" on one the sides (Tib. ཀདོང [ཀ་གདོང]). The upper area had Gyara Shiga that belonged to Tsomönling. It had six treba. If you go to the lower area of Kongpo, there was a village called Shoga [Tib. ཤོག་ཁ] and it had about 20 (Tib. ཏྲེབ) households.   

**Q:**  How many households were there under your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>?   

**A:**  According to the tax system, there were 75 dön.   

**Q:**  How many households were there on one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> of land?   

**A:**  One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> was equal to three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a>. This <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> had 190 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱི་འདོན] An outer dön for which the taxes and corvée labor services were provided to the government as opposed to the estate lord.">chidön</a> of land to pay taxes to the government but it only 75 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་འདོན] An &quot;inner dön.&quot; Land from which taxes were paid to the immediate estate lord.">nangdön</a> of land to pay inner taxes. So, some households might have three gang of land, but some had two gang of land or even one gang of land. Shoga had eight dön, in Bamdrong there was a shiga called Bamteng Shiga that had two dön of land with only had five or six households. Baka had 13 dön of land and it had one gembo. Lamdo [Tib. ལམ་མདོ] had eight dön of land with about 30-40 households.   

**Q:**  How did you divide the land into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a>? Was it according to the land or people?   

**A:**  At the beginning, I guess it was divided according to the people, but recently some households have increased the number of their people while some have decreased, and some of them have became extinct [Tib. སྟོངས]. In this case, the collective[the group] planted their land and the collective [group] paid its taxes. This was called Tonggang [Tib. སྟོངས་རྒང]. Moro had 13 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> of land. Barang had 2 dön of land. Kasar had 13 dön of land. Bamtseg had 12 dön of land and Geba [Tib. གས་པ] had 4 dön of land. However, I don't remember the number of households in these. I know there were big villages that had over one hundred households. I guess the total number of households might be about 500-600 households. I do not know the number for certain.   

**Q:**  Can you please tell me what you did in an entire year from spring to the winter?   

**A:**  Normally, I lived in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> and the major shiga had 200 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of land. That number is certain. There were 8 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> in Garchag and their village was called Garchag <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་པ] 1. The Tibetan government office responsible for law and order in Shöl (tib. ཞོལ), the walled town beneath the Potala, as well as for 18 districts (tib. རྫོང) around Lhasa. It handled mainly criminal cases including murder. 2. The head of the Shölpa leygung.">Shölpa</a> [Tib. གར་ཆག་ཞོལ་པ]. Every household would send one corvée laborer and we planted the two hundred khe of land. After the harvest, we managed the grain [supply]. I sent one of my servants to Bamteng Shiga. This shiga had a good income and would select one corvée laborer from each household from the four villages in the Kongpo lower areas and plant the land. It could produce 800 khe of grain per year. It was a good shiga. I sent one servant to Serdog Shiga. This shiga could get 300 khe of grain in yield. Bamdrong Shiga was leased to another and could get 40 khe of grain as the lease fee.   

**Q:**  One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of land could produce how many khe of grain?   

**A:**  The yield was very poor. Usually one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of land only produced about 4 or 5 khe of grain. In the Garchag area, the yield was especially poor and the crops would easily get damaged by the insects. The insects were eating the roots of plants.   

**Q:**  If so, was the grain produced from the land enough for the local people?   

**A:**  Yes, it was. Middle Ney area was agropastoral, but mainly they were nomads. They only had a little piece of land, so they needed to buy grain. Usually they bought grain from my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> and they paid me with butter. One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of butter exchanged for two khe of grain. They came to get grain in summer and would bring butter in the 9th and 10th months.   

**Q:**  You said there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> and gembo. How were they appointed?   

**A:**  These were permanently held by a certain household, except in Shoga where there were two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒན་བོ] A village headman. Such headmen were responsible for organizing the different households to pay the village&#x27;s taxes in-kind and labor. They also played a role in settling minor disputes and were the link between the village and the higher authorities. In some areas they were elected by the village households, while in others the position was hereditary or appointed.">gembo</a> who were the heads of the two bigger households in this village. Those two families took the position by turns. The other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> were unchangeable because they had the land tenure document. This position was held by the households and the head of the households took the position. For example, if we had a meeting, we sent a message to the tsodrag and gembo and they transmitted it to the masses. If a meeting was held, the gembo and tsodrag would attend this meeting.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> were there?   

**A:**  There were only four families. For the meeting, each village would send one representative. At the meeting I would transmit the orders from the government. Normally, I would stay in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> permanently and settle the matters regarding the taxes, lands and law cases regarding the lands, and married couples.   

**Q:**  For example, if an argument arose about a piece of land, how did you deal with it? Can you tell me some instance when you had settled it?   

**A:**  Yes, I can. There was a land tenure document book called Jetra Shebam [Tib. འབྱེད་ཁྲ་ཤེ་བམ]. This was written by measuring all lands by steps [Tib. གོམ་པ] and it listed them in the book. The stones piled on top of the others indicated the borderline between the households. All fields were given names and listed in the book. This book that was formulated by the Tibet government could indicate which field belonged to which household and how big it was. It was a rolling style book. This book could not only indicated who was the owner of a specific field, but also indicated the land of the government, the aristocrats, or the monasteries, including mountains. We could find an owner for every specific place.   

**Q:**  Was that the book called The Land Enumeration of the Iron-Tiger Year [Tib. ལྕགས་སྟག་ཞིབ་གཞུང]?   

**A:**  Yes, exactly right.   

**Q:**  Then it did not change, right?   

**A:**  Not at all. If there were any arguments that related to land, we solved it according to The Land Enumeration of the Iron-Tiger Year. However, the land tenure document called the Shebam was given to Lhalu's household and that book could indicate Lhalu's right to punish or exercise legal jurisdiction over its subjects [Tib. ཁྲིམས་འགོ་རང་བཙན]. Normally, most <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> were not allowed to judge cases, except minor disputes. Mainly they had to report them to the Dzong. But we, the Garchag Shiga, could judge cases because Lhalu had the right to punish or exercise legal jurisdiction over its subjects. But there was a problem. Because we ourselves judged cases in our shiga and it became that we kind of were ignoring the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, we did not always have a good relationship with the dzong.   

**Q:**  Oh! Really? Do you have any experience about settling disputes?   

**A:**  The biggest case would be murder. In this case, we should report it to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. Normally, we ourselves would make the judgments for the other cases. So sometimes, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> would be powerful or bossy, he would say something to us. However, we had the right to punish or exercise legal jurisdiction over one's own subjects, so we did not have to obey the dzong very much. Basically, the dzongpön hated us.   

**Q:**  How many days did you need if you took a trip from your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>?   

**A:**  It was a two-days trip.   

**Q:**  Where was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> located?   

**A:**  Tsela <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> was located in the lower area of Nyingtri [Tib. ཉིང་ཁྲི]. It was very close to Nyingtri.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that in Kongpo Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ]?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  You said you went from village to village to collect the animals in the fourth month, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I needed to know how many newborn animals were there because that was related to collecting butter. If I didn't make a list of the newborns, they would not pay the butter taxes. The other taxes were collected according to the listing in the book.   

**Q:**  Did you send your servants to do it?   

**A:**  No. I myself did it. I was young. I guess I was 17, 18 or about 20 years. So I did it by myself.   

**Q:**  Did you know the traditional method of counting, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡེའུ] The traditional method of Tibetan arithmetic that uses a board and a variety of items like beans, sticks and stones.">diu</a>?   

**A:**  What do you mean?   

**Q:**  The method where they did the calculation using beans and sticks etc.   

**A:**  Yes, we used to, but now I have forgotten it. But at that time we did the calculation using that method. We also have the fraction [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲན]. We also went to the nomads in the tenth month to collect the animal number that had died in the year. Then we added the newborn animals and cut the number of deaths. Finally we could get the actual animal number. We made an account for it every year.   

**Q:**  When would they deliver the butter tax to you?   

**A:**  I had to go to the village to collect them. I went twice a year. One was in the sixth month and the other one was in the tenth Tibetan month. It was the best time to produce butter. We collected butter and weighed it, and then made loads and stored in our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>. We stayed five or six days in every village and collected the butter tax. After loading the butter, we sent it to the shiga and stored it.   

**Q:**  Then how did you send it to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Each of the four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> would transport the butter to Lhasa twice, and still some remained so I had to move that. Each of the four households had one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལག] A traditional Tibetan unit comprising of ten transport animals. This term was normally used for mules and donkeys.">lag</a> of mules. I collected the butter and stored it in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> and then moved it. We could send butter to Lhalu at any time and the number of loads did not have to be big. You know, one herd of mules usually could only move 40-50 loads of butter at one time, and if it was for Lhalu, we could send it directly. Normally, however, the butter tax should be handed to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Treasury Office. It had to be handed in in one shipment. So we would move the butter into Lhasa many times and store it in Lhasa. They would not receive a small amount of butter. On the other hand, even if they received one thousand loads of butter, they wouldn't make a note of this on paper. They would just make the note on a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སམ་ཁྲ] The traditional rectangular wooden writing/message board. The message was written on the polished, blackened surface of the wood that was covered with a white chalk. A stylus was used to clear away the chalk leaving the shape of the letters, which appeared black. It was usually about 12-14 inches long and 2 inches wide. There was a lower board on which the messages were written and a top board which served as the cover. In many cases there were several additional writing boards between these two.">samtra</a> traditional message board. And then the second part had to be handed in very soon. Otherwise, the note would get rubbed off on the message board and if the note was lost, they wouldn't take into account the butter we had already delivered. Moreover, each time we delivered the butter, we had to give one load of butter for each person who was weighing the butter there. So if you sent butter many times, you would lose more butter. Usually every time we weighed the butter, we would lose two loads of butter because there were two people who would sit on two loads of butter, and these would not be counted. So we stored butter in Lhasa and when we had more than one hundred loads of butter, we would deliver it to the Laja Treasury Office .   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> [khe] were there for one load of butter?   

**A:**  Usually we would make twelve <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> for each load of butter for ourselves, but ten khe loads for the butter that would be sent to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Treasury Office, because if we made each load of butter smaller, it would be more khe to carry.   

**Q:**  Why? It is not possible. Did they use another standard of scale?   

**A:**  No, if we made a small load of butter, they would weigh it carefully. If we made bigger loads of butter, they used to decrease the actual weight. So if we made bigger loads of butter, we would lose a lot, so we would make small loads of butter for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Treasury Office. The ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> scale was the biggest one for it. So we made each load of butter ten khe and if we met a good person, he would do the account for us saying these were 11 khe or 12 khe for each in the Laja Treasury Office.   

**Q:**  What kind of scale did you use?   

**A:**  It was a Tibetan scale called Tentshig <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་མ] A unit of weight equal to one jin [ch. 斤] (1.1 lbs).">gyama</a> and was made from wood. It was the standard scale and it had a seal from the Tibetan government on it. At that time, there were standard volume measures and also weight measures of khe.   

**Q:**  I see. I heard that while measuring the butter, the people weighing the butter would sit on a load of butter and this load belonged to the person. Was it true?   

**A:**  Yes, this load would be confiscated. As we do today, they were not weighing the butter properly, so we had to visit his home and give one or two loads of butter to him. Then he would weigh it well for us, and if the load was ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a>, he would make the note for 11 or 12 khe.   

**Q:**  In what month would you usually hand in the butter?   

**A:**  It was very hard to hand in it every single year. I was in Kongpo about ten years but I only handed it in three times.   

**Q:**  But it was an annual tax.   

**A:**  Yes, it was. But all taxes were summed together and were handed in several times. If the total number was not big enough, they did not make the note on paper, they just wrote it on a Samtra. If we couldn't deliver it continuously, the note made on the Samtra would get rubbed off after a time and we would have to bear the misfortune [loss].   

**Q:**  What else did you do?   

**A:**  Usually, I stayed in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> and some local people would visit me every day. For example, some people would visit me for borrowing grain or cash, and businessmen came to exchange butter and grain. At that time they took grain from me and later they would send the butter to me.   

**Q:**  How did you lend (grain)?   

**A:**  When they borrow grain from the government, ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain required paying one khe of interest (per year), [Tib. སྐམ་སྐྱེད་བཅུ་ཟུར]. However, if we lent grain from our private grain, the interest was much higher than that of the government. If we lent five khe of grain, we could get one khe of grain as the interest (per year) [Tib. ལྔ་དྲུག་འགྲོ]. If we lent the loan at high interest, we collected one khe of grain as interest for four khe of grain (per year). This was called "four becomes five" [Tib. བཞི་ལྔ་འགྲོ].   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain did you usually lend per year?   

**A:**  It would be a huge number. The Garchag Shiga usually could harvest about 600 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain and the Bamteng Shiga could harvest about 800 khe of grain. We stored the seed [for planting] and left some grain for religious offerings, but the other grain should be sold.   

**Q:**  So it was sort of business, right? And you were trying to sell as much as you could, right?   

**A:**  They would come to ask for grain. It was a business, otherwise I would not have income. Usually, we lost about 300 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of butter every year when we were collecting the butter and handing in it. In addition, we did not have wages. So we had to earn money by ourselves.   

**A:**  When I began to take the position of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> in Garchag Shiga, it had only five mules and five or six horses. Ten years later, when someone else took over my position, I had about 200 yaks and 120-130 horses and mules. I owed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Treasury Office more than 2,000 but less than 3,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of butter, but there was more than that number of butter needed to be collected from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> that I had lent them. Of course some of them were very poor and were unable to pay back the grain. Usually, during the 6 years term, most of the shidö would owe a lot to the Laja Treasury Office and to Lhalu and others, but during my term, I could actually just get the accounts balanced.   

**Q:**  When did you take the position? Was it when you were 15 years old?   

**A:**  Not really. I went to Kongpo when I was 15 years old and lived there with my parents for three years. Then my parents returned to Lhasa and I did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> work alone. I was the shidö until I was 25 years old.   

**Q:**  But you were very young.   

**A:**  Yes, I was.   

**Q:**  You might have had some very capable servants?   

**A:**  Servants of our household were from the countryside, so they were not so capable. So I had to take the main responsibility. I took a servant who could take notes, one servant for doing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡེའུ] The traditional method of Tibetan arithmetic that uses a board and a variety of items like beans, sticks and stones.">diu</a> calculation and one for weighing.   

**Q:**  How did you handle it when there were some sort of lawsuits?   

**A:**  It depended on what kind of lawsuit it was. For example, if a couple had an argument and their land needed to be divided between them, I would receive petitions from both sides. I would also ask about it to the local people. After I understood the actual situation, then I made the decision for them.   

**Q:**  For example, if a couple wanted to divorce, how did you make the decision for them?   

**A:**  This was one kind of argument. But basically the main arguments would arise over the land. For example, two households had their own lands. In the middle of the land that belonged to the two households, there would be a small empty piece of land. Usually, it was used as a grassland for pasturing animals. Then one side cultivated some part of the grassland and made their own fields bigger. In such a case, according to the Land Enumeration of Iron Tiger Year, I needed to measure the fields. If someone wanted to set up a new household because the person and some other members of this household had some argument in their home, I helped them to divide all of their property including the furniture, animals, and fields according to the number of people.   

**Q:**  How did you make decisions for such cases? What was your main legal principle?   

**A:**  Generally. I decided it according to the "13 Article Legal Code" [Tib. ཁྲིམས་ཡིག་ཞལ་ལྕེ་བཅུ་གསུམ]. In addition to that, when I divided the things, it was done according to the custom of Göphö Jusur, that is, confiscating one tenth of the things that was divided.   

**Q:**  How did you do that?   

**A:**  All of their property was divided into ten parts and one tenth of their property was confiscated and the other nine parts of their property would be divided according to the number of people. For example, this household had ten animals. We confiscated one animal and then divided the nine among them.   

**Q:**  All of their property?   

**A:**  Yes. It included the animals, grain and land.   

**Q:**  What would be the most serious criminal issue? I mean what kind of criminality was so serious that you could not make decision by yourself?   

**A:**  If someone committed murder it would be considered as a serious crime. In such a case, I needed to report it to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and then it would be reported to the Tibetan government. Basically I made the decision and reported it to the dzong. Because we had special rights, we could make decisions, but we needed to report about it to the county.   

**Q:**  Did you have a prison?   

**A:**  Yes we did. We also had leg shackles and wooden shackles, and whips to implement the punishments.   

**Q:**  Who was in charge of it?   

**A:**  I was.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have a judge?   

**A:**  No, we did not. But during the time I was there, I did not meet such a thing.   

**Q:**  What else did you do?   

**A:**  There was a place called Nenang [Tib. གནས་ནང] where we needed to cross a bridge called Sangga [Tib. གསང་སྒ྄]. We were unable to walk on the bridge because it had only one piece of round wood that that was about 18 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོམ་པ] A distance equal to the span of one&#x27;s outstretched arms from fingertip to fingertip.">domba</a> in length. The place was also called Bajag Shri [Tib.?].   

**Q:**  Why were you unable to go on it?   

**A:**  There was a river flowing underneath and both sides were rocky mountains so they placed the wood there without building any wall to support the bridge. Therefore, we were unable to cross the river on a single piece of wood. So when we collected the taxes from them, the local people collected it and carried it on a human's back to move it to this side. The local people could carry a 12 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> load and walked on it with canes. There were four villages under Bajag Shri: Lhalung [Tib. ལྷ་ལུང], Gawari [Tib. དགའ་བ་རི], Manchuka [Tib. སྨན་ཆུ་ཁ] and so on. We needed to appoint a headman for them. They were [ethnically] Mönpa people (Tib. མོན་པ). They were handing in taxes to us.   

**Q:**  What kind of taxes did they hand in?   

**A:**  They were handing in 75 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of rice, 3,000-4000 khe of a red dye that was made from a wood and many skins such as marmot, a kind of deer called Khasha [Tib. ཁ་ཤྭ], the skins of mountain goats, bear, leopards, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གུང] A high title in the Tibetan government.">gung</a> [Tib. གུང] [a kind of leopard], and so on. All of those taxes had been divided between each household. Each household also handed in honey that was stored in bamboo tubes. On the other hand, they could receive some sort of payment. After they handed in their taxes, we gave them salt as cost price. This [lower price] was called Pürin [Tib. སྤུས་རིན].   

**Q:**  How much salt did you give?   

**A:**  We paid one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of salt for 12 khe of red dye.   

**Q:**  How much did you pay for honey?   

**A:**  We just paid a few <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> for other items. It was a token, not a real price. For example, each piece of skin, including the skin of a bear, would be given three sang. They also had lot of red pepper and they would hand in more than 70 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of red pepper. One khe of red pepper would be given ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྲེ] A unit of traditional volume measurement [a container] in Tibet, 20 of which typically equaled one khe or bo [also a container], although in some areas there were only 16 dre in one khe.">dre</a> of tsamba. It was just kind of half price.   

**Q:**  Who was the authority over them?   

**A:**  I was.   

**Q:**  And did they have local headmen?   

**A:**  I appointed a headman [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] called Depa. He was working under me.   

**Q:**  How did you appoint him?   

**A:**  Usually, they had a traditional headman who had inherited it from his father. When I was there, the headman was called Depa Chösang [Tib. སྡེ་པ་ཆོས་བཟང]. He was very powerful in that area and he was causing many hardships for the local people. So he and the local people did not have a good relationship. Many local people complained to me when they handed in their taxes. So I replaced him. Before that time, he was very powerful and when he was making speeches at the meetings, he was saying strange things. As you know, when we were offering a mandala, we would pray, "Mount Meru, the king of the mountain surrounded by outer walls[Tib. ཕྱི་ཡི་ལྕག་རི་ཁོར་ཡུག་གིས་བསྐོར་བཻའ། རི་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ་རི་རབས]. So he used that sentence and said that he was Mount Meru, the king of the mountains that was surrounded by outer walls [Tib. ཕྱི་ཡི་ལྕག་རི་ཁོར་ཡུག་གིས་བསྐོར་བཻའ, རི་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ་རི་རབས་མི་ང]. The local people did not know what he was saying, but they were afraid of him. In addition, he used a whole roll of raw silk fabric as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf. At that time, when people visited a headman, they had to offer a khata to the headman. It was the custom. For example, if they held a meeting of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒན་བོ] A village headman. Such headmen were responsible for organizing the different households to pay the village&#x27;s taxes in-kind and labor. They also played a role in settling minor disputes and were the link between the village and the higher authorities. In some areas they were elected by the village households, while in others the position was hereditary or appointed.">gembo</a>, each of them would offer one khata to me. I received it and did not give it back to them. He used to use the whole roll of raw silk fabric as a khata and when he held a meeting, the local people had to offer silk clothes to him. He also caused some arguments in their area. When my father was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> of this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>, Depa Chösang was the headman of those areas. However, after I began to be the shidö, the local people were complaining lot about him. At that time there was another man who wanted to challenge for this position too. He asked me many times to give him the position of headman. His name was Pemba [Tib. སྤེན་པ]. I asked the masses and the masses said this person was an honest man. However, the old headman was a person that nobody could cope with. But he came to meet me frequently and he always offered a khata and 3-6 whole rolls of raw silk fabrics and tiger skins to me, and he explained what he was doing. In about 1949 or 1951, once he visited me and I seized him there because his behavior was so bad and he was talking back to me too much when I scolded him quite seriously. So I tied him up and shut him inside the prison. The prison was in the basement of the building. This room had very big pillars and we tied him to such a big pillars and shackled his legs. Some of the Lopa people had very bad behavior. On that day, I went to the other side of the river. That place was called Magong and in the afternoon when it was getting dark, I returned to my shiga. When I entered into the gate and I saw five or six Mönpa people. They used to have poisonous arrows. They were doing something, but I did not pay attention to them. They did not shoot arrows at me. We had a prison but we did not have guards for it, but I thought he was not able to flee from that prison. Actually during the time when I went out, they borrowed tools from a blacksmith in the village, broke the door, cut off the shackles and took him away. He successfully fled away from my prison.   

**Q:**  Where did he flee?   

**A:**  He was brought to his hometown. However I had appointed the person called Pemba as the headman for the Mönpa and the masses liked the new leader. As a result, we had good times for several years. Later when I went to collect taxes from the Lopa, he [the old gembo] sent a group of Lopa soldiers to kill me.   

**Q:**  Did you have weapons in your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, I did. I had one handgun and two Japanese rifles, and a Mauser rifle. Even though he sent fighters, he was not able to hurt me.   

**Q:**  Do you know if that person is alive or not?   

**A:**  I guess he died. I got a message from Pemba saying that he had sent soldiers to kill me. At that time I was taking a trip in the forest. I did not know where he was waiting for me, but we did not meet in the path of the forest. Since then his power became weaker.   

**Q:**  Did you hear about him?   

**A:**  He lost his position and the masses did not support him anymore. Then the masses got happier lives. The new leader was an honest person and he and the masses had a good relationship. So it was the biggest event that happened when I was in there. But it did not have a final solution because he fled away.   

**Q:**  What else did you do?   

**A:**  Later Bajag Shri was lost to India and it came to belong to India [Note: As a result of the Simla Convention of 1914]. I have been asked about this history by some people who came from China. I told them specifically about it. In short, an Indian man called Dele Sahib visited me and told me that Bajag Shri belonged to them.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  It was in 1951. He said during the time of Minister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>, this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> had been given to India, so since then, I no longer collected the taxes because they would collect it.   

**Q:**  What is the name of that place?   

**A:**  Bajag Shri. I responded to what he said saying, "It is impossible because this is our place and I have to collect the tax and hand it in to the Tibet government and the Lhalu household. It is my duty. If I do not do so, I will receive punishment. You can ask others if you do not trust me." I heard that four airplanes came to that place and they landed there. Later I know it was helicopters. They stayed there the whole day and flew back in the afternoon every day. They took lunch with them and had it there. They calculated the population and established schools. When they calculated the population, because no one reported the number, they gave cotton clothes to the local people and they calculated the number of clothes in order to get the number of the population. People, like spies, often came to meet me and told me some information. I asked how did they get the number of people, and they told me that they [the masses] did not tell them the number, but the Indians distributed clothes and got number of people that way.  

**Q:**  Did you meet the Indian person?   

**A:**  The person called Dele-sup [sir] arrived in my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>, but those people who came by airplanes did not come to meet me.   

**Q:**  Did the sup speak Tibetan or Indian?   

**A:**  He had an interpreter. His name was called Tsering [Tib. ཚེ་རིང]. He said he had been born in Gyantse. I reported all about this to Lhalu, and since then, the local people did not hand in taxes to me.   

**Q:**  How long did the Indian stay at your place?   

**A:**  He stayed three days. I do not know why, but he and his helper climbed at the night and got some plants from the mountains. He took a lot of pictures and collected many flowers. There was a mountain in the middle of our area and it had a special flower. That flower grew only on the grasslands of that mountain and also on Nelung [Tib. གནས་ལུང], a mountain in Kongpo. That flower we call Tagsig Metog [Tib. སྟག་གཟིག་མེ་ཏོག]. Its root was like the root of onions. It grew in the middle of fields and the flower was orange color. They dug [out] the roots of the purple colored flower grown on the rocks of Nelung and put [it] into a box and took it with them when they returned. They also collected some other white plants like eggs and took lots of pictures. They stayed in that place three days and then returned to India.   

**Q:**  Did they carry weapons?   

**A:**  No they did not.   

**Q:**  One or two people?   

**A:**  There were only two people, the Indian man and his interpreter.   

**Q:**  Did he claim that place belonged to India?   

**A:**  Yes, he said that. And after he finished his research, he returned to India. He had a map and we could understand the location of Garchag Shiga. On the map, they indicated very clearly where the Lha, the deities and the nagas [Tib. ཀླུ] existed in that area. He gave me a picture of those. When I asked how they got those pictures, he answered that they had taken them from the airplane. Since then, the local people did not hand in taxes and the Tibetan government [The local government during his term] did not say anything about it.   

**Q:**  Did he speak Tibetan?   

**A:**  He knew a little. Mostly he spoke Mönpa or Lopa languages.   

**Q:**  The two languages are different from Tibetan, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they had their own languages. It was called Mönke [Tib. མོན་སྐད]. For example, if we say "Feed grasses to the horse", in term of their language is "Tapi achap" [Tib. རྟ་ཕིའ་ཨ་ཆབ྄]. They would call the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a>, Dongdu" [Tib. གདོང་འདུ]. I was the Dzongpön of Garchag, so they would call me Garchag Dongdu. So mostly we did not know what they were saying. Their call meant Anye (Tib. ཨ་ནི) and said Alo [Tib. ཨ་ལོ] for butter. But all of them who came to my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> knew Tibetan. In addition, they were very good looking, like Chinese. And they were much nicer than people in Kongpo. They were also very smart. Many people in Kongpo were kind of like idiots and many of them had goiters.   

**Q:**  What else did you do?   

**A:**  I told you about collecting the taxes. I did not know the specific number of taxes that we were collecting on because it was the job of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒན་བོ] A village headman. Such headmen were responsible for organizing the different households to pay the village&#x27;s taxes in-kind and labor. They also played a role in settling minor disputes and were the link between the village and the higher authorities. In some areas they were elected by the village households, while in others the position was hereditary or appointed.">gembo</a> and gadag to do it. So when I collected taxes, I asked them the number of taxes one should hand in and I did a little examination. Then the total taxes would be divided into each household.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go to that place?   

**A:**  No, I did not. I could not cross that dangerous bridge. If I could, I could then walk into the forest and would arrived in their village, but I could not pass the bridge. I had sent people twice to collect the taxes that should be handed in.   

**Q:**  What else did you do after you were 25 years old?   

**A:**  Oh! When I was 20 years old, Lhalu was the Governor of Kham, the Doji, and my younger sister was told to go to Kham to be the maid servant of Lhalu's wife. However, she did not have a good health condition, so I went to say she was not able to come. After I arrived there, Lhalu kept me in there for about 18 days.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  It was in 1950.   

**Q:**  How did you go there?   

**A:**  I rode horses and went through Kongpo. At that time I could impose horse corvée to the local people. There was no highway. I stayed there for about 18 days and I helped the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Lhalu to collect taxes. I did many things such as collecting taxes and copying the documents. After 18 days, I was sent to Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ]. At that time, there was a chandzö of Lhalu whose name was Tengba [Tib. སྟེང་པ]. He was in charge in the area of the ferry site, Gamtog Drukha [Tib. སྐམ་ཐོག་གྲུ་ཁ] on the Yangtse [Tib. འབྲི་ཆུ] River. I had helped that person until April of 1951. I went to Chamdo in the 8th month of 1950. The revolt was going to rise and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> was going to enter Tibet. All goods that those businessmen took from China needed to be checked. There were a lot of businessmen and we were required to check all goods and list them.   

**Q:**  Where were you? I mean were you on this side or that side of the Yangtse River?   

**A:**  This side of the river. I was on the side of Tibet. After the businessmen moved goods such as tea or other goods that were produced in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> to sell in Tibet, we checked them and listed them. There were two jobs: listing the goods and checking the people. People were saying that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> was going to enter Tibet, so we were checking all the people who came from China in order to make sure about security. We checked letters, documents and weapons that they probably hid under their clothes, especially letters.   

**Q:**  What did you find?   

**A:**  The businessmen usually would not hide things. They just took their goods, but we needed to check the pilgrims. We checked their whole body including their underwear. However, generally we did not find much. Some of them had handguns which was considered a part of their property. We did not find letters from them. We listed all of what we found and collected the taxes. The tax we collected was one box of tea from every 12 loads of tea. We collected cash for the other goods.   

**Q:**  Did anybody who was sort of famous came to that place?   

**A:**  No. On the other hand, a monk of Drepung Monastery, Lhade Khensur Rimpoche (Tib. ལྷ་སྡེ་མཁན་ཟུར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ) arrived there and a person who looked like a Chinese person came with him. His name was Jia Sai. When we checked his loads, there were a lot of gold biscuits that had been put into a box with some religious objects. We suspected that he was as a Chinese spy and we detained him for about two or three months. We reported this to Chamdo and Chamdo reported it to the Tibetan government. We thought he probably would be a Chinese spy. Later, he told us that he had come to Tibet many times because he was a monk. He knew many high ranking men such as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] and so on. After two months, we let him enter Tibet. Later I knew that his wife was the woman who was broadcasting in Lhasa. He acted like a religious person and for some time he managed an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> in Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང].   

**Q:**  What was the name again?   

**A:**  He was called Jia Sai and his daughter was called Jia Liangdan. His first name was Jia. He was a tall man and used to pray and visit monasteries. That was the only strange thing that we had met there.   

**Q:**  Then what else?   

**A:**  If we passed a mountain pass from Gamtog Drukha to collect taxes, we would arrive in Derge Simda [Tib. ?] where there was a small custom office for collecting salt taxes[Tib. ཚྭ་ཤོ]. I worked there for about two months. However, there were no more taxes to collect. There were only a few loads of salt to be collected. Then I was told to come back to Gamtog Drukha. In 1951, the situation was very unstable. It was just before the disturbance involving Rupön Bügang [Tib. སྦུད་ཁང] occurred. I was sent to the Chinese territory [Tib. རྒྱ་སྡེ] to collect taxes. So I went to Derge Gönchen [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་དགོན་ཆེན] and at that time, the Queen of Derge was there and I visited her. She also had a lot of tax deficits. She had a businessman called Lodrö Gyatso [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱ་མཚོ] and she could not control him. So she sent me to the place where the businessman was living. I had a helper with me. We visited him and I understood he was a very rich man. After we arrived in his home, he said he needed one-week's time to collect his yaks that were grazing on the grasslands. He offered us a lot of white liquor [Ch. bai jiu]. He had many boxes of liquor. It was the liquor made in Xining. He put the liquor from bottles into a pot and served us. He also put a basin of crystal sugar on the table. I had a wooden bowl and the living room was furnished with a wooden floor. When he served the liquor, I acted as if I was drinking it, but when he left this room, I poured the wine from my bowl into crevices in the wooden floor as it was really hard to drink. We stayed there for four days and he served wine and good food to us. If we waited another three days, he could collect his yaks and about thousands of boxes of tea would be sent to the Derge Queen. However, the person who was sent by the Queen with me said we should not stay in there continually. He said if we stayed in there continually, we would be killed by him. My partner was so afraid that he did not want to stay there any more even though I told him that the businessman would not dare to kill us. I did not know the reason why my partner was so terrified, but I told the businessman that I did not have time to wait for him continually and I asked him to come with us. He did. He rode a very good quality horse and came with us. After we arrived in Derge Gönchen I lived in a guest house, and then I asked the Queen of Derge how many tea loads she got from the businessman. He actually did not give even one load of tea to her. He argued with her and blamed us because we did not wait for him for one week and he said that it was her [the Queen's] fault.   

**Q:**  How did you talk with them because you probably spoke <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> dialect but they must have spoken their dialect?   

**A:**  I could understand what they were talking about. He was very clever and it was very hard to get benefits from him. He dared to challenge the Derge King. All the capital of the King was said to be lost while under his control.   

**Q:**  Several thousand loads of tea?   

**A:**  Yes, right. Not only did they owe taxes to us, I heard that all the capital of the King was in his hands.   

**Q:**  What was next?   

**A:**  When he was arguing with the Queen, he gave me a load of tea and five rolls of silk. When he was talking with them, they did not have much power to deal with him. Then I returned to Gamtog Drukha. When I arrived in Gamtog Drukha, all officials of the Custom Salt tax collection office were not there. They had already left and all the houses were empty. I had a saddle bag with me and I had taken some food from the Derge Queen because there was nothing to eat. After a time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> of the border security guard [Tib. ས་སྲུང] came there and asked me what I was doing. I asked him where they had gone. He said, "Do not stay alone in the empty house in which there is no food and drink. Come to my house." I asked, "What are you doing here?" I saw there were about 30-40 silversmiths making silver goods there. He told me that he was told to manage the silver factory and was told to close the factory. He would return to Tibet after his job was over. I stayed with the gyagpön for about five or six days, but his job was not going to be completed soon, so I left alone.   

**Q:**  What did they make?   

**A:**  They were making silver stands and lids of the bowls and silver saddles.   

**Q:**  Did it belong to Lhalu?   

**A:**  Yes. It was a private factory. He told me that he was not going to complete his job soon, so I should better leave by myself earlier.   

