# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0430.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsewang Namgyal Shelling was born in Lhasa to a well known aristocratic family and became a government official in 1954. This interview is a continuation of H.0430.02. While in prison, the interviewee improved his Tibetan by writing confessions for the other prisoners. In this interview, he describes life in prison in depth, including how the prisoners were made to hold struggle sessions against their fellow inmates. He discusses how many prisoners died from food shortages and how he kept a sample of the coarse bean tsampa given to the prisoners as proof of their inadequate treatment. In 1961, he was formally sentenced to 12 years, then sent to do manual labor in Ngachen. He discusses the hard labor and the struggle sessions that were held against the prisoners. He was sent to Tshakur Linga to work on the construction of the Leather Factory. He describes the food shortage and a time he picked up rotten fishes from the tributary river.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0430_03/H_0430_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  In the beginning, I had to ask [about] a lot of spellings. He had been dictating me like that for a couple of months.   

**Q:**  At that time, who was reading those confession reports?   

**A:**  The offices in charge of interrogating the prisoners were reading them. When we were just arrested, there was an office called the Military Control Committee [Tib. dmag don bkag 'doms u yön lhan khang] and this office was issuing the verdicts for the prisoners. In that office, there was the lay official Tsögo Thöndrub Tsering [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ་དོན་གྲུབ་ཚེ་རིང]. But, later he was demoted during the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  After you wrote the reports, did they come to ask you questions?   

**A:**  Yes, when there was something important, they would come to ask questions. When they needed to ask about some points in the report, they would ask questions.   

**Q:**  Did they ask you questions after you submitted the report?   

**A:**  Yes, they asked me questions. At that time, they were asking questions to most of the Dewashung officials. At that time, I could improve my Tibetan, and he also taught me Tibetan grammar when we had a little time in the evening. After that, I didn't need to ask him the spellings because I could remember most of the spellings. In 1959, they didn't make us do any work. In 1960, we had a very hard time with a shortage of food. That was the time when the three-year disaster [Tib. ལོ་གསུམ་གེགས་བར] occurred all over the China. The food in the jail became very scarce. That year, many people died from the food shortage. I can't say that they died from starvation because they were giving a little amount of food.   

**Q:**  How much food did they give you?   

**A:**  In the beginning, the [amount of] tsampa became less and less, and we had one full lid of the wooden bowl of tsampa. At last, they ground tsampa from black beans and the bean called vicia faba [Tib. རྒྱ་སྲན་མ]. There were so many water mills near and around Lhasa, but they didn't ground the tsampa in the mill and they let prisoners draw the grinding stone, and they had to run around when they were grinding the tsampa. The amount of tsampa was just one handful for each meal. Sometimes, they would say that they didn't have the time to grind it and they would give roasted beans. We had to divide the roasted vicia faba beans by counting the beans one by one. At that point, we had 9-10 grains of vicia faba beans for each meal, one in the morning and one in the evening. There weren't any other foods like vegetables and so on. They would give a light black tea with the beans and we were eating the beans one by one very slowly.   

**Q:**  How long did they give you that kind of food?   

**A:**  That was for one year. Sometimes, they would give us black beans. If they would grind them well, it was not so bad. They were grinding it very coarse, just like the fodder for the horses. So at that time, I thought of keeping some proof to be exhibited in the future and I wrapped a small amount of that rough black bean tsampa in paper. On that, I wrote, "The tsampa of the prisoners in the Taring Prison in 1960, the Iron Mouse Year." I wrapped it in plastic and I sowed it in between the cotton of my cloth that was wrapped around my waist [Tib. སྐེད་དཀྲིས]. I was hoping that in the future if I would get the chance to go to India, I was planning to show the people that rough tsampa and tell them that the Chinese had made us suffer in that way.   

**Q:**  In that year, did they let you go out to work?   

**A:**  No, we were shut in the prison cell and made to do wool work. They made a work quota that each prisoner had to spin four sang of very fine woolen yarn, used for weaving woolen materials [Tib. སྣམ་བུ], per day. They would weigh that every evening. It was very difficult to spin four sang because it had to be spun very fine. And the food was what I mentioned above. But, when we were given the vicia faba bean, though we felt very hungry, there weren't many deaths in the prison because we had something to bite and eat. After that, they gave us a very light tsampa soup which was so light, like a water. When we looked at the soup in our bowl, we could see our faces, like looking at a mirror. They gave us that kind of soup for about two months and then many people died.   

**Q:**  How long did they give you the bean?   

**A:**  They gave the beans for about 5-6 month. They probably didn't do something bad purposely and gave the light soup. They might have thought that the bean was a little amount and it was a little better to fill the stomach if they added some water and made the tsampa into soup. And they added some very rough vegetables, like sticks which were used to feed pigs. After giving that tsampa soup, most of the prisoner got diarrhea and they died after 2-3 days. After having diarrhea, they would bring the prisoner to another cell which they called the patient's cell, and they would give them a little bit of a thicker soup. But, at that point, they were about to die. The prisoners were dying while they were talking to each other.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the prisoners allowed to drink water between the meals?   

**A:**  No, in 1960, they stopped [allowing] the family members to bring food to the prison. That was why so many people died. In that year, they didn't give food and they stopped [allowing] family members to bring food. Therefore, so many people died. To tell you in short, in that year, they really fired cannons into the stomach and killed people. Even if the government didn't have food to give because of the disaster, they should have let the family members bring some food to the prisoners. People might ask me, "If so many people died, how could you survive?" At that time, there were 17 inmates in the prison cell where I was shut in. Out of the 17 inmates, only three of us survived.   

**Q:**  That was in one year, right?   

**A:**  That was just in a couple of months. At that time, by the grace of the Three Jewels or the karmic result, three of us didn't get diarrhea. So we didn't die.   

**Q:**  Did they give you newspapers?   

**A:**  We were given Tibetan newspapers and we had to read them every evening. That was the period when they finished the interrogating and they hadn't issue the verdicts. So they made us do the wool work. At that time, the cadres would just appoint a prisoner in that cell whose writing was a little better for making the notes of the opinions of the prisoners. That was called the tsugdrang. I was appointed as the tsugdrang of that cell. Once the cadres called me and I told them that "We are working hard, but we are extremely hungry. This is really unbearable." At that time, the other tsugdrang didn't dare to say that, but I told the cadres about the food. The Chinese got very angry but they didn't hold struggle sessions against me. They scolded me very severely for telling them that we were hungry. There were about 300 prisoners in the Taring prison. I can't tell [you] the total [number of] deaths in the whole prison. When the food was very scarce, every day there were about 5-6 bodies taken out from the prison. At that time, they were taking the bodies below the Sera Shar sky-burial and they buried them under the sand. They were not digging the pit deep, so the dogs were eating the bodies. In the beginning of 1961, I had kept that proof with me. At that time, they issued the verdict for me and announced the 12 years of imprisonment. On that day, they also issued the verdict for the lay official Thönpa Paljor Wangchuk [Tib. ཐོན་པ་དཔལ་འབྱོར་དབང་ཕྱུག].   

**Q:**  In the meanwhile, did they tell you anything that you were doing wrong with this and that?   

**A:**  Before that, they were interrogating us, but they didn't tell us anything like that. They just issued the verdict saying that I had registered my name as a volunteer in the revolt and according to the crime that I had committed, the prison term would be 12 years and [I would be] deprived of the political right for four years. In 1961, the food in the prison got better. That was probably in the winter of 1960. It might have been a policy from above or the work style of the individual cadres. Anyway, at that time, a section leader named Lian Dongsan came to the Taring prison. He was a Chinese offspring [of Chinese descent] born in Lhasa. He was a very good person that was really strange. He improved the livelihood of the prison. In the beginning, he didn't have the power to give more tsampa to the prisoners because that was decided from above. But, he sent some people to beg for blood from the butcher's house located near Norbulinga. I heard they were just throwing away the blood of the slaughtered yaks. He used a very good method and sent people to get the blood which was free, and gave the blood to the prisoners, which stopped the prisoners from dying because of the scarcity of food. He just let the cook boil the blood and add a little bit radish and give it to the prisoners. It was a blood soup and the color of the soup was red.   

**Q:**  Did he know Tibetan?   

**A:**  He was born and grew up in Lhasa, and he spoke Chinese. He saw that the blood from the butcher's house was thrown in the ditches and that the prisoners were dying. At that time, there was a round hole in the door of the cell and the door was locked, and we had to urinate in the tin placed in the prison cell. They would take us out to defecate twice a day. When I saw blood soup in the basin placed near the door on the first day from the hole of the door, I felt extremely glad because that was for saving our lives. We hadn't seen that kind of food for a couple of months and the prisoners were dying. At that moment, we were saying to each other, "They have brought blood!" Before drinking the soup, all of us were so glad. After drinking the blood soup, all of us had a very sound sleep that night. After that, he probably reported to his superiors and he brought yak heads. He probably got that very cheap from the butcher's house. Then he burned the hairs of the yak heads and gave them to the prisoners, and gradually he made the soups a little bit thicker and gave us wheat porridge. That was great food and it stopped the prisoners from dying.   

**Q:**  What were you doing during the daytime?   

**A:**  We were spinning yarn the whole day. There weren't any weekend holidays. In the beginning of 1961, they issued the verdict as I mentioned above. The lay official Thönpa was with me. The two of us were neighbors in the Barkor Street. The two of us were called to the office and there were two cadres [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Were they Chinese or Tibetan?   

**A:**  There was one Chinese and one Tibetan, and the Chinese was older. The Tibetan was probably the interpreter. He read the verdict [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  What kind of clothes were you wearing in the jail?   

**A:**  At that time, they were not giving us any clothes. We were just wearing our own clothes. Later, they made clothes and shoes from the brocade objects used for making offerings in the monasteries and gave them to the prisoners. The prisoners would feel cold in winter because they didn't have enough clothes to wear. When they read the verdict, it was said that the Military Control Committee had issued the verdict. There was only the name of Tsögo in that verdict. The other names were all Chinese. Two of us were sentenced to 12 years imprisonment and we were sent to Ngachen Pang [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན་འཕྲང] to work on building the Power Station. Before the verdict was issued, they didn't make us do hard labor. Since the verdict was issued, the labor started and the so-called reform through labor started. That was started at the beginning of 1961.   

**Q:**  Did they count the years that you had been in the jail before the verdict was issued?   

**A:**  Yes, it was counted from the time of the imprisonment.   

**Q:**  When you were in the prison before that, were any struggle sessions held?   

**A:**  Yes, there were a few struggle sessions held. They didn't hold struggle sessions against me. There were just a few people who suffered the struggle sessions. When I was in Taring in 1960, there was a lama from the Drepung Monastery who was called Gungru Khentrül Ngawang Khyenrab [Tib. གུང་རུ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ་ངག་དབང་མཁྱེན་རབ]. He was arrested in 1960. He was left on the society till then. At that time, Gungru Khentrül, Ditru [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག] Lama who is now very pro-Chinese, Shitram [Tib. ཞི་བྲང] Lama from Drepung, and Rinbur [Tib. རི་འབུར] Lama who is now in America-Gelek Rimpoche had a good relationship with him. At that time he was living with the mother of Gelek Rimpoche. At that time, those lamas had established a secret organization in Lhasa. That was a very important thing. Many people didn't know about that. At that time, the above-mentioned lamas made a secret organization for casting spells upon the CCP. The way of casting the spell was called the, "Put face down the big copper pot of the hell [Tib. དམྱལ་བའི་ཟངས་ཆེན་ཁ་སྦུབ་པ]." That means they put face down the big copper of hell where many beings were tortured and they cast the spell for killing the CCP under that pot. That was after the revolt.   

**Q:**  Was that the new name for the spell or was it an old name?   

**A:**  That was an old name for the spell in the old society. I knew clearly about that in 1960, when Gungru Khentrül was shut in the 6th prison cell where I was there. When he was shut in, he looked very healthy and imposing, and he was fat.   

**Q:**  How old was he?   

**A:**  He was in his fifties. At that time, he was wearing a very good quality monk's robe. At that time, they were allowed to wear monk's robes. At that moment, I was the person making the notes. The cadres called me and 2-3 of the other prisoners and they told us to hold struggle sessions against Gungru Khentrül. The reason for holding struggle sessions was that he had cast a spell on the CCP and he had hidden guns, and they told us all of his crimes. The cadres told us to ask him those questions. He had a very hard time. There were 17 prisoners but nobody beat him up, but he was made to stand and bend his body down. At that time, I had religious faith towards him because he was a lama, so I felt very sad. But, we didn't have any choice but to ask him questions. I am not sure [if] he was kind of insane before that time, but, I saw that he went kind of insane when the struggle session was held against him because prisoners were just pulling and shaking him many times telling him to confess to those crimes.   

**Q:**  Did he go insane right at that time?   

**A:**  He had been living very happily outside and all of a sudden, he was imprisoned and the food was very scarce in the prison. And the prisoners pulled and shook his body, and yelled and told him to confess to his crimes. So he went insane and he couldn't say clearly what he had done. What he was saying was in a disorderly manner, talking [about] this and that. I was making the notes. I felt very sad at that time, but I didn't have anything to do because the cadres were looking at us. When people were yelling "Where did you hide the gun?" and asking him other questions, he was unable to answer the questions clearly. I was able to help the lama without having problems with the CCP. While they were holding the struggle session, I prayed for him and I made up my mind to tell my opinion courageously to the cadres, though at that moment we wouldn't dare to do that. I told the cadres that I had something to report about my opinion. They said, "That's okay, come on," and they stopped the struggle session and called me in. At that time, I was trying to save him from the struggle session. I told the cadres, "I am going to tell you my true opinion, if I am wrong, you can criticize me because I am a prisoner and I am telling my opinion to the cadres. I think this is not the right method to deal with him. Don't you need his clear confession?" They said, "Yes, we need this." I said, "If this is what you need, would it be okay for me to ask him the questions slowly in a gentle manner? I am the person who is making the notes. I suggest that you stop the struggle session against him. Just let him sit down." In the beginning, he had leg shackles as well as handcuffs. I told them "You should remove his handcuffs. If possible, you should also remove his leg shackles." To tell you the truth, their purpose was to get clear information, not to beat him up.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you speak Chinese?   

**A:**  At that time, I couldn't speak Chinese. I told that to the Tibetan cadre who was the interpreter and the main leader was Chinese. I told the cadres, I am sorry to tell you this. If I am wrong you can criticize me. At that time, I felt very sad and almost burst into tears when they were holding the struggle session against the lama. They were pulling and shaking him so many times. So I thought I didn't care whatever would happen to me and I told them courageously. Then the cadres told me "You can do that if you can make him confess his crimes," and they removed his handcuffs. Then I went to the cell and told the prisoners that the cadres told me to ask him the questions and to stop the struggle session. The other prisoners were working and I sat near him and called him Rimpoche in a low voice, and told him loudly that he should confess his crimes clearly. "You had a secret organization and your partners have already confessed about that, and they handed over you." Actually, the other lamas like Rinbur and Ditru had betrayed him. The other lamas were not arrested. That was really strange. They handed over Gungru Lama for making contributions to the CCP. Then I told him that they would not hold struggle sessions against him. "You can relax and think about the matter slowly and tell me about that. If you confess well, they will remove your leg shackles also." I asked him where the organization was made and who talked at the meeting the first time. "What was your purpose?" Then he told me, in detail, about casting the spell "Putting face down the big copper pot of the hell." I wrote 54 pages. He didn't need to suffer the struggle session. So he was very glad and he told me, "Thank you very much." I told him "You don't need to thank me. This is the only thing that I can do for you." At that time, I had the experience of writing the life stories. So I wrote it in a good order with the paragraphs and points in a modern way of writing, and made it easy to translate into Chinese. After I submitted his confession, they removed his leg shackles right away.   

**Q:**  How long did it take to write his confession?   

**A:**  It took about a week. I did that slowly and carefully because both of us didn't need to work.   

**Q:**  When the prisoners were handcuffed, didn't they have problems when urinating, defecating and kneading bag?   

**A:**  Yes, the inmates would help them knead the bag, but they had problems when they were urinating and defecating. They had to bear the hardship. Later, I also had the same problem.   

**Q:**  Do you remember in detail about the secret organization?   

**A:**  I don't remember in detail. I remember their movement regarding the spell and [how] they held many meetings. At that time, the lamas like Rinbur might have talked a lot eloquently. Later, they made Gungru Khentrül like the culprit, but, actually, he was not the culprit. They had been holding the same meeting. He wasn't the chief of the organization. People were calling him Kangyur Rimpoche because he gave a transmission of the Kangyur text. He was a famous lama.   

**Q:**  What was their main purpose?   

**A:**  That was for casting spells on the CCP. They couldn't cope with the CCP by making war. So they were trying to destroy the CCP through religious means.   

**Q:**  Who was there in that organization?   

**A:**  Ditru Lama, who is now in Lhasa, and Rinbur Lama, who is now in America. I heard that the actor Richard Gere is sponsoring him. People were saying that he was the father of Yangdröl La. And there was Shitram [Tib. ཞི་བྲང྄] Lama. There was another lama, but I don't remember the name of the other lama.   

**Q:**  Was there Demo Lama in that organization?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. At that time, the Chinese were not to be blamed. They regarded the matter very seriously and the leaders were coming near the door of the prison cell.   

**Q:**  Did you know who handed over [Tib. རྩིས་སྤྲད] the Gungru Lama?   

**A:**  That was one of the other three lamas. They were all living outside at that time. That was a very serious matter that they might have been executed right away [for]. After I submitted his confession, his leg shackles were removed and they didn't hold any struggle sessions against him, and he became like other prisoners and he was carding wool. Even now, I rejoice it because I could accumulate a good merit. At that time, they also held a struggle session against a goldsmith [Tib. ཕྲ་བཟོ་བ] called Yeshe Tenzin [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་བསྟན་འཛིན]. That was for his confession regarding the matters during the revolt that was not clear. He could confess his wrongdoings at the struggle sessions.   

**Q:**  Was that in the prison cell?   

**A:**  Yes, that was in the cell with two pillars where 16-17 prisoners were shut in.   

**Q:**  Was it as big as this room?   

**A:**  It was like half of this room.   

**Q:**  The people who were holding the struggle session were also prisoners?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were those prisoners from other cells?   

**A:**  They were in the same cell. At that time, I told the lama, "They handed you over and you suffered the loss, and you are in the prison of the CCP. If you don't confess clearly, they will not remove your leg shackles." Later, he was so glad that he was moved to tears and held my hands. The Chinese were also very glad to get his confession. At that time, when the food was scarce, he didn't die. I heard that he stayed about 1-2 years in the prison. After that, I was sent to Ngachen and I had a very hard time again.   

**Q:**  In Ngachen, were there teams or what?   

**A:**  There were big brigades.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in a brigade?   

**A:**  In that brigade, there were about 180-190 people.   

**Q:**  Most of them were young or no?   

**A:**  They were all different ages, like in their forties. People like us were the youngest. At that time, I was in the Second Brigade. That was the prisoner's brigade. We were living in tents and there were soldiers guarding us, and there was a fence made of barbed wire all around the tents. Sometimes, when the situation was quite tense, they would attach electricity to the barbed wire so that the prisoners would get an electric shock as soon as they touched the wire.   

**Q:**  What kind of tense situation do you mean?   

**A:**  That was when the prisoners ran away or something like that.   

**Q:**  Did the prisoners run away from Ngachen?   

**A:**  Yes, shall I tell you about that.   

**Q:**  Yes, go ahead.   

**A:**  At that time, there were 180-190 people living in about ten some tents, and each tent had a tsugdrang appointed from among the prisoners.   

**Q:**  What was the duty of the tsugdrang?   

**A:**  That was for making the prisoner work and dividing the foods and so on. At that time, each tent was called tsug [Ch. zu]. The tsugdrang also had to inform [them on] whatever happened in the tent.   

**Q:**  Did the tsugdrang also have to work like the other prisoners?   

**A:**  Yes, some of the tsugdrang were very bad. At that time, the food that was given was not bad [Tib. ཨའུ་ཙམ].   

**Q:**  What did they give you at that time?   

**A:**  That was tsampa and black tea. The amount was quite good.   

**Q:**  Did you have your bowls?   

**A:**  Yes, the prisoners had their different bowls.   

**Q:**  Were those the wooden bowls?   

**A:**  There were wooden bowls and other different kinds of bowls. The government was not giving out bowls at that time. The tsampa was weighed and given to the tents and the tsugdrang would divide it by measuring it in some bowls or tins [and gave it] to the prisoners. Usually, each prisoner was given 32-36 jin of tsampa per month. When the prisoner had to do some overtime work, we were given 40 jin per month.   

**Q:**  Did you have two meals or three meals?   

**A:**  At that time, we had three meals because we had to do hard labor with building the dam for the power station. The dam was about three stories high, which was built with pebbles mixed with sand. It was very heavy when we had to carry the baskets on our backs and it was very hard to dig it with the hoe. The dam was built with alternative layers of pebbles and sand to about one foot high. It was cone-shaped, so the bottom was very wide. On the outside, the dam was built with stones.   

**Q:**  Did they put cement on that?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**Q:**  The prisoners and the other people were doing the same work or no?   

**A:**  Yes, all people were working at the same place, but the prisoners were made to do harder works like getting into the water digging out pebbles.   

**Q:**  In winter, when the weather was cold, might it [have] been very hard?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, they gave some alcohol to the prisoners to keep them warm when they had to work in the water sometimes. They made the masses do the little, easier works. At that time, there were a lot people from Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were those pebbles mixed with sand?   

**A:**  Yes, it was also wet. We had to dig it with a hoe and shovel it into the baskets. When we shoveled it, we had to attach a rope to the shovel and one person would pull the rope while the other person would use the shovel. The baskets were middle size because the pebbles were very heavy. People couldn't carry them in big baskets. At that time, some elderly people were told to count the number of baskets that each team had carried. He would put a bean or a pebble [aside] whenever a basket of pebbles or sand was brought to the dam. At that time, they were not counting the number for the individuals. They were counting the number of baskets for each team. When the number of baskets was not enough, the cadres would hold meetings and scold the prisoners in that team. And they would also hold struggle sessions against some [of the] people who were unable to work well in that team.   

**Q:**  Was the elderly person counting the pebbles for the whole brigade?   

**A:**  Yes. The old man would keep the numbers and the cadres would take the number from the old man. The cadres would criticize the team whose numbers of carrying pebbles was less than the others. After that, the tsugdrang would criticize the prisoners in his tent.   

**Q:**  Did you have to work every day?   

**A:**  When the work was urgent, we had a rest on alternative Sundays. Usually, probably, we had a rest every Sunday. Otherwise, we had to work all the time. Working time was like a little more than 8 hours. At that time, as soon as the work started, the cadres would keep a close watch on the prisoners and the prisoners had to carry the basket full of pebbles and walk very fast, like not carrying anything on their backs.   

**Q:**  How many jins were there for a full basket of pebbles?   

**A:**  I can't tell you the number of jins. That was very heavy. If somebody didn't walk fast on that day, the cadres were watching them and they would make a note of the name of that person. On that evening after the work was over, the cadre would call that person and they would say, "Today, so and so person in such and such team was walking slower. What is your purpose of not walking quickly?"   

**Q:**  At that time, did the cadres know the people?   

**A:**  Yes, because he was in charge of that brigade and he knew all the names of about 100 prisoners in that brigade because they would read the names of the prisoners every night. When the names were read, the prisoner should speak Chinese "tao" [Tib. དཨོ] [and say] I am here.   

**Q:**  Did the prisoners stand up when their names were read?   

**A:**  They were standing in line. When their names were read, they had to raise their hand and say "tao." They were checking whether the prisoners had ran away or not.   

**Q:**  Was the cadre Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were they from Ütsang [Tib. དབུས་གཙང] or Kham?   

**A:**  The cadre of our brigade was from Ütsang. At that time, there were 10 people in our team. The tsugdrang of our team was from Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ]. He was a very bad person and he was a very healthy and strong person. We had a very hard time when we had to do the labor the first time. He knew how to do the labor because he was from Phembo, but he was always doing the easiest work and he was always pulling the rope attached to the shovel. At that time, the number of baskets carried by our team was always the least. That was because the younger and the stronger people were not carrying the baskets and there was an old lay official who used to be a tsidrung called Chalu Surpa Phuntso Jordan [Tib. ཆ་ལུ་ཟུར་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས་འབྱོར་ལྡན]. He and I and some other weaker ones were carrying the baskets. Hence, the number of baskets became less. The tsugdrang informed the cadres that the old lay official was not working well. At that time, he was almost 50 years old. The whole brigade held struggle sessions against him and our tsugdrang beat him up at the meeting. He hit his fist on his face and also slapped him. At that time, prisoners had to work hard all day and at night they held struggle sessions.   

**Q:**  Did they hold struggle sessions many times against that person?   

**A:**  No, it was once. But there were other people who also suffered from struggle sessions. When they held the struggle sessions and beat them up, they had to go to work as usual. When our tsugdrang beat him up, he shouted, "Please tsugdrang, do not beat me up."   

**Q:**  What were they saying when they were holding the struggle session?   

**A:**  They were saying, "Why are you not working well? You were a ngadag in the past, and you have been sucking the blood and sweat of the laboring people." Once I told my opinion to the team. "Our team is always falling behind the other teams."   

**Q:**  Did you tell that to the tsugdrang?   

**A:**  I told that at the Saturday criticism meeting, which was held every week.   

**Q:**  Did they confess [their] own wrongdoings?   

**A:**  Yes, the prisoners had to tell their own wrongdoings and criticize others.   

**Q:**  Did all the people have to talk?   

**A:**  Yes, they had to talk, but it was their choice whether they wanted to criticize people or not. But the bad prisoners would criticize a lot. At that time, I was not criticizing anybody, but at that meeting, I told them my opinion. "The reason why our team is always falling behind other teams is that although you tsugdrang are very healthy and strong, you are not carrying the basket." Nobody dared to say anything to him, but I told him, "Actually, you should carry the basket because your legs are strong and the number of baskets will increase. We are ngadag and we have sucked the blood and sweat of the laboring people. I feel very regretful about that. So I want to reform myself through labor. But we don't [know] how to do the labor, so we want to learn how to pull the rope attached to the shovel, and how to use the hoe and the shovel and carrying baskets. If you make us carry the baskets all day long, we won't know how to use the shovel. I think it would be good if we can carry the basket and use the shovel in turn. Then the number of the baskets will go up because you strong people can walk faster." My opinion was reasonable, so he couldn't say that it was wrong. In winter he was pulling the rope and he felt cold and was stepping his feet on the ground [trying to keep warm], but we were sweating. At that time, he couldn't refuse and refute that my opinion was wrong and we carried the basket in turn. That was a much easier for us.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for that tsugdrang getting into the prison?   

**A:**  I don't know whether he had stolen things or not. He was sentenced to five years imprisonment. After that, he was very agitated with me, but he couldn't do anything at that point. From the next day [on], he was carrying the baskets. One day, I had a problem. On that day, I was very tired, and I went to a corner and squatted down and pretended to be defecating, and I took a rest for a while. At that time, there were some child prisoners looking [to see] whether people had defecated or not. Those kids were pick-pockets in the old society. The Chinese might have told those kids to check whether the prisoners really had defecated or not. But, at that point, I didn't know that. That was at around 4 p.m. when I squatted down for a while. [When I] rose up, one of the kids came over and asked me, "Where did you defecate?" I didn't have the stool to show him. So I thought, now it is finished [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་སོང] and I'll have to suffer a struggle session. I just told that kid that my stomach felt bloated and I felt that I had to defecate and squatted down, but that it was just gas and no stool. Right after that, the kid informed the cadre and the cadre punished me by making me carry very big baskets, like double the size of the ordinary basket, filled with pebbles like filling the offering box with butter and tsampa [Tib. ཕྱེ་མར] and made me run. The pick-pockets kids were holding needles in their hands and they would poke [me with] the needle if I didn't run fast. At that time, they were doing that to many people. Fortunately, there were only about 10 minutes knocked off the work. So I only had to run for 10 minutes. At that moment, the tsugdrang was very glad and he might have thought to beat me up at a struggle session. In those days, I was doing my prayers and seeking protection from the protective deities surreptitiously while I was carrying the basket wearing a cloth mouth mask. I sought protection from the deities and I thought that I should do something to prevent the struggle sessions. That evening, a big meeting was held and the cadre said, "Today, ... has pretended to defecate and squatted down to take a rest. If he were to confess clearly about his purpose of doing that, it will be okay. Otherwise, we are going to hold a big meeting struggle session against him tomorrow evening." Fortunately, they didn't hold the struggle session right away. On that night, I was thinking very carefully [about] how I should confess the purpose and get through this problem. The next day, the cadre was at the work site. I went to see him and told him, "I have to report something about my confession." In the beginning, he was looking angrily at me. He said, "Alright, sit down." I told him "I have really been lazy with my work. I feel extremely regretful about that. The reason for being lazy with my work was that I am sentenced to 12 years imprisonment. So if I were to work actively, I could work 1-2 years. But how could I work for 12 years like that? I thought that I would not be able to work actively during all the time. Therefore, I have been lazy with my work." It was strange that he seemed to believe me. After that, I told him the above-mentioned about learning the labor and about being a ngadag and about the oppressions imposed on the masses in the past. So I had committed a very serious crime. In those days, I noticed that the cadre was looking at the pretty Lhasa girls very much and he was teasing them by throwing small pebbles at them. So I was suspicious that he might have been a womanizer. So I had to tell him something that he liked. So I told him, "In the past, I couldn't control myself and I was a womanizer and did all these bad things." When he heard that, he said, "What did you do at that time? Tell me about that." I told him, "I don't dare talk about those things." He said, "Go ahead and tell me about that." When I told him about being a womanizer in the past, he was extremely glad to hear that. I told him that the girls from Lhasa and Amdo are very pretty and all in detail. So he was very pleased to hear that. In the end, I told him, "I feel very regretful about those things." I had been talking with him for about one and a half hours. After I went back to work, my friend, the old lay official, asked me in low voice, "What the hell have you been talking about for such a long time?" I told him the truth and he told me, "You are really an ingenious person. How did you dare to say such things to the cadre?" I said I saw that the cadre was teasing the Lhasa girls. On that night, the big meeting was held and the cadre said, "Yesterday, we were supposed to hold struggle session against ..., but today he came to me and he confessed his purpose clearly. So we are not going to hold a struggle session against him." By the grace of the Three Jewels, I didn't suffer the struggle session. At that moment, the tsugdrang was very disappointed because he didn't get me. There was a young prisoner from Kongpo, all people were calling him Ada. He was about 19-20 years old. He used to be a trainee in the Public Security Bureau [Tib. གོང་ཨན་ཇུ] and he was imprisoned for theft. He missed his mother and he ran away. He was a short guy and he had a woolen chupa. That day, he tied his belt very low like a woman and he wrapped his head with a cloth. Then he carried a basket and left with the people from Lhasa. He went to Lhasa where he used to ask for lodging. The inn-keeper could not bear the responsibility and they reported the matter. So the cadres seized him and they brought him back. After that, they held struggle sessions against him many times.   

**Q:**  Was that only for one evening?   

**A:**  If the struggle session was because of work, it was held just for one evening. But they held [one] many times because he fled from the prison camp. So they beat him up and shackled him. There were different people among the people who were holding the struggle session. There was a painter called Kunga [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ]. When he was holding the struggle session against Ada, he beat him up and asked him his purpose of fleeing. Ada said, "I missed my mother, so I ran away." He didn't have any purpose to go to India. Then Kunga said, "Let alone your mother, even if you miss your wife, how could you run away?" At that moment, all the prisoners ridiculed and jeered the painter. There was another strange thing to tell you. In our team, there was a prisoner called Champa Rabgye who was a very tall guy. He was stealing a lot of things from the other prisoners. He was stealing the things that were brought from their homes. He was an infamous thief in that brigade. I can say that my wife saved my life in the prison. She brought me very good foods even [though] she didn't have enough food for herself. She brought me momo and bagtsa markhu, a flour dough mixed with butter, cheese and sugar, and rice mixed with meat and so on. At that time, the family members were allowed to bring us food once every two weeks.   

**Q:**  Was that allowed from the beginning?   

**A:**  That was allowed after we came to Ngachen. I am grateful to her that she brought me good food so that I could work well. She was suffering outside and she had to do a lot of unpaid laboring.   

**Q:**  Where did you keep the food?   

**A:**  We didn't have any places other than in the tent. When I came to that team, some of my friends told me, "Now, you are finished. The person sitting next to you is a very bad thief. He will eat all the food that you got from your family." At that moment, I didn't have any freedom to say that I was not going sit next to him. If he were to eat my foods and make them dirty, I couldn't eat them. Therefore, I thought of a method to deal with the thief. I thought it would be the best to make friends with him. When I first met him in the tent, I told him Champa Rabgye La. He was so surprised to hear someone calling him "La" in an honorific way. All people were looking down on him saying that he was a thief. I asked him, "How are you?" After that, whenever my wife brought me food, I offered him some amount from all the food. He was not to be blamed. He was stealing because he was hungry. When I gave him food, he was so surprised. Before going to bed, I used to eat some bag and Champa Rabgye would tell me, "Mr ... ate a good bag."   

**Q:**  How did you get tea?   

**A:**  At that time, we were given black tea. Sometimes, when we didn't have tea, at night we would eat tsampa mixed with water.   

**Q:**  Could you get the water?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, I used to leave the momo, fried meat-filled pancakes, and bagtsa markhu near my pillow, opening the lid of the container, and Champa Rabgye was next to me. Later, he was really moved and he was very glad when I gave him the foods. Before going to bed, he would say openly "Mr ..., you can sleep soundly. You don't need to worry about me." He meant that he would not steal my things. Actually, he didn't steal anything from me. At that time, it became widespread that "Champa Rabgye was not stealing even when ... left momo and those foods near him at night." We became friends and I could accumulate a good virtue, and he didn't need to steal from me. Once my wife brought me a bottle of Chinese hot sauce, Doupan Jang. I gave him all the other foods and I forgot to give [him] that hot sauce. The next morning I saw that he had put his finger in the bottle and ate some sauce. I asked him in an honorific way, "Did you put your finger in this bottle?" He said, "No, I didn't." I told him, "Never mind, tell me the truth. I will give you all the remaining hot sauce." Then the two of us were together at work. I saw him coming after me and he was calling me "Mister ..." and he said, "I am so sorry! I am going to confess that I ate your hot sauce, although you are so kind to me. I will never do that again. Please forgive me" He was crying and I also burst into tears. After that we became closer friends. At that time, they were holding a lot of struggle sessions against Champa Rabgye because of stealing other prisoners' food. He was a tall man and like a spoiled person, and the tsampa was not enough for him. And there wasn't any meat or vegetables. He didn't have family members to bring him food. Actually, he was not to be blamed.   

**Q:**  When he put his finger in the hot sauce, did it become dirty?   

**A:**  Yes, for me it became dirty because he put his finger in the bottle. For him, it was not dirty. So I gave him all the hot sauce and he was very glad.   

**Q:**  Was that cadre Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes. After 4-5 months, the dam in the Ngachen was built. After that, we moved to the Leather Factory located in Tshakur Linga [Tib. ཚ་ཁུར་གླིང་ག]. That was near the Trisam [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟམ] Bridge. That was the type of foreign bridge built in Tibet. In the old society, that place belonged to Drepung.   

**Q:**  How far is it from Lhasa?   

**A:**  It would probably take a whole day walking from Lhasa. At that time, my wife came to that place to bring me food. In that place, the work was much lighter, though it was construction work. Compared with carrying pebbles in Ngachen, the work was much easier and tsampa was also given less. At that time, we were given only one-third of the tsampa given in Ngachen.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That is in the middle of 1961. We stayed there till 1962.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the construction workers prisoners or other people?   

**A:**  All of the workers were prisoners. That was a brigade of prisoners. There were about over 100 prisoners.   

**Q:**  Did you live in tents?   

**A:**  Yes, the whole Second Brigade was moved to that place. In those days, the prisoners who had their family members bringing food didn't have many food problems. But, the other prisoners who didn't [have] families in Lhasa, had a serious shortage of food. The food was not like a few pieces of beans in Taring, but in that place, we had to do hard labor and food was scarce. In those days, in the evening they would give us the next day's tsampa for the morning and lunch because they didn't have time to distribute the tsampa in the morning since the work would start early. As for dinner, they were giving a kind of soup containing flat pieces of dough without meat. The soup was not so light, but it wasn't enough to be filling. We had about one and a half bowls of soup. The soup was not enough to be filling and the tsampa supposed to be eaten the next day was given in the evening. If we didn't keep that carefully, we didn't have anything else to eat in the morning and for lunch. When we felt very hungry, we couldn't control ourselves and had to eat from the tsampa. When I ate one spoonful of tsampa, it was very delicious. I would make up my [mind] not to eat more than one spoonful and tie the tsampa bag and leave it there. Again I felt hungry and my stomach was gurgling, and I had to eat one spoonful again. When my wife was bringing me food, I didn't need to act like that.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the prisoners allowed to give food to each other?   

**A:**  Yes, we were allowed to give food.   

**Q:**  Did they give food to each other?   

**A:**  Yes, some people were giving food to other prisoners. Among the prisoners, there were eating communes [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང] which consisted of 3-4 people. And they were eating together with whoever received food from their family members. They all had family members bringing them food. They would not let other people join the eating commune if they didn't have family members. They had a lot of food to eat.   

**Q:**  Did you have an eating commune?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. But, when my wife was in Lhasa, she brought me food once every two weeks and I became very healthy. She came from such a long distance to bring me food even [when] she didn't have enough food for herself. After that, my wife was sent to Phembo for six months. She didn't have any freedom and the Neighborhood Committee sent her to Phembo. At that time, she was not allowed to say that her husband was in the prison and that she had to bring food. During that period, I suffered very seriously because the tsampa was not enough. So I had to eat some tsampa at night. If we could keep the tsampa carefully, we had a small amount of bag in the morning and for lunch. Usually, I would eat just a few spoons of tsampa at night. One night, I felt very hungry and I just acted recklessly and ate all the tsampa that was supposed to be eaten the next day. At that time, we were given black tea without salt. Tibet is a place where salt is produced, but they didn't give salt to the prisoners. That was very bad. The family members had to bring salt to the prisoners. And the tea was called Chingta [Ch. qing cha]. The Tibetans had to eat tsampa with tea and so we needed salt. When the other prisoners were eating their little amount of tsampa, I slept late putting my head in my bed. I pretended to be asleep. If I got up, I would see them eating bag and smell it. So then my mouth would have watered. Then I drank some tea and went to work. When the other prisoners were eating their little lunch, I read the newspaper. At that time, we were just kidding each other, "Today I am reading the newspaper." There were many people acting like that. Back then, it was really like the proverb, "When the fire of hunger burns in the stomach, there is no fear in disobeying the law of the king [Tib. མི་ལྟོགས་ཁོག་པར་མེ་འབར་ན་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཁྲིམས་ལ་ཡ་མི་ང]." I had that experience. At that time, there were militia guards following us wherever we were working. Some of the misers were given a little bit [of a] salary and a gun to guard us. We were working near the tributary of the river and the water reached our waist. One day, I heard that some of the PLA were throwing explosives into the water to kill fish [Tib. ཉ་འབོམ]. They were putting some kind of explosives in bottles and throwing them in the water and many fish were being killed, and some of them fainted and they were picking them up. Some of the dead fish had sunk into the water after they were killed. It has been about two days and it was a little bit rotten. When we knew that there were some dead fish which sank in the water, some of us went to pick up the fish because we were very hungry. When I had to pick up the fish, we had to go in the tributary of the river. At that moment, the guards were yelling, "Halt, or I'll fire," and they were moving the gun bolt and loading the guns.   

**Q:**  Were you alone at that time?   

**A:**  On that day, I was alone. Later, I found out that there were four of us doing the same [thing]. When I heard the guard yelling, "Halt, or I'll fire," I wasn't afraid at all. That was really like the above-mentioned proverb. I thought, I don't care about [him] killing me. When I looked in the water and saw the dead fish, I had to submerge [myself] and pick up the dead fish. I got 2-3 times [more] fish in that way. In those days, we, the Tibetans, could remember the dharma teachings in our mind, no matter [what] hardship we faced. As I told you before, I was trying to be kind-hearted as much as I could. One day, I felt very hungry. At that moment, I saw a hawk eating a fish at the tributary bank. I picked up a stone and I was going to stone and frighten it away. Just at that moment, I thought that the hawk is hungry and I am also hungry, so what shall I do? Right after that, I had a second thought. I thought the hawk had wings and he could fly wherever he wanted to go to find food. But, I am a prisoner and I don't have any freedom to go find food. Today, it seems that I am more important, and I stoned and frightened the hawk away. The hawk had eaten only the head of the fish.   

**Q:**  How did you eat the fish?   

**A:**  In those days, we could pick up some small firewood and make a fire. The prisoners made small stoves from the big pork tin and the pot was also the tin. Then I boiled the fish in the tea without salt.   

**Q:**  Was that with real firewood?   

**A:**  We picked up some small pieces of woods in the construction area even though they were scolding us. When I boiled the fish in the tea, some kind of whitish soup was floating on the surface.   

**Q:**  Was that in the tent or outside?   

**A:**  That was in the tent. At that moment, the other prisoners' mouths might have watered. We didn't have anything to put on the fish, not even salt. The soup was so delicious even though the fish was slightly rotten. The fish I got from the hawk was fresh, so it was very delicious. On the night that I got the fish, I slept very soundly. That must have been very good for one's health.   

**Q:**  When you were going to pick the fish and when the guard told you "Halt, or I'll fire," did you tell them, "Please hold on, I will come back right away?"   

**A:**  No, I didn't say a single word. But they didn't shoot us even though they could shoot us.   

**Q:**  Did the militia know what you were doing?   

**A:**  Yes, we were going to pick up fish when the militia was watching us. They saw us picking up the fish but they didn't take the fish away. That was not bad. They were also saying, "You will get it [Tib. ལྟད་མོ་ལྟོས་ཨ]." Later, I came to know that there were four prisoners [who] ate fish in our brigade. One prisoner was in the same tent and I saw him bringing a fish. After that, they held a big meeting where 2-3 prison brigades were gathered. There were about 500-600 prisoner. Before that day, a meeting was held in our brigade. At that time, the leader was a Tibetan PLA. I heard he used to be the servant of the kudrak Horsur. He said at the meeting, "Last time, four prisoners went to pick up fish in the tributary river. Even when the guards told them, 'Halt, or I'll fire,' they kept on going to pick up the fish. Who were those prisoners? Stand up." Then the four of us stood up. They were supposed to hold struggle sessions against us.   

**Q:**  Did you stand up?   

**A:**  Yes, the other prisoners were sitting. The cadre said, "The government is giving the prisoners enough food to eat. But, these four prisoners were implying that the food was not enough to be full and they crossed the river and went to pick up the fish. Even when the guards told them, 'Halt, or I'll fire.' You, prisoners! Tell the truth, the government is giving you enough food to be full, right?" At that point, the cadres hoped that the other prisoners would say, "Yes, the government is giving us enough food. These four evil people are bad. And we are going to get beaten." At that time, there was a prisoner called Dingri Ngawang [Tib. དིང་རི་ངག་དབང]. He used to be a Tibetan soldier in the Dingri Regiment. He was at the meeting.   

