# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0430.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. shel gling tshe dbang rncam rgyal]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsewang Namgyal Shelling was born in Lhasa to a well known aristocratic family and became a government official in 1954. In this interview the subject tells how completed his prison sentence in 1971 and was transferred to a labor camp where he worked as a cloth cutter. He describes the labor camp in detail, focusing on the living conditions and how the regulations of the camp gradually became looser due to changes in the policy. In 1979, he was sent to Xiangyang in China to be a teacher in the Tibet Institute of Minority Nationalities. Later, he was transferred to Lhasa to work as a translator for textbooks.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0430_06/H_0430_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  On the 10th of April in 1971, my 12-year prison term was over and I was released. Before that, the prisoners in the 5th Brigade were saying that I would not be released on time. I also thought that I would not be released because I had some problems in the prison as I mentioned above. But, I was released on the due date. I was moved to the labor camp. At that time, people used to feel very glad when they were moved to the labor camp. Actually, there was only a wall between the Trapchi Prison and the labor camp. But, when we get to the labor camp, there was a little more freedom when comparing the prisoners. At that time, they were not paying a real salary. They were calling it the money food allowance [Tib. 'tsho ba'i grpon dngul]. They were saying that we didn't have the right to receive a salary.   

**Q:**  What did they tell you when your prison term was over?   

**A:**  They called to me to the office and said, "Now you have to go to the labor camp, so go get your bedding." At that time, they didn't say I was released. I was very glad because I was thinking that I would not be released. We knew what the labor camp was.   

**Q:**  When you were in the prison you were not allowed to go outside the gate, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we were not allowed to go outside the fence. In the labor camp, we were allowed to go out on Sundays. In 1971, that was just after the Cultural Revolution. So it was quite strict for the labor camp members.   

**Q:**  When you had to go see the leader of the labor camp, did you have any kind of letters to show them?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. The leaders of the prison told the leaders of the labor camp about that. When we got there, the leaders of the labor camp who were called the dütrang, the brigade leaders, were telling us to go to that team. They also had teams in the labor camp. It was exactly the same as in the prison. We had to sleep about 10 people in one room on a large wooden bed. At that time, we were paid 20 yuan, 7 maotse, and 5 fen per month as the food allowance. It was supposed to be 21 yuan, but they were deducting 2 maotse and 5 fen. At that time, there were two kinds of labor camp members; the labeled [Tib. ཞྭ་མོ་ཡོད་པ] and the unlabeled [Tib. ཞྭ་མོ་མེད་པ] and I was in the labeled group. In those days, the majority of the labor camp members were labeled and there was only one team which consisted of about 10 people who were unlabeled. They had some more freedom than the labeled people with going home and those things. The labeled were a little bit strict [subjected to strict rules]. In those days, it was very bad. Although we were allowed to go out, but we were not allowed go alone. The rule was very bad, but we were very glad to go home. On Saturday evenings, we had to ask for leave from the cadre to go home on Sunday. The cadre would nominate so and so persons to go together to Lhasa. These nominated people had to go out from Trapchi together and go together everywhere in all the homes.   

**Q:**  If someone said that he was not going home and he was going to the market, was he allowed to go alone?   

**A:**  No, even [if that was] so they had to go together.   

**Q:**  When they asked for leave, did they need a home to go to?   

**A:**  No, they could go to the market, but they had to go together. The first time when I went home, there were four people together. That was causing the family members a lot of troubles.   

**Q:**  If all the labor camp members said that they were going home, what would they do?   

**A:**  They would send 3-4 people in groups. If three people were sent together and all of them had family members, then all three people had to go together to the three households. When we get to one's own home, we were not allowed to go to the toilet alone. No matter if you want to urinate or not, all three people had to go to the toilet together. When we went to the department stores, we were not allowed get lost. We had to go like northern nomads holding each other's hands.   

**Q:**  When three people had to go to their families, how did you arrange the time?   

**A:**  We would divide the time from 8-9 in the morning till 5 p.m. and go to the homes and go to the market. We had to get back to the Labor Camp before 5 p.m. When three people went to a household, they had a lot of trouble because they had to prepare food and tea for three people, and at that time, they didn't have much money. We were not allowed to help one's own family when they were cooking. I was not allowed go to the kitchen alone because they would be suspicious about what I was talking about with my family members. We had to sit like a guest in our own home. We were not allowed to fetch water and help them cook. That was really a legal punishment. After visiting the first family, then the three people had to go to the second family and do the same. At the first time, when I went home, there were four people together. At first, when my wife saw me, she was glad. But, when she saw three more people coming in one after another, she had a long face because there wasn't any privacy. As for the talks, we were always talking about the correct policy of the Party and telling the family members not to worry about us. Under the correct policy, we were released and paid a salary. In case some people got lost in the crowd in the department store for a few minutes, we had to confess about that after we got back to the labor camp saying that we didn't purposely separate, we were just lost for a short time. We were not allowed to go with one's own friends. If it were to be our own choice, we could take one's relative and friends. The cadres would purposely send some informers in the group for listening to what the family members were talking about. After he got back, he would inform [the cadres] about that. For example, there was a monk of the Nechung Tratsang [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] called Thubden Geje [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་དགེ་བྱེད]. When we went to see his maternal uncle, the lama called Changtse Chöje [Tib. བྱང་རྩེ་ཆོས་རྗེ], two people were sent with him and one of them was a lay official, Urgyen Tenzin Treling [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་བསྟན་འཛིན་བཀྲ་གླིང], who was an informer with a hunchback. On that day, the lama served them momo. After eating the momo until he was full and came back to the camp, he criticized the team at the meeting and pretended that he didn't know the lama, and said there was an old monk and he was asking him how many prisoners were there in the Trapchi prison.   

**Q:**  Did he tell a lie?   

**A:**  No, that was true. But, the number of prisoners was kind of a secret, so he told about that.   

**Q:**  Were you allowed to go every Sunday in groups?   

**A:**  Yes, but at that time, it was kind of suffocating. Though we wanted to meet the family members, it was causing a lot of trouble for the family members because they had to entertain 3-4 people. And they didn't have money to serve food for 3-4 people. It was causing trouble to all the 3-4 family members on that very day. When we had gone through two families, we were full. So we were telling the third households not to cook food because we had been to two households and we were full. But, they were not listening to us saying, "Please don't say that," and they were cooking food. As for the work in the labor camp, it was according to one's talent or skill in crafts. I was stitching clothes in the prison. Therefore, I was assigned to be the cloth cutter using an electric machine in the prison tailoring workshop. At that time, I could say that I was making 1,000 yuan per day because we were cutting 150 layers of jeans. But, the food allowance was 20 yuan, 7 maotse and 5 fen. But at that time, the ration was cheap.   

**Q:**  Did you get food coupons?   

**A:**  No, the rice, flour, butter or cooking oil, and meat, were bought together for the whole labor camp. There was one jin of butter or cooking oil and the meat was probably two jin per month. There was a very little amount of meat in the dishes. We had enough ration grain to be full. That was about 32 jin per month. We were eating together and the elderly people couldn't eat much, so we had plenty of flour.   

**Q:**  Was most of the ration tsampa?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have tsampa. It was flour and rice.   

**Q:**  Did you cook for yourself?   

**A:**  There was a mess [hall]. There was a cook for all the labor camp members and the cook was paid by the government. The cook divided the food equally.   

**Q:**  Did you keep the ration in the team?   

**A:**  No, there was a steward appointed and he would keep them in the store and the cook would make an inferior quality butter tea every morning. The ration and butter and the meat cost only about 13-14 yuan per month.   

**Q:**  So each members need a thermos flask, right?   

**A:**  Yes, if they didn't have a thermos, they needed a big mug because the tea was divided at once. In the morning, we had one thermos with the capacity of five pangs.   

**Q:**  Was that the bigger or the smaller one?   

**A:**  That was the middle size. We had a lot of steamed buns and for lunch we had rice.   

**Q:**  Were you allowed to take your food to your room?   

**A:**  Yes, the cook would divide the food equally and we would take it to the room and eat it. The members would give their leftover food to each other and the elderly would give us their leftover steamed buns. The money was collected equally and the food was also divided equally. At that time, the cadres of the Labor Camp were two Tibetans. One of them was called Ma Dütrang, the brigade leader. He was a person who changed his name in the Cultural Revolution. He was from Biru. In those days, it was very strict because the Tibetan cadres were not courageous. They were very scared of the policy from above. After one year, a new brigade leader came in the labor camp. He was a PLA soldier who used to be the leader in the 5th Brigade of the prison. His name was Li and he was in the battle in Sogde and Biru. That person was treating the prisoners very kindly. The other labor camp members didn't know about that. But, I knew him because he was the leader of the 5th Brigade. We were very glad to have him in the labor camp and the Chinese was the main leader, and he was more powerful than the Tibetan.   

**Q:**  When you came to the labor camp, how was the relationship between the members, was it like in the prison?   

**A:**  It was similar because we had trustworthy friends and also informers in the labor camp. We would not talk with the informers or the suspicious people. We would talk with one's friends.   

**Q:**  How did you know if they were informers or friends?   

**A:**  We would know that they were informers because they were informing the matters to the cadres like I mentioned above. When they informed the cadre, the accused person would be scolded. Most of the informers were appointed as tsugdrang. Some people were not tsugdrang, but they were informers and they were bad and all the people were suspicious of them.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you have to study politics in the evening?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to read some newspapers, but it was so much like in the prison. We had to read the only sometimes newspaper. After the Chinese leader came to the labor camp, one night when we were studying in our team, Li Dütrang, the Chinese leader, came inside and told us in Chinese, "From today on, whatever matter you need to report, you can report it to me." He did a self-introduction. The other cadres didn't tell us that he was the new leader.   

**Q:**  Did he wear army uniforms?   

**A:**  He was wearing kind of an old army uniform, but he didn't have any insignias. He was transferred from the army. At that moment, I was extremely glad. Then I told one of my friends, the monk from the Nechung Monastery, and another person called Mimi who is from the northern Tibet. They didn't know Li Dütrang. I told my friends, "Don't tell anybody. Let's go ask for leave from Li Dütrang. He will send us to go to Lhasa separately." After it became dark, we went to his room. I spoke Chinese and told him "Please grant us leave for tomorrow. He said, "It will be okay." Then I asked him, "Who and who should go together?" He said, "Each of you can go to your own home."   

**Q:**  Was the next day Sunday?   

**A:**  Yes, then I told my friends "I didn't misunderstand the Chinese. He said that we can go to our own homes. Tonight we should keep quiet. Tomorrow we should go out together from the gate of the prison. And then let's go separately to our own homes."   

**Q:**  Did you think that the leader would say that?   

**A:**  Yes, I was hoping he would say that because he was a very kind person. He treated the prisoners very nicely. And he treated Norbu Tsering especially good though he had fought with him in battle. He was just telling him while laughing, "How accurate you were shooting us? When we were stopping for a meal, how many soldiers did you kill at that time?" The next morning, the three of us washed our faces and went out from the gate together, and then we went separately.   

**Q:**  Was there was a soldier at the gate?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to tell the soldiers that we had asked for leave and that we were going to Lhasa. The soldiers knew that we were labor camp members. On that day, my wife was scared and said, "Oh! Did you run away? Where are your partners?" I told her that we were sent alone. On that day, I felt really happy at home.   

**Q:**  Who were there in your family?   

**A:**  My wife was alone at that time. She was living in a very dark room.   

**Q:**  Where was it located?   

**A:**  It was in the Barkor Street right behind our house.   

**Q:**  How big the room was?   

**A:**  There were two very small and dark rooms. We had to light candles even in the daytime. When people came to see her, they would come in like a blind person and we had to hold their hands and say please sit here. On that day, my wife was extremely glad. In the evening, after we got back to the labor camp, the Tibetan cadre called Ma knew about that we went separately. "Who are the three people who went separately to Lhasa?"   

**Q:**  How did he know that?   

**A:**  The informers had informed them. Then I said, "The three of us went to Lhasa." He asked, "Who did you ask for leave?" I said, "We asked for leave from Li Dütrang and he said that we could go separately to one's own home." Then he said, "Woan." Li Dütrang was more powerful than him. He was the main leader of the labor camp. Everywhere the Chinese were more powerful and Li Dütrang was transferred from the army, so he was powerful. After that, Li Dütrang gave the order and after that, all the labor camp members were allowed to go to one's own home separately. But we were only allowed to go in the daytime. At that time, there was only one Chinese labor camp member who had his wife at home and he was allowed to go home on Saturday evening and spend the night at home. That Chinese was unlabeled.   

**Q:**  Was his wife Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes, he was a machine repairer and he married a Tibetan girl. I thought if I told Li Dütrang, he would definitely send us home on Saturday. At that time, the Tibetan labor camp members were all going in the daytime, even they had wives. After two weeks, on the Saturday evening, Li Dütrang was giving instructions where some of the labor camp members were digging a well. He didn't have leisure time. So I didn't get the opportunity to ask for leave. Then I told Li Dütrang, "I have my wife at home, would I be allowed to go home tonight." He said, "It is okay." Then I hurried up and changed my clothes, and I was so nervous that I didn't close the trunk and left the labor camp. It was almost dark when I left Trapchi. I was first to go home on Saturday night among the Tibetans. There were 5-6 Tibetan who had wives, but they didn't dare ask for leave. There was a lama from Drigung. He was educated in China and spoke very fluent Chinese. Even he didn't dare ask for leave though he was unlabeled. On that night, my wife was very scared and said, "Oh! How did they send you at night?" I told her that I was granted leave. The next day, Li Dütrang gave an order saying that all the labor camp [members] who had wives at home could go home on Saturday nights. On the evening when I left, the lama from Drigung was near me and when he saw that Dütrang granted leave for me, he wanted to ask for leave, but he didn't dare ask right away and he was going hither and thither. When Li Dütrang was there, we lived very leniently, though he couldn't do anything with the food allowance and those things. After that we got the freedom for going home and we could help the family members carry water from the well and help them cook.   

**Q:**  How was the livelihood of your wife at that time?   

**A:**  Her livelihood was very poor. She was going to work on the construction [projects], but she didn't get much time go to work because the Neighborhood Committee was making her do a lot of unpaid labor probably 10 days a month. She didn't get the chance to go to work on the construction and the wages were also low.   

**Q:**  How much did she get per month?   

**A:**  At that time, the wages were 1 yuan and 2 maotse per day. She could only work for about 20 days per month. She had to buy tsampa and fuel and all the things. At that time, they didn't have enough ration grain. I used to take the leftover steamed buns home. Usually, they were feeding horses with the leftover steamed buns in the labor camp. I told the elderly people, if you have leftover steamed buns, please give them to me. They would cut the steamed buns cleanly before they would eat and then gave them to me. When I went home on weekends, I had a bag full of steamed buns.   

**Q:**  How many steamed buns would you take?   

**A:**  At least-I would take about 10-15 steamed buns and my wife used to dry them in the sunshine, and she said it was very delicious when she soaked the dried buns in tea when she would go to work. When the family members were rich, the labor camp members would carry an empty bag when they went home and carry a bag full of butter and meat when they came back. I was the opposite, my bag was full when I went back and empty when I came back.   

**Q:**  Why she became poor, did they label her?   

**A:**  No, but she was a ngadag trerim. So she had to do all the public works like cleaning the toilet and sweeping the courtyard, and all the hard and dirty works, and all the works were unpaid. In addition to that, the Neighborhood Committee was making them do other unpaid works. Hence, she became very poor.   

**Q:**  Was the wage the same if she could go to work?   

**A:**  Yes, it was same, but they were not giving her time to go to work. That was very bad. They used to call the unpaid works obligations [Tib. འོས་འགན].   

**Q:**  Were they using the term [Tib. འོས་འགན]?   

**A:**  Yes, that was a new term translated from Chinese.   

**Q:**  That was a kind of ula, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was really an ula. But, some of the ula had a little bit of land, but they didn't have anything at that time. Furthermore, my wife was not healthy at that time. That was because they made her do too many unpaid works. She said once she had a lot of nosebleeds because they made her draw the cart when they were making the plain in Polinga [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ག] After I came out, she was sick and bedridden, and she didn't have any income. I could only take 6-7 yuan per month after I bought my ration and I had to borrow a little bit of money from many elderly labor camp members.   

**Q:**  How long did you have to borrow money for?   

**A:**  I had to do that for about 2 years until 1973. She was absolutely bedridden for about four months. For 1-2 years, she could only do a little bit of work. During that period, I had a very difficult time. When my wife had diarrhea, we didn't even have a handful of rice to make rice soup. At that time, we were not allowed to beg for food openly in the market. But, some people in Lhasa gave us some food.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have relatives?   

**A:**  We had some relatives among the progressive people [Tib. ཡར་ཐོན], but when we were poor, nobody was helping us. Our close friends were all reactionary and shut in the prison. At the end, we had a shortage of food. When my wife was sick, I had to ask for leave many times. But when Li Dütrang was there, he never scolded me. He granted me leave for about a month and paid the food allowance.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1972. When I told Li Dütrang that my wife was sick and we didn't have enough food to eat, he almost burst into tears. He had the power to grant my leave. So he granted me leave for months and he told me that "You have to come to the labor camp once every 2-3 days and let me know that you are there. That is the rule or law, and then you can go back home." They were probably afraid that I might run away. When I came in the prison courtyard and when he saw me from a distance, he would wave his hand to tell me to go back. When he was there, I didn't have any problem with asking for leave. After that, Li Dütrang was changed and a Tibetan woman called Chungla [Tib. ཆུང་ལགས] came to our labor camp. She was very bad, like a witch. We called her witch. She didn't have any compassion.   

**Q:**  How old was she?   

**A:**  She was in her twenties. When I asked for leave and told her that my wife had diarrhea and nobody was helping her, she would scold me right away. "Is your landlady [Tib. ལྕམ་སྐུ་ཞབས] sick?" How could there be a landlady at that time. I told her, "To be a landlady is out of the question, she is almost dying. She needs a person to help her." She said, "Go and get a certificate from the Neighborhood Committee. Otherwise, I won't grant you leave." She might have thought that the Neighborhood Committee would not issue the certificate. Then I went to the Neighborhood Committee and asked for the certificate. At that time, the Director [Tib. ཞུ་རེན] of the Neighborhood Committee was a Khamba woman called Tayong la [Tib. བཀྲ་དབྱངས]. I told her that the leader of the labor camp said that they needed a certificate. "You are aware of my wife sickness, please issue a certificate." There was a person called Chögyal la [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ལགས] in the Neighborhood Committee who was writing Chinese. The Director told him to write the certificate. He wrote it and told me that he had written it well. He wrote, "His wife is very seriously sick, so we suggest that her husband be granted leave for the time being." He said, "I wrote for the time being in the certificate." He was a good person. When I went back and showed the certificate to Chung La, she was very agitated and said, "Heng! How dare they write for the time being." She said, "You can't stay for the time being. You can stay home for a week." Another example was that she caused the death of a baby. There was a lay official called Pema Lodrö [Tib. པད་མ་ཨོལོ་གྲོས]. His estate name was Khargya Gyatso [Tib. མཁར་ཁ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]. His wife was pregnant though she was quite old. When she was about to give birth to the child, Pema Lodrö was asking for leave every night to care for her. The birth of the child was delayed a long time, probably about a month. One evening, Chung la, the cadre, scolded Pema Lodrö very severely in the courtyard. "You are not allowed to go home tonight. I never heard that the baby stays in the womb for ten months. I am a woman also." She stopped him from going home. On that very night, she gave birth to the child and the baby died because nobody was helping her. So at that time, people were saying that Chung La killed the baby. She granted him about one month of leave to go home every night and on the night when the baby was born, she stopped him and the baby died. Later, we heard that Chung La got bone cancer, so we were saying that that was the Karmic consequence that she had to repay and we were saying that it served her right. Just after she got bone cancer, her husband divorced her. She was there until 1979 when I was sent to China to be a teacher. When I was sent to China, she was very unhappy, but she couldn't stop me because the policy had a great change. In that year, all the prisoners in 1959 were to be released and they removed the label of all the labor camp members. We were sent to be teachers in China. So I was about to fly from Lhasa. Before my departure, I had to go to the labor camp to do something. At that moment, Chung la was with some other cadres. She told the other cadres, "Listen! ... is going to travel by airplane!" in a very sarcastic manner. Actually, what was the use of being so surprised to travel by airplane? She might have been thinking that a labor camp member traveling by plane was something impossible. She couldn't change the policy of married labor camp members going home on the weekend. But, sometimes she used to stop people in our category from going home. That was probably in 1978, the policy became better and they made the wage scale for the labor camp members. And they gave titles [Ch. zhi cheng] for the skills in staff to the labor camp members, and a salary was paid according to the title, like the real workers. I was paid 46 yuan per month according to the title in cloth cutting.   

**Q:**  After that did your wife's livelihood improved?   

**A:**  Yes, it was improving a little bit because I got the salary. Sometimes she was working and sometimes she had to take leave. The best thing was that my wife's younger brother Lhundrup Dorje [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ] was released in 1974. The prisoners who were arrested by the Army were given back their watches. He sold his watch and repaid my loans to the labor camp members, which came to a total of 300 yuan.   

**Q:**  When did he repay the loans?   

**A:**  That was in 1973. He got about 600 yuan for the watch and he repaid the loans.   

**Q:**  When you were in the labor camp, were you allowed to wear the watch?   

**A:**  Yes, there were people buying new watches and riding bicycles. After that, I was doing the same work and our livelihood became better. In 1979, I was sent to be a teacher in China.   

**Q:**  How did that happened?   

**A:**  In 1979, we knew a little bit about the policy becoming better and we heard that they would choose some of the labor camp members to become teachers. But, we were [not] sure about that.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, I had learned Chinese in the prison. When I was in the labor camp, I translated some of the opinions of the labor camp members. One morning, the prison leader called us to his office. He was called Ying Sozhang, the jailor. He was infamous for being a very cruel man. He was the jailor of the prison in Surkhang's house before 1959. He was infamous for torturing the prisoners. He was very frightening. At that time, four of us were called to his office. There was the lay official Lobsang Targye Shewo [Tib. blo bzang dar thyas zhe bo]. He was a kalön in Dharamsala and now he is an ex-kalön. The late Chime Gyalpo Chabtsom [Tib. འཆི་མེད་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཆབ་ཚོམ] who was a fourth rank lay official, the fifth rank lay official Dorje Gyalpo Menri [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་པོ་སྨན་རི], and me.   

**Q:**  What did you think at that time?   

**A:**  In the beginning, we didn't know for sure, though we heard something about that. Usually, the Chinese leader Ying Sozhang would look at us angrily and he never, ever told us to sit down. That day, he was peaceful and told us to sit down. That was a surprise. I thought that something good was going to happen, and there was a fat Tibetan cadre with a dark complexion. We were told to sit on the sofa.   

**A:**  Then the Chinese leader said, "Today, we are going give you guys an opportunity to serve the people." At that moment, I thought it was definitely a good thing. Then he said, "The teacher Chögyal La from the Tibetan Institute of the Minority Nationality [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] in Xian Yang has come here and they need Tibetan teachers in the Institute."   

**Q:**  Who was Chögyal La?   

**A:**  He was one of the teachers in the Xiangyang Institute and he was an important person. I heard that nowadays, he is in the Translation Bureau [Tib. ཕ༹ན་ཡི་ཇུ] in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  I know him.   

**A:**  He used a very tactful method at that time. Before that, they sent other teachers to Tibet to find Tibetan teachers, but they didn't get any teachers. Chögyal La thought of finding teachers in the labor camp because the policy had changed. And then Chögyal La was paying respect to us by folding his hands and speaking with honorific words. "The reason for calling you teachers here is that we badly need Tibetan teachers in our institute. We got the opportunity because the policy has become more lenient. We request for you to come to Xiangyang to be teachers. We know all about you, so we are not going to give you any kind of exam. But, please just write one page of letters. You can write whatever you'd like to write."   

**Q:**  All of you were kudrak, right?   

**A:**  Yes, three lay officials and one tsidrung. The teacher said he reported to the leader of the prison and we got permission [to go]. "Please tell us whatever problems you have. We will try and solve them." The four of us were sitting side by side and Chabtshom was sitting next to me. They didn't dare say anything. I thought they had made the decision to hire us. So if I didn't tell [ask] them about the salary, that might not have been good. Then I told Chögyal La, "We Tibetans have a proverb; 'One should not feel ashamed when making an agreement [Tib. ཁ་ཆད་བྱེད་དུས་ངོ་ཚ་མེད].' We were sucking the blood and sweat of the people and we committed a serious crime. We are very glad and we are grateful to the government for giving us the opportunity to serve the people and to become teachers. But, when you tell us to talk about the problems, I think we should say the problems first. I have a sick wife and a small child. I request for you to give me a salary that I can [use to] support the two of them." Chabtshom was poking me with his elbow, implying [that I should] not talk about that. When we went back, all of them were scolding me saying, "That was ridiculous! You let a good opportunity slip by like the proverb; 'Good luck on the edge of the mouth, pushed out by the tongue [Tib. གྲོག་ཁ་ལ་ཡོད་པ་ལྕེས་ཕུད].' You are going to push the good luck out." I told them "There is nothing to push out, you can watch what happens in the future. They have already confirmed that we are teachers. What else is there to push out? You just keep quiet. You will also get something along with me." They said, "That was ridiculous to talk about the salary now." I said, "If we don't tell them now, when shall we tell them?"   

**Q:**  At that time, you were allowed to go with your family, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When I said that, Chögyal La made the note and said that he would try to solve the problem.   

**Q:**  You and Chögyal La were all talking in Tibetan, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he didn't translate it to Ying Sozhang. Later, they informed us the date of the flight. At that time, we didn't have good clothes to wear. So I told Chögyal La to borrow some money for making some clothes. I borrowed 100 yuan. I didn't dare borrow more than that. When we came out of the labor camp, they gave us a cotton suit from the tailoring shop and we bought some clothes. At that time, Chögyal La told us "You don't need to worry about the salary. It was good that you said your opinion. We have solved the problem." But he didn't say the amount. Then we were taken to Xiangyang by plane.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was probably in 11th or 12th [month] in 1979. We started teaching in 1980. We flew to Chengdu and from Chengdu, we had to travel for a long time by train. We had to go through over 100 tunnels.   

**Q:**  That was the first time you went to inland China, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, you kind of had freedom, right?   

**A:**  Yes, since we became cadres.   

**Q:**  Did you get a residence card?   

**A:**  We didn't need to do anything. They did all the procedures. I borrowed 100 yuan from Lhasa and bought something from Lhasa. We heard that the livelihood in Xiangyang was poor, and I heard that the cooking oil was not good. In Chengdu, there were good oils. So we bought a plastic container full of cooking oil. We had to buy food on the train. So my money ran out completely and I didn't even have 5 fen. When we arrived at Xiangyang, it was arranged for us to stay in the guesthouse and we didn't need to pay for food. There was an old woman in charge of the guesthouse. She said, "Come take a bath, it is 5 fen." I said, "I am tired so I am [not] going to take a bath," though I had to take a bath because we traveled on the train for a long time. But, if I told her that I didn't have 5 fen, it would have been a little bit shameful because we were supposed to be cadres. It was not convenient to tell them that we needed money just after we arrived there. After 3-4 days, I told Chögyal La that I needed to borrow some money to buy necessities. He said, "I forgot to tell you. Go to the accountant and get the money." I went to the accountant office and the accountant was a fat woman. When I was standing there, I saw a document with a big red seal on it and our names were written on it. I saw the number 90 near the names. At that time, 90 yuan was a very high salary in China. That was the salary for the department chairperson. Then she gave me 90 yuan and told me to sign my name. I didn't believe that was the salary. I was wondering if I had borrowed money, if they might have loaned me 100 or 50 yuan. Why did she give me 90 yuan? In those days, the new teachers in Xiangyang were getting about 45-46 yuan. Chögyal La was also getting much less than us. Then I told Chögyal La that when I went to get the money, the accountant gave me 90 yuan. He said, "That is the salary. I forgot to tell you. I had a lot of trouble in Lhasa regarding your salary. It was good that you told your opinion. If you hadn't told your opinion, we were planning to pay you the same salary as the other teachers. If you had to take that salary, it would have been a little more than 40 yuan. That would have been difficult to support your wife and child with. Then we went to the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས] and confirmed your salary according to your title in the old society, like the other people in the Political Consultative Conference. So the fourth rank had 90 yuan, the fifth rank had 85 yuan and the ordinary lay officials had 80 yuan." I was among the fourth rank and I got 90 yuan. At that time, our neighbors were asking me "How much do you deposit in the bank a month?" Actually, we didn't have money to deposit because we had to buy meat, eggs and milk powder, and many other foodstuffs. When I told them that the money ran out at the end of the month, they asked, "What are you eating?"   

**Q:**  At that time, you were cooking for yourself, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we had two rooms and the kitchen. We were real cadres. In Xiangyang when we had to teach the classes, my Tibetan was not so good because I just learned in the prison. Out of the four people, my Tibetan standard was lower. But, they didn't know Chinese. The leader told us that we could choose whatever classes we wanted to teach. Then I asked the leader, "Can I teach Tibetan to the Chinese students?" When they taught Tibetan to the Chinese students, the teacher had to write all the new words both in Tibetan and Chinese on the blackboard and the teacher had to explain the lesson in Chinese. So I hoped to improve my Chinese that I learned in the prison. When I asked them if I could teach Tibetan to the Chinese students, they said, "That is what we need badly. There are 34 Chinese students including one girl who is a mix-breed of Chinese and Tibetan. The Tibetan teacher of that class is younger than the students. So the students are looking down on him saying "We don't want a teacher who is younger than us." They said they wanted an elder teacher. So you will be the right person for that." Then I started teaching them Sakya Legshey [Tib. ས་སྐྱ་ལེགས་བཤད] and other lessons. On the first day, I explained to them that "I am your Tibetan teacher. So I can guarantee that I will not make any mistake when teaching Tibetan. But, in order to serve for your study [for your benefit], I am going to use my Chinese, though my Chinese is not good. And I am going to write all the new words in Tibetan and Chinese, and I will speak Chinese and explain the lessons, though my spoken Chinese is not good. I learned my Chinese in the prison. I never learned in the school. So please teach me and correct the mistakes that I would make when I use my Chinese." The students were good. They corrected whatever mistake I made in using my Chinese. I taught for about two years.   

**Q:**  How many teachers were there altogether?   

**A:**  There were probably more than 50-60 teachers. There were about 15-16 teachers in our department. At that time, our department was the Language Department [Tib. སྐད་ཡིག་སྡེ་ཚན] and there were many [other] departments. After that, the other teachers who came from Tibet knew that we got a high salary and they told me I had done wonderfully at that time. I told them "If I hadn't asked them about the salary, we would have gotten about 40 yuan. How could you manage your livelihood [with that]?" At that time, we had all the financial rights like the cadres, but we didn't need to attend the meetings of the cadres. We were called the six old misters. From the Political Consultative Conference, two tsidrung were sent with us; Ngawang Tsemphel Jangra [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཚེ་དཔལ་ལྕང་ར] and Lobsang Tenzin Thönsur [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་འཛིན་ཐོན་ཟུར].   

**Q:**  Was that because you were kudrak?   

**A:**  No, that was because we were in the category of the members of the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་གྲོགས]. I was about 42 years old but they were calling us the six old misters. At that time, my wife was sick because it was very hot in the summer and we didn't have air conditioning. During the summertime, there were no classes, but the heat was terrible. At that time, my wife got some kind of liquid tumor called Echinococcosis (Hydatid Disease) [Ch. bao nang chong] on her liver. She had to be hospitalized in a very big army hospital in Sian. Though the medical fee was very high, we didn't need to pay the fees. When I was taking care of her in the hospital, my salary was paid. She had to have a 1,000 cc blood transfusion. In the beginning, the doctors might have been thinking that I had to pay the fee. They were asking me, "Do you want to have the blood transfusion?" I was always telling them "Please transfuse the blood," when they asked me several times. Later, the doctors told me, "You were always telling us to transfuse the blood. That was because you didn't need to pay for that." She had to stay in the hospital for about four months. During that time, I was with her taking care of her. So I couldn't teach the class. When I told the leaders of the department that it took a long time in the hospital and I couldn't teach the class. They told me "Never mind. If you didn't know Chinese, we would have to tell another teacher to leave their class and go be the interpreter. You have been doing the interpreter [work] and helping your wife. So we have to thank you for that." After we got the high salary, I tried to get transferred to Lhasa because my wife got sick. But the director of the department refused my request. So I asked for a vacation to Lhasa. Then I didn't go back and reported to the Education Bureau [Tib. སློབ་གསོ་ཏིང] to get me transferred. The leader, Tharchin La [Tib. མཐར་ཕྱིན་ལགས], was from Ba [Tib. འབའ]. I told him my problem and requested a transfer to Lhasa and [to be] transferred to the Teaching Material Bureau [Ch. jiao cai chu] in Lhasa. I was in the section where we were translating Chinese textbooks on physics, chemistry, and math from Chinese into Tibetan. At that time, they made the real salary scales of the cadres for us and they confirmed the rank of the cadre according to the amount that we were getting in China. Then my salary scale became the 17th. That was very high. We got about 260 yuan in Lhasa and we became real cadres. In the beginning, they gave me a kind of test for the translation. The leader was called Kunga la [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ]. He said, "We don't need that, but I think we should just give you a test for the translation." He gave me two pages of a Chinese article and he wanted me to translate it. He said, "There is no problem even if it takes 1-2 weeks to translate it." He thought I might not have been able to translate it quickly. I translated it on that day and gave it to him the next day. He said "Oh! Did you translate it so fast?" "There was not much to translate. Please check if it is okay or not." He read it and told me "You have translated it very well." Then he said, "Now you are confirmed as our cadres. Please come to Norbulinga." Until 1985, I was working as a cadre in that office. I was among the people getting the highest salary in our office. The work was translation and it was much better than teaching classes. When I was teaching, I had to take some responsibilities and worried about whether the students could pass the exams or not. It was very difficult to give the exam marks. Especially [because] the girl students were very jealous of each other and some students were not behaving well. During that period, I could improve my Chinese spoken language.   

