# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0430.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsewang Namgyal Shelling was born in Lhasa to a well known aristocratic family and became a government official in 1954. In this interview, he discussed his youth in Lhasa and his family's background. He also talks about how he began attending school in Lhasa at age seven, but at eleven was sent to Kalimpong in India where he attended a number of private English schools. After his mother's death, he argued with his brother over household ownership and talks about that dispute. He discusses how he returned from school in India to Lhasa and then how he became a government official. He also discusses how he felt when the Chinese first came and how they tried to attract the Tibetan youth by setting up the Youth League.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0430_01/H_0430_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Would you start [by] telling me about what you remember when you were younger? When were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in 1938 in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  In what animal were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in the Earth Tiger Year.   

**Q:**  What do you first remember about growing up in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I don't remember much about the things that happened after I was born in Lhasa. The only thing I remember was that when I was three years old, my father died. I just remember a little bit before his death.   

**Q:**  Was your father a government official?   

**A:**  Yes, when he died, he was one of the heads of the Revenue Bureau [Tib. ཙིཀང], he was a Tsipön. Before that, he went to Kham as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment. He stayed in Kham for eight years. He was 43 years old when he died. When I was 5-6 years old, I remember that I was brought to Yamdrog [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག] Nangkartse [Tib. སྣག་དཀར་རྩེ] where there was one of our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> (estates) called the Khalung [Tib. ཁ་ལུང]. I remember that I stayed there for a couple of years. In 1945, when I was probably seven years old, the Tibetan government established an English school in the Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག]. That was probably the first school established in Lhasa. There used to be a school in Gyantse before that. I went to that school for a couple of months. The teacher was an Englishman. He was a very good teacher.   

**Q:**  How many students were there?   

**A:**  There were about 60-70 students.   

**Q:**  Were all of the students <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>?   

**A:**  No, they weren't. There were probably no children from the ordinary <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>, but there were children from the traders and different people in Lhasa. The school was arranged by the Tibetan government. On the first day when the school started, the students were called to the Revenue Bureau. At that time, one of the heads of the Revenue Bureau was Shakabpa. He told us that we had to go to the English school. The school was very good and lunch was served at the school. They were teaching English very nicely and the children were very glad.   

**Q:**  Did you sleep in the school?   

**A:**  No, we would come back home at night.   

**Q:**  What kind of classes were there?   

**A:**  They started teaching with the alphabet, but we had only 5-6 months of classes. I remember that they kept a lot of toys in a room. We could see the toys from the window and we were told that the toys would be given to the students if they could high pass the exams. But they didn't get the time to give us the toys.   

**Q:**  At that time, did they teach English exclusively or were they also teaching Tibetan?   

**A:**  There wasn't much Tibetan. The main subject was English. They were probably teaching a little bit of Tibetan. There was only one main teacher. In the beginning, they didn't have to make different classes because all of the students were learning the alphabet.   

**Q:**  Were all the students young or no?   

**A:**  Most of them were young. They were probably under the age 12-13.   

**Q:**  Were there girls in the school?   

**A:**  I don't remember [if] there were girls. After about six months, the people in Lhasa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> a song with the wording "In the pure sanctuary of Lhasa, there is an impure English school. The teacher has a big nose and students are the monks' wives [Tib. ལྷ་ས་དག་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས་མ་དག་དབྱིན་ཇིའི་སློབ་གྲྭ། དགེ་རྒན་སྣ་ཆེན་ཡོག་རྡོག, དགེ་ཕྲུག་གྲྭ་པའི་སྐྱེ་དམན]." The song was probably composed by the people staying behind. There were some students who were 12-13 years old. So they were saying that those students were the homosexual partners of the monks. After that, we heard a rumor saying the monks of Sera Monastery were coming to destroy the school. So the school was closed. Actually, they didn't come to destroy the school.   

**Q:**  Were you students afraid when you went home that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> would come to catch you?   

**A:**  At that time, we had my babysitter Maimai [Tib. མ་མ] with us. She took us to the school back and forth.   

**Q:**  Were you afraid?   

**A:**  No, we were very happy in that school because they didn't beat the students up. In those days, the students were beaten in the Tibetan schools.   

**Q:**  Before that, did you study Tibetan?   

**A:**  I never learned Tibetan before that. I started learning at the age of eight. After that, when I was eight, I was sent to a Tibetan School.   

**Q:**  To which school did you study [were you sent to study]?   

**A:**  I was sent to Pelgong [Tib. སྤེལ་གོང] School. The teacher of the school was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Phala. Later, he died in the Gansu prison. That was a private school. At that time, we had to go to the private school in the morning and come back home in the evening. I studied Tibetan for three years.   

**Q:**  How many students were there in that school?   

**A:**  There were probably over a hundred students.   

**Q:**  Was that bigger than the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་རོང་ཤག] Name of a private school in Lhasa (and the house in which is was located).">Nyarongsha</a>?   

**A:**  They were almost the same in the beginning. Later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་རོང་ཤག] Name of a private school in Lhasa (and the house in which is was located).">Nyarongsha</a> probably became a little bit bigger. I learned Tibetan handwriting for three years and I could just write the Tsugtung, the third smaller letter on the wooden board. I didn't know any spelling or grammar. I was not promoted to write on paper. When I was 11 years old, I was sent to India to the English school.   

**Q:**  Who was in charge of the household then?   

**A:**  My mother was the main in-charge. My father died. My mother died when I was 15 years old. And there was also my elder brother who was Chunden La's [Tib. ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས] father. He was not taking responsibility for the household. He had already separated from our household. He was engaged in religious practice in Tö [Tib. སྟོད]. When he was 27, he left our home and went to practice religion. He had a son and a daughter. The daughter was Chunden La and the son was called Thöndrub Phuntso La. I used to call him brother because he was two years older than me. Actually, I am his uncle. At that time, my late mother and two sons were in the family.   

**Q:**  Were there girls in that school?   

**A:**  Yes, there were girls too.   

**Q:**  Were all of them daughters of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>?   

**A:**  No, there were also children of the ordinary misers. And there were also servants of some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མངའ་བདག; ch. 领主] Feudal lord, manorial estate holders, serf-owners.">ngadag</a> like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] studying in the school. They were their servants, but they let them study for the purpose of making them become their clerks and so on. There were also children of the workers and tailors. But, according to the custom then, they were not leaving girls in school until their graduation. In those days, people were saying that girls didn't need to be well-educated. That it would be alright if they could just write letters.   

**Q:**  How did they send you to India?   

**A:**  At that time, our household and the [household] were getting along well.   

**Q:**  Where was your mother from?   

**A:**  She was from Gangdö Khangpa Nubma [Tib. གངས་སྟོད་ཁང་པ་ནུབ་མ] located on the east side near Lhasa. In those days, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> had a house in Kalimpong and their condition was very good. So my mother asked <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Yamphel La to take care of my brother and me and to take us to India. At that time, Panda Yamphel La told my mother that it would be better to send the children to the English school. Otherwise, we would get spoiled.   

**Q:**  Why did he say that the children would be spoiled if they stayed in Lhasa?   

**A:**  He meant to say that if the children didn't know English they would suffer a loss in the future. At that time, their way of thinking was good and my mother was also broadminded. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> was making relations with foreign countries. So they knew that we would need English. In terms of the economic condition, our condition was not that good. In those days, the people who were sending their children to India were all very big kudraks like Ngabö, Surkhang, and Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག]. At that time, Yamphel La told my mother, "Don't teach your children only Tibetan. You should teach them English." At that moment, she was very worried about the children because she had to send us such a far distance. But, she made up her mind and sent us to India. In 1948, my brother and I were sent to India.   

**Q:**  Your brother was the elder brother of Chunden La, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was one year older than Chunden La. At that time, there were two sons of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>; Samdru Norbu [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ནོར་བུ] and his younger brother, Sambo Rinpoche, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Wangmo La [Tib. དབང་མོ་ལགས], Yuthok Jigme la's [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས] wife. All of us were taking [going] to India together.   

**Q:**  In which school did you go?   

**Q:**  In the first year, we were sent to Darjeeling. After we arrived in Kalimpong, we had tuition for about a month before the time to be enrolled in the school. An Indian teacher taught us the English alphabet, though we knew a little bit before that. Then we were enrolled in the primary school in North Point St. Joseph's College in Darjeeling. At that time, there was Preparatory A and Preparatory B. When I was 11 years old, in 1948, I started learning English and there were many Tibetan students. Before one year or so, the Dewashung had sent 10 students to that school. Five of them were for becoming <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and five of them were for becoming lay officials. At that time, the government had told us that we could go to India to study, but at that point, my mother didn't dare send us to India, saying that she didn't want to send the children such a far distance. If she had sent us at that time, the government was paying the expenses. The 10 government students were in the same school and there were many other private students, like two sons of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, two sons of Ngabö, J.T Surkhang, P.G Rongdrag, Yuthok Dündül la [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་ལགས] and Sicho la. At that time, Yuthok Jigme La was on the football team of bigger boys. He was probably in the fifth-sixth grade. At that time, there were about 20 Tibetan students. I studied there for one year. That school was very strict with discipline and they were teaching English very well. But the teacher was an Indian who taught us English at that time. Therefore, most of the Tibetan students were speaking English with an Indian accent.   

**Q:**  Were you wearing a school uniform?   

**A:**  Yes, we were.   

**Q:**  Did you have to buy it by yourself?   

**A:**  Yes, the uniform was made from blue serge and they had to put the patch of the school on it.   

**Q:**  In the school, were the Tibetan students allowed to speak Tibetan?   

**A:**  No, we were not allowed to speak Tibetan. Not only the Tibetans in that school, there were students from many countries. All of us were not allowed to speak our native language. They told us that the school was for teaching English. So, "You are not allowed to speak your native language." In case [they were caught]—the teacher knew that the Tibetan students were speaking—they would fine [them] one Indian rupee. In those days, one rupee was very valuable.   

**Q:**  What did you do because at that time you couldn't [speak] English fluently?   

**A:**  We couldn't speak English fluently, but we had to no choice but to speak English in the school. In six months, we could speak the English that we need in the school.   

**Q:**  When you went out of the school to the market, didn't you speak Tibetan?   

**A:**  We were not allowed to go out to the market. But we were speaking a little bit of Tibetan surreptitiously in the school like in the bathroom. At that time, the school gave the students three different colors of cards; the yellow, the blue and the pink card every week. That was for checking the discipline of the students. If you got the pink card, that was the best. They would give you a few sweets as an award. When you got the blue card, there was no award and no punishment. When you got the yellow card, they would beat you with a cane on your rear end twice. When the teacher would give the yellow card, they would say "Come to my bed." I got the yellow card only once because I was [not] adhering well to the discipline. The mischievous boys would get the yellow card many times. Once I fought with an English boy and I hit him a little bit, and he was probably bleeding a little bit. He reported [this to] the teacher and I got the yellow card once. On that day, I was extremely scared, wondering what would they do to me. On that night, the boys who got the yellow card had to go to the teacher's bedroom wearing their bedclothes. On that night, there were 5-6 students who got the yellow card and they were standing in line and I was at the end. At that moment, I could hear the sound "huyug huyug" of hitting the cane and the boy was crying. When I went inside, the teacher hit me twice which hurt me very much. After that, I didn't get any yellow cards. The school was very good, but most of the Tibetan students didn't stay there. That was because we were spoiled in Tibet with eating food. At that time, the school was giving brown bread and we didn't want to eat that bread because it looked like [it was] black. The children said that the discipline was strict and the food was not food. So we didn't want to stay there anymore. Most of the Tibetan students went to Kalimpong and all the small boys were sent to St. Joseph's Convent in the girl's school. At that time, the boys under the age of 11-12 were admitted to the girl's school. At that time, Chunden la and I were in the same school. In the St. Joseph's school, I could finish Preparatory A and Preparatory B in one year. So actually, I had to go to the first class in the Convent. I was in the first class for just a week when the teacher promoted [me] to the second class. The teacher told me that the first class was too easy for me. At that point, I came to know that the school in Darjeeling was really good. In the Convent school, the teacher was an old English lady. She was very kind to the students and the food in the school was also good. In that school, I could study very well. In the second class, whenever I took an examination, I never fell below second place. In my third year, we were not allowed to stay in the Convent anymore. So I went to the St. Augustine school in Kalimpong, which was located just above the Convent. At that time, in Kalimpong, the school was called the Father's School. That was my final year in India. In that year, I was in the third class and I could study very well and I made a great improvement. The teachers told me that they were to give me the promotion to the fifth class the next year.   

**Q:**  What were they teaching in the school?   

**A:**  They were teaching math, science, geography, and there was also a little bit of history.   

**Q:**  Who was there in that school? I mean the Tibetan students?   

**A:**  At that time, my brother and I were there. I don't remember whether most of the Tibetan students were in the Father's school or not. In the Convent, there was the son of Surkhang, the sons of Ngabö, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Wangmo La, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Jetsun Pema La [Tib. རྗེ་བཙུན་པད་མ་ལགས] and Semo Khando La [Tib. སྲས་མོ་མཁའ་འགྲོ་ལགས]. But, I don't remember whether the other boys like J.T. Surkhang were in the St. Augustine school or not. That was in 1950 and I was 13 years old. That year, my late mother came to India. At that time, probably, the Chinese had arrived in Kham and it was said that they were coming up to Lhasa. When the Chinese arrived in Kham, the people in Tibet were very scared. My late mother was very knowledgeable, smart and capable. Her writing was also very good and she knew all about the international situation. As soon as she heard that the Chinese were coming to Tibet, she took all of the valuable things and fled to India. She brought a full truck of things when she came to Kalimpong. The things were loaded on animals from Lhasa. If she had stayed there at that time, it would have been the right thing to do.   

**Q:**  Where did you keep those things?   

**A:**  At that time, we were living with the Pandatsangs in their house. It was the time when the Dalai Lama was in Yadong. My mother decided to leave us in India because we were going to be promoted to the fifth class as day scholars as the expenses would be less. While I was in India in the school, my babysitter also stayed in India. She was renting a room in the town wherever I was studying. She would bring us whatever food and treats we wanted to eat surreptitiously in the school. I am very grateful to my babysitter. Her name was Phurbu.   

**Q:**  At that time, how much [were your] expenses that you had to spend for the school?   

**A:**  It was just 160-70 Rs per month for the boarding school. Although the money was very valuable at that time, but in terms of our economic condition in Tibet, it was not a big amount for us.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> was that?   

**A:**  In those days, it was 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> for 1 rupee. When we were in the St. Augustine school, the fee for boarding per year was about a little less than 2,000 Rs. At that time, we heard that the Dalai Lama was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and that he might come to India. They were probably talking about the 17-Point Agreement, but we didn't know about it in detail. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> did some preparation thinking that the Dalai Lama might stay at Pandatsang's house. Later, we didn't know about the Agreement in detail, but we heard that the Dalai Lama had decided to go back to Lhasa. Therefore, all of us came back to Tibet. At that point, my late mother told us that it would be useless to stay in India if the Dalai Lama was going back to Lhasa, and [so] we took back the things that we had brought to India.   

**Q:**  At that point, what did you think?   

**A:**  I was very disappointed because my brother and I wanted very much to stay in India. The teachers were treating us very nicely. Whenever an examination was taken, the two of us could always get the first or the second [get the top or second-best score]. And that time, the two of us were called the big...and the small... The two of us loved each other very much as relatives, but we had a competition with studying. The two of us were best in the class and the teacher was always praising us.   

**Q:**  Were those teachers Catholics wearing black robes?   

**A:**  Yes, they were Catholics and some of them were from Canada. They were called Fathers. There was a Chinese Father called Lee who didn't know a single [word in the] Chinese language. He was born in India. He was the Reactor at that time. There were Canadian Fathers. The teachers were very good and they were teaching us in a very good way. The discipline was not strict and the food was good at that school.   

**Q:**  Did you tell your mother that you wanted to stay in India?   

**A:**  Yes, we told her "Please let us stay in India. The teachers are saying that we will get promoted to the fifth class in the next year." At that time, my elder brother Sonam Tobgye La, the father of Chunden La, came to Kalimpong from Tö. We spent the Tibetan New Year in Kalimpong together. My late mother hadn't seen my elder brother for a long time since he left home for practicing religion. She was extremely glad to see him in Kalimpong. After that, my mother and my elder brother went back to Tibet and the two of us were left in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  At that time, was the Dalai Lama was still in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, but he had already decided to go back to Lhasa. We were staying in Kalimpong happily, but when my mother and my brother arrived at Rinchengang [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་སྒང] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, which was located just below the Nathula [Tib. སྣ་སྟོད་ལ] mountain pass, my mother had a bad dream. Therefore, she said, "I am not going to leave my children in India." And she sent for servants and horses and mules to take us back to Tibet, and they were waiting at Rinchengang. At that time, the two of us were very disappointed, but the servants told me about the bad dream that my mother had and she said, "I may not meet my children again. The two of you should come back even if you have to leave your studies." She was right. If we hadn't come back at that time, we wouldn't have seen her before her death. It was really a prophecy. When we told the teachers about that, they said that it was a disaster. But we told them that we didn't have any choice but to go back. After that, we came back very disappointed.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the students thinking about the Chinese coming to Tibet?   

**A:**  We didn't have any idea about what the Chinese were going to do. At that point, the Chinese actually hadn't come to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were you worried about if the Chinese would come, they might do this and that?   

**A:**  At that time, we saw in the newspaper [things] about Mao and the Communists. But us kids didn't have any idea about that. When we arrived at Rinchengang, my late mother and my late brother were there. Then my mother told me that we should go back to Lhasa. At that point, being kids, we had to obey her instructions. On the way, when we were riding horses on the plane called Chumbithang [Tib. ཆུ་འབི་ཐང] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, in the distance one person was yelling "Dismount from your horses." We couldn't see them clearly at that distance. Later, we came to know that was Phala Drönyerchemmo of the Dalai Lama. When we dismounted from our horses, we saw that the Dalai Lama was running, like playing, and the chief attendant in charge of serving food [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], the chief attendant the in charge of the robes [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], the chief attendant in charge of religion and offerings [Tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ]—all of them were old and they were running after the Dalai Lama while panting. At that time, the Dalai Lama was about 15 years old. We were watching them from behind our horses. At that time, the Dalai Lama was wearing a Tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ] made from yellow brocade.   

**Q:**  Were they riding horses?   

**A:**  They were walking and the Dalai Lama was running very fast, and his personal attendants had to run when the Dalai Lama was running. After that, we arrived in Lhasa. That was at the beginning of 1951. At that time, the 17-Point Agreement was probably signed.   

**Q:**  We were talking about how you were going to the school and coming back to Lhasa. Did you think of anything else that you might want to say about your school period?   

**A:**  When I was in the St Joseph's Convent in Kalimpong, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Wangmo La was with me. When we were taking the exams in the second class, there was an Anglo-Indian girl. She was almost the same age as me. She was pretty and very proud. In that class, either she got first place or I'd get first place in the exams. The two of us had a serious competition. She always looked down on the Tibetan students and she was showing an appearance of disgust [Tib. སྐྱུག་བྲོ་སྣང] towards the Tibetans. When she would see the Tibetans, she used to sniff like this, as if smelling an odor. She was very good at her studies. At that time, I was kind of mischievous [Tib. སྤྱོད་པ་ངན་པོ]. One day I thought of disgracing [Tib. དམའ་ཕབ] her because she was looking down on the Tibetans. Once she was carrying a small stool on her head and coming over. At that point, I was kicking a ball along and when I came near her, I kissed her strongly. That was just for disgracing her, I was a kid and I didn't have any kind of sexual intention. I could kiss her with the sound "chop"—but she didn't hit me with the stool. She should have hit the stool on my head because she was carrying it on her head. She just said, "Tis," and she was showing an appearance of extreme disgust. Just after that, she reported the matter to the Mother, the teacher. At that time, I was quite small and thin, though I was 12 years old. At lunchtime, the Mother made me stand up and criticized me in front of all the students. She said, "Don't you feel ashamed to do that, even [though] you are so young?" While she was scolding me, the Mother burst into laughter and she turned her face towards the wall, and I didn't get scolded seriously. After that, she never looked down on the Tibetans. When she would meet the Tibetan boys, she would bend her head down and go away. In terms of study, I couldn't cope [compete] with her, but I was also bragging about my studies. At that time, Pandatsang was like our sponsor and Wangmo La was treating me very kindly. There was an exam taken every six months. At that moment, the students were studying very hard and some of them would become thin. I was also aggressive and thinking that the Anglo-Indian girl might get first. Once I bragged and told Wangmo La that in this six months exam I would never fall from second place, even [if] I didn't get first place. Wangmo La said, "Are you sure of that? Do you have the confidence of getting that?" I told her, "Yes, I do." Then she said, "Let's bet," and she agreed to give me her brand new green woolen sweater which was very good quality if I got first or second place. That was a girl's sweater, but it didn't make any difference for small kids. I didn't have anything to give her but if I didn't get second, she said that she would not give me the sweater. After that, I studied very hard and when the exam was given, I saw the vision of the sweater in my eyes and I was also aggressive. After the exam, all the students were gathered in the hall when they announced the results of the exam and they were giving awards like books and other things to the first and the second places. After they read the names of the first class, when the teacher was saying the second class, my body was trembling. When the teacher said first place, I couldn't see clearly with my eyes. The Anglo-Indian girl was first. Then she tossed her hair with pride and she went up to get the award. If I didn't get second, that would have been a great loss. Then the teacher said the second. At that point, my body was trembling and I heard my name...I was so glad, and I got the award from the school and also the sweater from Wangmo La. At that time, though I was a kid, I had a great loyalty towards the Tibetans. When people looked down on the Tibetans, I didn't like it because the Tibetan students were studying well.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you ever think that your land would be lost?   

**A:**  I didn't think in that way. We saw the newspaper that the Communists had risen up, but we didn't know what the Chinese would do if they came.   

**Q:**  Did you read the newspapers?   

**A:**  I could read a little bit but we didn't have much time. We were just looking at those photos of Chairman Mao. I didn't have any political ideology in those days. When I was a kid, I was kind of engrossed in my studies. I had a good memory and I was also diligent. So I could improve my studying. After that, I came back to Lhasa. At that time, I was 14 years old. I forgot to tell you something. My mother's father was one of the sons of Horkhang and we had some maternal relatives among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, like Ngabö. At that time, there were two sons in our family. My mother was thinking that in future, it would not be certain whether the two sons would get along well in one household. So she told me that I should learn something beneficial, and she made me learn Tibetan medicine. Probably, I was kind of kind-hearted in my childhood. So my mother told me, "You have a kind-hearted nature. How do you feel about learning medicine?" I told her that would be alright with me. At that time, the Director of Mentsigang, the Tibetan Medical and Astrological Institute, was Khenrab Norbu [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ་ནོར་བུ]. He had a good relationship with my late mother. She requested him to teach me Tibetan medicine, and I was sent to Mentsigang and I learned Tibetan medicine and Tibetan grammar until she passed away. I didn't get to study in Mentsigang for even a year.   

**Q:**  What kind of organization was the Mentsigang?   

**A:**  Mentsigang was established by the Dewashung. The students were recruited from all the monasteries in Tibet. That had been very useful. There were many sent to many remote places where there were no doctors in the past. Generally speaking, there weren't any places in Tibet where there were no monasteries. So the students were recruited from all the monasteries. The food for the students was supplied by the government and they were sent to their own monasteries after graduation. They were not allowed to go to other places. There were also students recruited from the regiments. By the grace of Director Khenrab Norbu, there were Tibetan doctors spread all over Tibet. He himself graduated from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a> [Tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི]. Many students graduated from that school.   

**Q:**  How did they teach in the class?   

**A:**  At that time, they divided the time for teaching Tibetan and teaching medicine. At that time, the students had to learn by heart the volumes of Tibetan medicine. I could learn by heart the front and the back side of one big page a day and I could learn by heart about half of the four volumes. They would give the explanations after you learned by heart all four volumes.   

**Q:**  How did they teach Tibetan?   

**A:**  They had Tibetan teachers. Before that, I had been to the Tibetan school for three years and I could write on the wooden board.   

**Q:**  But you weren't able to read well, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was taught Tibetan in Mentsigang, but I couldn't improve well because I had to learn Tibetan while learning medicine. In 1952, when I was 15 years old, my mother passed away. My mother was a great religious practitioner. She received teachings from many lamas. At the time of her death, she transferred her own consciousness to the pure land [Tib. རང་འཕོ]. My brother and I were sitting near her bed when she did that. I had heard a lot of about the self-transfer of consciousness. But that was the first time for me to see that. It was at 1 p.m. in the afternoon. My mother had a stroke and at that time, the conditions of medical treatment were not so good. Doctor Khenrab Norbu came to see her and he gave her the treatment with the golden needle which could cure many people, but he was unable to cure her. She had a stroke at night and in the next morning, she had only her body heat and her breath. Otherwise, she had lost all of her senses. She couldn't move, talk, hear or see anything. At that moment, she was lying on a spring bed. The two of us were on the right and the left side of her bed. At about 1 p.m. she had a hiccup. After just a few seconds, she had a very loud and strong hiccup and her whole body raised up evenly about one foot high above her bed while she was still lying down, like some kind of magic on the T.V. Both of us saw that. Chunden La told me that her late brother told her about that. I think when she had the first hiccup, her outer breath stopped.   

**A:**  Her whole body became like a straight beam and raised up about one foot high above her bed. When her body fell down on her bed, she was dead. My mother's root guru was called the Khanpo Ngaga [Tib. མཁན་པོ་ངག་དགའ]. He was a very sacred lama. He was the root guru of Chadrel Rinpoche [Tib. བྱ་བྲལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. She used to be in retreat many times. At that time, we didn't know in detail about the self-transfer of the consciousness and we sent a servant to call Düjom Rinpoche [Tib. བདུད་འཇོམས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] for transferring her consciousness. The lama knew about her death and came along, and our servant met him on his way. When he came to our house, we requested for him to transfer her consciousness. He said, "Yes," and he went inside the room and checked her head, and he came out very quickly. He was smiling and said, "There is no need to transfer her consciousness. She has already transferred her own consciousness by herself." Düjom Rinpoche was born in Pemakö [Tib. པ་མ་བཀོད], but he spoke Lhasa dialect very well. He didn't wear the clothes of a lama. He was always wearing laymen's clothing, Tsechuma, and he had long hair. After knowing for sure that she had transferred her own consciousness, we felt relaxed. Later, we heard that they could see the hole in her skull at the sky-burial. When my mother passed away, I was 15 years old and my brother was 17 years old. At that time, Chunden la's father was in Tö practicing religion. That was a distance of 16 days on horseback. Back then, we didn't have telephones. So we sent a rider messenger to Tö. Later, my elder brother came from Tö. In the meanwhile, our steward in Tö was in Lhasa and he took care of making the offerings. I forgot to tell you something. Before the death of my mother, it was decided for my brother Thöndrub Phuntso [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་ཕུན་ཚོགས] La to be sent as the bridegroom to a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> called Phünrabpa [Tib. ཕུན་རབ་པ]. At that time, the reason why Phünrabpa wanted my brother instead of me was because my brother's maternal uncle was the minister, Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>. At that time, people needed the backdoor relation and in those days, we were calling it the backer [Tib. འགོ་འདྲེན]. If someone was acquainted with the minister, they could get a good job. It was the same as nowadays. At that time, Surkhang was the Senior Kalön and he was very powerful. My brother's maternal uncle was Surkhang and I was not related to Surkhang. At that time, Phünrabpa sent one of their relatives called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> Jamyang La [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས་འཇམ་དབྱངས་ལགས] to request my mother to give my brother to them as their bridegroom. At that time, I was about 14 years old. I could understand all about those things and I was there when Jamyang La came. He told my mother, "Please give us your elder son as the bridegroom." My mother told him "It will be alright if the results of the divination are good." That person went out and came in again and told my mother "I mean your elder son." My mother told him "Yes, the elder son, Thöndrub Phüntso." After that, he came in again and said, "I mean the elder son." Then my mother burst into laughter and told that person, "Please don't tell me that so many times. I know that you meant my elder son." He was afraid of getting him mistaken with me because if they got me, it would be useless. They were not to be blamed, they didn't mean that I was bad. But they need the Surkhang. Later, the father of Phünrabpa got a very good job. At that time, the divination was done and it was confirmed to send him to Phünrabpa, and we had prepared all of his shares. At that time, we didn't need to give many kinds of ornaments for the son except some earrings, but we had to make a lot of clothes and put them in trunks, and I remember there were four trunks full of clothes. We had to stitch about 70-80 pantaloons. When everything was ready, the maternal uncle of Phünrabpa passed away and they had to delay the marriage. After that, the daughter of Phünrabpa who was going to get married to my brother gave birth to an illegitimate child. It was said the father was one of their servants. So the marriage had to be delayed again. After that, my mother passed away. After my mother died, my brother said that he was not going to Phünrabpa and we had a little bit of an argument. At that moment, I was just a kid, but my elder brother came from Tö and he told his son "You shouldn't act like this. If you don't want to go, you should have refused at the beginning to your grandmother when she was alive. Now she has passed away and only a small kid is left alone in the family. How can you say that you are not going?"   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any problem if the girl gave birth to a child?   

**A:**  At that time, we knew that she gave birth to the child before my mother died. Later, my elder brother talked with Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> and at last he agreed to go to Phünrabpa. My elder brother told him "We will give you whatever amount of extra shares that you want. You can take whatever you want," and my brother said that he wanted the three gold biscuits which weighed 81 tola and a brand new Mauser rifle. The gold was said to be from the U.S. The National Bank was written on the gold biscuit. My mother bought that from India.   

**Q:**  At that time, were they staying in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Phünrabpa had a house in Lhasa, but the marriage ceremony had to be held in Lhoka at their estate. At that time, we didn't have much of a disagreement and we signed a pledge saying that in case my brother did not get along well with their family, he shall return to our family. My brother was a little worried about not getting along well because the girl had the child. We called that "separating amicably [Tib. དགའ་དབྱེ་འཛུམ་བྲལ]". After my brother went out, I was left alone. We had three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> in Tö, but those were not much in use because it was far away from Lhasa, so we couldn't transport the grain and those things. The best shiga was the Khalung Shiga in Nangkartse. We had a three-story house in Lhasa. We were regarded as middle-upper standard <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>s. We were not like the Surkhangs and the Sambos. I was the only person in the family and I was just 15 years old. My elder brother was separated from the family and he used to take a salary from our family. He was engaged in religious practices full-time. At that time, he came to help me even though he was separated from the family. My father passed away very early. So my elder brother was treating me like his son. I am very grateful to him. My elder brother was 19 years older than me. My mother gave birth to eight sons, but only the second and the last one survived. In those days, my elder brother regarded me much more highly than his own son and he was backing me instead of backing his own son. That was because the Surkhang family was backing his son. My brother had three maternal uncles; the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, the Khenjung and the Depön. I didn't have any backers except my elder brother. He regarded his younger brother as more important than his son. So I am very grateful to him. At that time, if my elder brother had driven me out and gave me some share and gave the whole family to his son, he could have done that without any problem. But, he didn't do that. That was what we Tibetans call <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a>, or the cause and effect. That was his accomplishment for practicing the religion. At that time, my elder [brother] was a little bit angry with his son about that matter. After making all the offerings and paying the loans that we had to take for making the offerings by selling grain from the shiga, he handed over to me the household with three shiga and a house in Lhasa, and not having any loan to be paid [and all of our loans were paid off]. Then my brother told me, "As for your wife, it is up to your own choice. Whatever kind of family, like kudrak, traders or misers, and whoever you would like to take. I will not tell you to take this or that girl because you are a boy living in the modern era. Go ahead and find your owner/partner. After you find her, you just tell me and I will do the work for you to request her family and so on." I am really grateful to him. He stayed in Lhasa for a couple of months and then I got together with my wife. We have really been life partners until now. My wife's name is Tseden Chözom [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟན་ཆོས་འཛོམས]. Her family name was Gabde [Tib. དགའ་བདེ]. Their estate was in Rong. At that time, I could see a lot of girls in Lhasa and there were many families giving us photos of their daughters because, at that time, people were willing to give their daughters to families where the parents had died and there was only one child. So the girl would become the main mother of the household as soon as she entered the household. I was 16 years old when I was trying to get married. I met my wife in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> at the time of the religious festival <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> Serbang [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད་སེར་སྦྲེང]. On that day, there was a religious dance performed at the place called Nekhang Thogkha [Tib. ནས་ཁང་ཐོག་ཁ] in Shöl. On that day, I was with the sons of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> and Drangtöba who were my schoolmates in India. We were very show-offish and we were speaking English while we were walking on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street. In those days, there weren't many people speaking English in Lhasa. Now when I think about those things, I really feel ashamed. We were wandering together and we went to watch the religious dance from the top of the Shöl Legung, the Treasury Office in Shöl where there was the apartment [which] belonged to Drangtöba, who was then the shölnyer [Tib. ཞོལ་གཉེར] in charge of the Shöl Legung. In that apartment, the elder son of Gabde was shut in, like under house arrest, during the legal case against his wife Kyimey [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྨད]. At that time, he was not allowed to go outside the office. He was just enjoying himself playing mahjong. On that day, when we went inside, the mother of Gabde, her two sons, and two daughters were there. All of them stood up and gave us the best places to watch the religious dance because the son of Drangtöba was with us. This was the first time I saw Tsechö La. She was probably always staying home and doing the cooking and didn't go outside. That was really a karmic connection. I was 16 and she was 21 years old, but I was very attracted to her. She was very pretty at that time. At that moment, I was not watching the religious dance and I had to look at her many times. When I looked at [her] hands, it seemed that she was doing a lot of homework. That also seemed [to be a] very good thing to me. At that moment, the only thing I was worried about was I thought, probably, she might be married because, at that time, most of the girls were getting married at the age of 16-17-18-19. I thought she was about 19 years old. I couldn't say anything. After the dance, I asked my servant, "Do you know who that girl was?" He said that she was the daughter of Gabde. He knew about that, he was a smart guy. On that day, I heard the family name Gabde and nobody introduced me [told me] about that. That day, my elder brother went to Ramoche to watch the Tsongjö Serbang. I went to Ramoche and told my brother that today I saw a girl and I told him that I was one hundred percent satisfied and that I had decided to take her. He asked me who the girl was. Then I told him that she was the daughter of Gabde. The next day, my brother sent one of our relatives called Ensera [Tib. དབོན་གཟིམ་པ], who was a big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་རྒྱུགས་པ] A type of bound peasant/miser/serf whose lord was the government rather than an aristocrat or monastery/lama. They usually had sizable land holdings and were primarily responsible for providing the corvée transport and riding animal tax for the Tibetan government&#x27;s transportation system. Often translated as, &quot;Government taxpayer serfs.&quot;">shungyuba</a>, to ask for the daughter of Gabde. In those days, it was easy to send a person and ask for the name and the animal year in which she was born. At that time, we didn't do [things] like nowadays, making friends with the girls. We didn't even talk to each other. I only saw her but who knows whether she liked me or not because I was like a kid and I had a short hair like this. In those days, people used to send some of their relatives to ask for the girl or boy. The family members would not go there directly. When they asked for the name and the animal year in which the girl was born, if the girl's parents didn't agree, they would not give the name and the animal year and it was definite that they refused to give the girl. If the girl's parents gave the name and the animal year, it was indicated that the girl's parent agreed to give the girl. And it was our choice whether we would take that girl or not. We could ask for a divination or think about it and there would be comments even if the boy's side refused that.   

**Q:**  Was that a custom for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>?   

**A:**  Not only the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, the ordinary people like the traders were also probably doing the same. But the poor misers might not have been doing that. Generally, people would tell somebody to go ask for the name and the animal year in which the girl or the boy was born. On that day, the Gabde family gave the name and the animal year right away. Our relative told them all about our condition [our family, economic status, etc.]. They had two daughters.   

**Q:**  Could the parents say that "We can't make the decision right now. We will think about it and let you know"?   

**A:**  Yes, they could do that. They could say that "We will consult about this and let you know." The Gabde family gave a note of the name Tseden Chödzom, born in the Water Bird Year. At that point, we didn't ask the lama to do the divination. We asked the astrologist in the Mentsigang to do the divination calculation called the Yangchar [Tib. དབྱངས་འཆར]. It was known to be very accurate. Tsechö La's element was water and my element was earth. In the result of the astrological divination said, "The earth encountering the water means that they will be healthy and happy forever [Tib. ས་ཆུ་འཕྲད་པས་ལང་འཚོ་འབྱོར། ལང་འཚོ་འབྱོར་པས་རྟག་ཏུ་སྐྱིད]." Then we decided to take her as the bride and sent our relative to the Gabde family to ask for the daughter. That was in 1953, when I was 16 years old. We couldn't get married in that year because it was said that the year was a black year [Tib. ལོ་ནག]. So we had to get married the next year. I said that if we couldn't get married in that year, I was going to their family and we would have something like a honeymoon in Gabde's house. That was started on the 15th of the 4th Tibetan month. We consulted that I would go through the motions of going for a circumambulation around Lhasa City, and their house was located on the way and then they would call me to their house. I stayed for about six months in their family. That was a very happy period. In that year, I joined the Tsikhang, the Revenue Office. That was like the official training center. All of the lay officials had to go through Tsikhang. At that time, we had to take an exam on writing Tibetan. Even if the writing was not so good, the exam could be passed. They were not giving exams on grammar and we had to take the exam of the diu. After that, on the New Year of the year 1954, and in the Wood Sheep Year, I became a 4th rank lay official of the Dewashung, the position was called the senampa.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in the Tsikhang?   

**A:**  I stayed about half a year. It was not a real school, they were making the tsitrugpa—the students wrote some documents. But we had to graduate from the Tsikhang to become lay officials. At that time, I celebrated three things at the same time; entering the government service and becoming a lay official, marriage, and the New Year. At that point, the Dalai Lama was in Beijing. That was the time when the Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama, and Chairman Mao took the photo together in Beijing. So at that time, at the ceremony for entering the service, I had to prostrate to the throne of the Dalai Lama in the Potala Palace when they held the celebration of the New Year.   

**Q:**  That was in 1955 when the Dalai Lama was in Beijing?   

**A:**  Yes, that might have been in 1955 and I was 17 years old. After my wife came to our family, she didn't feel well. She got sick very seriously. It was said that it was caused by some kind of protective deities because we didn't ask for permission from the deity of Gabde. Later, she was cured by a sacred lama from the Sakya monastery. But, even after that, she wasn't very healthy all the time.   

**Q:**  Tell me something about the Reting event when you were in the school.   

**A:**  I was just 8-9-10 years old. I don't remember clearly. I was going to the Pelgong school. One day, my babysitter took us back from the school right away. They were very much scared and we were dragged very quickly saying that they were making war. After that, we didn't have to go to school for 1-2 weeks. My late mother and my elder brother had long binoculars and they were looking at the mountaintop of the Sera Wutse [Tib. དབུ་རྩེ]. They told me that there were many monks on the mountain and that they could see the monks taking snuff. We just heard that they were making war, but we didn't see anybody making war. I was just a kid, I didn't have any idea, but people were saying that Reting was imprisoned. The [regents] Reting and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> had an agreement for returning the political power after three years, but Taktra didn't return it. Therefore, the war took place.   

**Q:**  What happened when the Chinese first came in 1950?   

**A:**  I saw the Chinese coming to Lhasa the first time. At that time, we were just going to watch them. In front of the soldiers, there were people wearing colorful clothes, and beating drums and gongs. I felt that was like an interesting show, but we CCP didn't have any idea about the CCP.   

**Q:**  How did the Chinese come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  They came to Lhasa marching and there were four lines. They came through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street. We heard that they came from Kham. That was probably the first group who came through Kham. I heard that some soldiers came through the northern route.   

**Q:**  At that time, Wang Qimei and Phünwang came with the 500 soldiers from Kham, and after that, Zhang Guohua came from Kham.   

**A:**  Before the soldiers came to Lhasa. Zhang Jingwu came to Lhasa. That was the first time I saw the Chinese, and there was a Chinese called Alo Buzhang. They probably had only two to three bodyguards. They came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and came through the pasture Kyangthang Naga [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་ན་ག] to Lhasa. They were wearing grayish suites and riding horses and mules.   

**Q:**  Were they wearing army uniforms?   

**A:**  They were wearing civilian clothes. At that time, being a kid, I didn't know in detail whether they were bad or good. After that, the soldiers came and many camels came from the north. That was probably lead by Fan Ming. They had loaded five loads of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> on each camel. Usually, the mule could carry only two loads. There were endless camels coming to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Before that, you were in India. When you saw those new people, weren't you attentive?   

**A:**  We were not attentive about how after the CCP came to Tibet, they might have robbed our things. We had heard a little bit from our parents about how the CCP was kind of bad, but we didn't have any idea what they were going to do in the future. That was probably in 1952 that the Chinese established the Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོགས་པ] in Lhasa. In the beginning, it was held in the smaller house of Alo Chöndze near the meat market [Tib. ཤ་ཁྲོམ་པ་རག].   

**Q:**  Shölkang Jedrung [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང] was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the leader of the Youth League. Most of the youths in Lhasa were gathered in [were a part of] the Youth League. At that time, if they said that they were going to publicize the idea of communism, people might not have come [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Did they come to your home to call you? How did you make the relation?   

**A:**  They didn't come to the houses. They probably were just publicizing that they had set up the Youth League, and they told the people to join that and people passed the message to each other. They called the people saying that they were singing songs and dancing. Otherwise, the youths wouldn't go there. When many youths heard that they were singing and dancing, many youths gathered in that house. In the beginning, they were not doing anything else besides teaching new songs and dances. They taught a song with the wording "The sky is blue and clear," and after that, they were dancing.   

**Q:**  Was that a western dance?   

**A:**  Yes, that was a western dance holding hands. It was not disco.   

**Q:**  Were there any words of the communist ideas in the song?   

**A:**  They composed songs with the communist ideas and they were teaching those songs. At that time, there was another leader with Shölkang called Ma Goyang who looked like a Chinese or person from Siling. I felt happy to go there because they were teaching songs.   

**Q:**  Did the girls stay on one side and the boys stayed on the other side?   

**A:**  No, all the girls and the boys stayed together in a hall.   

**Q:**  Were they standing or what?   

**A:**  There were chairs and benches. Some of them were sitting on the benches and some of them were standing. It was kind of disordered [Tib. ཟ་ངི་ཟང་ངི].   

**Q:**  Did they serve food?   

**A:**  No, we were gathering there in the evening after dinner. Being a kid, I liked to learn songs and didn't know about politics. Gradually, we became engrossed [Tib. དབྱིངས་ལ་ཚུད] in the song, and we were also meeting some girls and boys. We were kind of happy.   

**Q:**  When they were teaching songs, were there people playing Dramnyan [Tib. སྒྲ་སྙན]?   

**A:**  Sometimes they were playing Dramnyan. Most of the time, they were teaching songs verbally. At that time, many youths were duped in that way. There was Demön Rigchö La [Tib. བདེ་སྨོན་རིགས་ཆོས་ལགས], she is the wife of Jindrung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> [Tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] who is one of the leaders of the TAR. And there were many other girls and boys from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> families. At that time, my elder brother was in Lhasa. I went to learn the songs a couple of times. But he didn't say anything. But, one night I was [out] very late until 12 p.m. On that night, my brother scolded me very seriously. This scolding turned the direction of my life [around]. At that time, I was almost inclining on the side of the CCP after going to the Youth League. I didn't like the idea of communism but I was kind of engrossed in the movement. And eventually, I might have held the idea of communism. My brother scolded me, "That is too much for you to do. We had been living by the grace of the Dewashung from generation to generation."   

**Q:**  At that time, wasn't your brother in Tö?   

**A:**  No, that was before I got married and he was still in Lhasa. My brother scolded me, "Now you are going on the side of the CCP. If you do that, you will be ungrateful to the Dewashung. You shouldn't go on this path." After that, I stopped going to the Youth League. After that, they established the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] A new school jointly started by the Chinese and the Tibetan Government in 1952 that was open to students from all classes in society. Thus the name.">Society School</a> [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ], but I went there for just a short time and stopped going there. I didn't dare go to those places. After that, the relation with the Youth League was stopped.   

**Q:**  In 1952, there was the Mimang Tsogpa and those things?   

**A:**  I didn't have any idea about those things being a kid. I just heard that there was a Mimang Tsogpa and there were Alo Chöndze, Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག], and they were telling the names of those people, and it was said that they were arrested by the Chinese or the Dewashung.   

**Q:**  In 1955, you were 17 years old and it had been about five years, since the Chinese came. What were the people thinking or saying at that time? At that time, the Dalai Lama went to Beijing. Were the people saying that the situation was not bad?   

**A:**  In the beginning, all the people regarded the CCP as very bad. Later, when it was said that Tibet was liberated peacefully—gradually, we had the feeling that the Chinese and the Dewashung were to become like a coalition [Tib. མཉམ་འབྲེལ] because the Dalai Lama went to Beijing. When the Dalai Lama went to Beijing, the people were full of sorrow. I heard that one old woman jumped into the river and committed suicide when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did she die?   

**A:**  Yes, I don't know her name, but it is true that she jumped into the river in Lhadong Shenka [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ]. We went to Lhadong Shenka. I felt very sad when the Dalai Lama crossed the river in the coracle.   

**Q:**  Did you think that he might not come back?   

**A:**  Yes, I was worried about what might have happened to him in China. I heard that he had a very hard time on the way. At that point, I was like a kid, but I was wondering that, although the Chinese are not good, the Dalai Lama was going to China. Probably, a real kind of peaceful liberation was maybe going to be implemented. After that, the Dalai Lama came back to Tibet safely. So the people were extremely glad. Then the Preparatory Committee of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> was set up in 1956. At that point, all of the officials of the Dewashung whose positions were not assigned were sent to the offices of the TAR. And I was among them. At that time, the Dewashung hadn't assigned my work because I just entered the service.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were the Senampa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was the fourth rank Senampa and I had the golden Gau amulet on my hair knot, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤ་ལྗོག] The two hair knots required to be worn by Tibetan government officials on their heads.">pajok</a>, but my work was not assigned and I was also like a kid. I was assigned to the Industrial and Trade Department [Tib. བཟོ་ཚོང; Ch. chu]. The Director [Ch. chu zhang] was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Yamphel. The Senior Director was a very bossy Chinese. His name was Li. And there were some section leaders [Ch. ke zhang]. Göshampa [Tib. རྒོད་གཤམ་པ] was one of them. And there was Nendrön, who used to be equal to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> of Taktra. Thönkhang Rimshi [Tib. དོན་ཁང་རིམ་བཞི] from Shigatse was also there. And there was a lay official of the Dewashung Lhamdünpa [Tib. ལྷ་མདུན་པ] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> called Möndrong [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོང], who is now in Dharamsala. Altogether, there were about eight to nine <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</a> officials. On the first day, the inaugural meeting was held in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Taktse [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་སྟག་འཚེར].   

**Q:**  How did the government tell you to go there?   

**A:**  The officials who were going to be sent to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> were probably called to a meeting held in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Taktse. At that meeting, Ngabö gave a lecture saying that the Preparatory Committee was set up. That office was lead by the coalition of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</a>, the Labrang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, and the Chamdo Liberation Committee [Tib. གཞུང་བླ་ཁམས་གསུམ]. With all the positions, there were three people from the three parties. At that time, we didn't have any work to do, but there were people from the three parties. Ngabö said, "This time all of you have to go to the TAR according to the order from the Kashag." I didn't join the office of the CCP voluntarily. I was sent by the dewashung in that way. Therefore, I had to go to the TAR. Otherwise, I broke all of the relations with the CCP and I didn't go to the school. If I would have gone to school, I could have gone right away. Our office was held at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s house. There were about 30-40 cadres from the three parties and we were paid a salary.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1956.   

**Q:**  At that time, did Chenyi come from Beijing?   

**A:**  Yes, he came and established the Preparatory Committee of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a>. At the inaugural meeting of the Preparatory Committee of the TAR, Chenyi, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama attended the meeting. The meeting was held in the big hall in the front of the Potala and the party was given in the Shugtri Linga [Tib. བཞུགས་ཁྲི་གླིང་ག]. They put up a very big canopy in the park.   

