# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0430.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཤེལ་གླིང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsewang Namgyal Shelling was born in Lhasa to a well known aristocratic family and became a government official in 1954. In this interview the interviewee continues describing his experiences in prison. He relates how in 1962, when the Sino-Indian war began, all the prisoners were sent back to Taring Prison. The interviewee was handcuffed and shackled because guards found the tsampa he had hidden as proof of the poor treatment of the prisoners. He also tells how he and his friends prepared to fight the Chinese if the Indians fought up to Lhasa, and [how he] even asked Ketsang Lama to make a protective talisman. In 1964, they were moved to Trapchi, the first prison of the TAR. There he taught himself Chinese and worked as an interpreter for the prisoners. When describing prison life, the interviewee pays special attention to the fact that some prisoners made false accusations against their fellow inmates. When this behavior was exposed, the perpetrators were often subjected to struggle sessions.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0430_04/H_0430_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  At that time, it became absolutely the opposite of what the cadre hoped. When the cadre asked, "You are given enough food to be full, right?" Dingri Ngawang, who is now living in Dharamsala, raised his hand and said, "The government told us to tell the truth. We are definitely not given enough food to be full. We are working very hard and actively." Even now, I can clearly remember him saying that in a Dingri accent. After that, most of the prisoners said, "That is true, the government is telling us to tell the truth. We are not given enough food to be full. We shouldn't tell lies to the government." And many prisoners were talking at the same time and it became like a hubbub [Tib. འུར་རྒྱག]. Then the cadre said the meeting was dismissed. We got the profit [Tib. ཁེ་བཟང་རེད] of eating the fish and not suffering a struggle session.   

**Q:**  What happened at the bigger meeting?   

**A:**  At that time, the cadres discussed at the meeting about eating fish and they told us to stand up. Making the prisoners stand up at the meeting was a kind of punishment because all the people were looking at us. But they didn't hold struggle sessions. Whenever I met Dingri Ngawang, I used to tell him, I haven't forgotten your talk at that meeting during my entire life. He said, "I told the truth at that time, right?" He is 2-3 years older than me. From that brigade, two prisoners ran away and they were seized back. At that time, the policy was not bad. They just shackled them and held struggle sessions against them. But they didn't send them to the real prison and they didn't increase their sentence. At that time, the policy seemed to be lenient, but we had the food shortage. We were allowed to meet our family members. The family members were allowed to meet the prisoners even on weekdays. We could meet them outside the barbed wire fence and talk with the family members. The guards were there, but they would not stay near us. The kid from Kongpo who ran away from Ngachen ran away again from Tshakhur Linga. So they increased his prison term by five years.   

**Q:**  Did you have to talk about that the ideology of the CCP is good and those things?   

**A:**  In Tshakhur Linga, we didn't need to talk about those things at the work site. We had to talk a lot about those things in Taring. Later, when my family member was not there, my health became very poor. I was quite young, but I couldn't work very much. Once the cadre thought that I was lazy and he made me carry a big stone. As soon as they put the stone on my back, I fell down. After that, he made me do light works with the old prisoners. At that time, the Chinese were doing strange things. They set up a loudspeaker and they were broadcasting songs and praising some prisoners who were working hard saying, "So and so prisoners are walking like having wheels attached to their legs." Later, when the cadre knew that I was really weak, he asked me whether I could write the things that should be read from the loudspeaker. I said, "I can write it well." So, he told me to write those things. I stayed for all of 1961 in Tshakhur Linga. In 1962, we were taken back to Taring Prison again. That was the time of the Sino-Indian war. In the beginning, we didn't know about that and the prisoners were taken to Taring all of a sudden. We were made to walk all the way to Lhasa with the soldiers on both sides, and our beddings were transported in horse carts. At that time, all of the people in Lhasa were watching us. We were not allowed to talk with them. Some of the people came to give us bread and sweets, but the soldiers didn't let them give us [them]. Otherwise, they were telling each other, "Look, they are prisoners", and many people were coming to give us food, but the soldiers stopped them.   

**Q:**  How many prisoners died in Ngachen and Tshakhur Linga during one year?   

**A:**  At that time, there wasn't much death like in Taring. Probably, some prisoners might have died from sickness. At that time, in Tshakhur Linga, the food shortage was not that serious that the prisoners had to die.   

**Q:**  How many prisoners were there among 100 prisoners who had family members bringing food?   

**A:**  At the most there were 30 prisoners who had family members. Most of the prisoners didn't have family members bringing food for them because they were from the long distance [far away] countryside.   

**Q:**  Were there people from the countryside?   

**A:**  Yes, they were probably involved in the revolt. But, the people from the countryside near Lhasa were not bad. They had their family members bringing food. Some of the prisoners from Phembo had loads of tsampa, cloth bags of dried cheese and dried meat. They also had flour and they were making Bagthug, stew containing small pieces of dough. They had an eating commune and our mouths watered when they ate those foods in the same tent. They were not giving food to the other prisoners.   

**Q:**  Were there prisoners stealing in Tshakhur Linga?   

**A:**  Yes, there were prisoners stealing both in Ngachen and Tshakhur Linga.   

**Q:**  Were there many?   

**A:**  No, there were 2-3 prisoners in the brigade. When they knew that they stole, they would hold struggle sessions against them.   

**Q:**  Did the guards steal things from the prisoners?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. The guards didn't steal and didn't take away things from the prisoners. Those were from the countryside and they didn't know much Chinese. It seemed that they didn't have much of a salary. They were just wearing the bamboo green colored clothes, but they didn't have any insignias. They just had guns with real bullets.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know Chinese?   

**A:**  I hadn't learned Chinese at that time. But, I knew a few Chinese words because I worked in the Chinese office for a short time. But, usually, I didn't speak any Chinese. Once, I was working in the vegetable garden and the work supervisor was Chinese. They were called the Lingong Yuan. He was probably a labor camp member. He was allowed to go to Lhasa on Sundays. Those people were very bad and they were taught a little bit of Tibetan. At that time, I couldn't work well. So the supervisor came to beat me up with the shovel. At that point, I rushed towards him and spoke [in] Chinese, "Go ahead, kill me." After that, the supervisor informed the cadres that I didn't speak a single Chinese word usually, but on that day, I spoke Chinese and told him to kill me. So they held a meeting and the cadre scolded me. "Usually some people do not speak Chinese, but when they get to a critical point, they speak Chinese." I forgot to tell you something. My wife gave birth to a son in 1958. When I was in Tshakhur Linga, my son was 3 years old. At that time, I heard that my son passed away because my wife didn't have time to take care of the baby because the Neighborhood Committee made her do a lot of unpaid labor. My son got a high fever and passed away all of a sudden. After that, we were taken to Taring Prison again.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you have a special kind of prisoners' clothes?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. I was given a pair of yellow trousers. That was probably made from the cloth for wrapping the scriptures. I was wearing that on that day and the people in Lhasa were looking at me very much. When we arrived at Taring prison, they differentiated the prisoners in the outer courtyard. The cadre was called Norbu Dorje. He used to be a servant of the Yabshi Taktse. He was a very bad man. He knew all of the government officials and separated us from the ordinary prisoners. At that time, there was a sölthabpa [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ], the tsidrung cook of the Dalai Lama. Norbu Dorje tested him [with] what he was saying and asked him, "What did you do in the past?" He said, "I was a cook." He hoped that the cadre wouldn't know him and that he could go among the ordinary prisoners. Norbu Dorje told asked, "What do you mean cook? Weren't you a sölthabpa and a tsidrung? Come on here." There were just about 9-10 Dewashung officials [who] were shut in the inner prison. I remember that the lay official Thönpa was with me.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1962?   

**A:**  Yes, when we were shut in Taring, in the beginning, we didn't know that the war with India had taken place. Actually, the war was going to take place and that might have been their purpose with shutting [them] in again in Taring because they were suspicious. The kudrak were shut in a cell that was locked and the ordinary prisoners were sent to Phembo State Farm.   

**Q:**  For what did they send them to Phembo?   

**A:**  They were sent to do the farming. And we were made to do the wool work again.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did you think?   

**A:**  In the beginning, we didn't know about the war. We were wondering why they were treating us more strictly.   

**Q:**  Were you worried about that?   

**A:**  Yes, we were worried about what might happen. Later, the newspaper came out about the war at the border. We had to read the newspaper. We had to read it in turn even if we didn't want to.   

**Q:**  Did you have to read it every day?   

**A:**  Yes, every evening.   

**Q:**  Were the leaders there?   

**A:**  But-there was the tsugdrang in each cell and there were some people reading in turn. At that time, the family members were allowed to bring food to the prisoners and the prisoners' food had improved. There wasn't any problem with the food. They were giving butter tea every morning and there was quite a good amount of tsampa. The prison cell was locked.   

**Q:**  Were you allowed to go into the courtyard?   

**A:**  No, the cell was locked all the time, except the time for going to the toilet twice a day for defecating, and we had to urinate in a tin, in the cell, and there was a bad odor.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in a cell?   

**A:**  In the bigger cells there were about 20 people. We had 10 people in the cell because the cell was small. At that time, Norbu Dorje knew me when I was in Taring. In those days, the leader of the prison was called Sozhang. He told me to be the tsugdrang of the 4th cell and to make the notes and read the newspaper because he knew that I was an old prisoner in Taring Prison. He thought that I might not have been bad because I had gone through the labor transformation and he trusted me. Back then, the tsugdrang had to make the other prisoners do the wool work. At that time, they were weighing the wool work that was done, but there wasn't any work quota. We had to spin the yarn for weaving carpets. It was up to the tsugdrang how much work he would make the prisoners do. At that time, I didn't like the CCP and I was trying to do my best to benefit the prisoners, and I had never informed the Chinese. I could keep on doing that for 12 years in the prison. I got a little bit of power in that prison cell to make the prisoners work less and keep them at ease. Back then, we were praying surreptitiously and sometimes singing operas in a low voice. At that point, I did [something] a little bit extreme [Tib. ཐལ་ཆེ་བ] and did half the amount of work that the other cells were doing.   

**Q:**  Didn't they scold you for doing that?   

**A:**  At that time, it was quite lenient. So they didn't say anything, although our bundle of yarn was much smaller than the other cells. For the half day, we were praying and singing opera in a low voice, and telling stories and enjoying ourselves. At that time, we were receiving meat and food from our family members. So we kept a small knife for cutting meat and we kept needles for mending the clothes, and we also kept pens.   

**Q:**  From where did you get those things?   

**A:**  In those days, sometimes, we were taken out to work and we could get those things, like the knife and needle. Those were all against the prison rules. We enjoyed [ourselves] like that for 5-6 months. One day, a Chinese man was shut in our cell. All of the Tibetans had solidarity. In that cell, there was the Ketsang Lama [Tib. ཀེ་ཚང], now he is in Dharamsala, Jamda [Tib. ལྕགས་མདའ] Lama from Sera Monastery, and the lay official of the Dewashung, Phüntso Tobgye Samsur [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་སྟོབས་རྒྱས་བསམ་ཟུར]. And there was a Chinese called Su Yanbei. He had leg shackles and handcuffs. He was one of the friends of Zhang Kaimin who was in the Chushigandru and later fled from Taring Prison. Zhang Kaimin was the Chinese who pretended to be performing a monkey, dog and sheep play and who went all over Tibet. Later, we [came to] know that he was an official of the GMD and a spy. He came to Lhasa in the 1950s and went everywhere in Tibet. At last, he went with the Chushigandru and made war with the CCP. And he interrogated the captured PLA soldiers. Later, he was seized from the battlefield in Lhoka. At that time, Su Yanbei was teaching me a little bit of Chinese. We were not suspicious that the new Chinese was an informer.   

**Q:**  Was he a prisoner?   

**A:**  Yes, he was a prisoner. Later, we knew that the Chinese was informed about our work, prayer and singing songs, and keeping the knife, needle, and pen. At that time, just after they called the Chinese, they called the Ketsang Lama and made the false impression that Ketsang Lama was the informer. After that, they didn't let me meet Ketsang Lama and they called me to the office. I didn't know that the Chinese had informed [them about us] and I thought that Ketsang Lama would never inform them. Actually, I was responsible for that from the beginning. I thought it would not be right if I handed them over because I was doing my prayers and it would be against the Karma. The cadre said to me "You have kept things like a knife that are not allowed to kept in the cell." I told them "We didn't have anything like that." So the cadre shackled my legs with a small shackle. At that time, the knife and those things were not regarded as very important. Then Norbu Dorje searched my clothes by rubbing all parts of my clothes. At that point, he searched out the tsampa proof of the Taring prison on which the date was written and kept from 1960 in the cotton padded cloth used for wrapping my waist. That was a political matter.   

**Q:**  What did you write on the tsampa package?   

**A:**  I wrote "The tsampa of Taring Prison in 1960, the Iron Mouse Year." Even if I were to die, that would be proof. At that time, they were making war at the border and we were under Chinese control. So it became really dangerous. I was shackled and left over there.   

**Q:**  Where do you mean over there?   

**A:**  That was in that prison courtyard and they were searching my things also in that courtyard.   

**Q:**  Where did you keep the knife?   

**A:**  That was in the cell. They told the inmates to hand over the knife and they got it right away from the cell. Norbu Dorje was a very cruel man. When he searched out the small tsampa package, he was showing an appearance as if he found a precious stone. He was kind of surprised and said, "Hei hei," when he read the Tibetan on the package. Then he called me to the office and asked me, "What is your purpose for keeping the tsampa?" Actually, I thought now it is finished and felt agitated rather than afraid. And at first, I just told him like [I was] kidding. "I kept this for comparing the past with the present [Tib. སྔར་དྲན་དེང་སྡུར]. In the past, the livelihood was poor and we had to eat this kind of tsampa in Taring Prison. But, the livelihood has improved." At that moment, he got very angry and banged his fist on the table and said, "You are talking like the philosophy of Nehru." At that point, I was very agitated and I told him, "I am just kidding! I will tell you clearly about my purpose of keeping the tsampa. I kept this for the purpose of when Tibet gains the independence. I am going put it in an exhibition and tell the people that the CCP had given the prisoners a tsampa like a fodder and many prisoners died from food shortages." I had already sacrificed [Tib. བློས་བཏང] everything and told him like that. So he didn't have anything to do. At that time, I was 25 [years] old according to the Tibetan calendar. He said, "You are young and you have some people backing you collaborating and giving you instructions. Who told you that Tibet will gain independence? What confidence do you have that Tibet will gain independence?" I told him "I have a great confidence that Tibet will gain its independence." He said, "What is your confidence?" He might have thought that I would say that the Americans would help or something else. I told him "The only confidence I have is that I am praying to the Three Jewels for the independence of Tibet. I have great confidence that my prayers will be realized." If I told them about the support from America, he might have asked me who told me that and so on. So I didn't tell him about that. He said, "There are people backing you." I said, "I don't need anybody to back me and give instructions. I know how to think about matters."   

**Q:**  Was that cadre Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes, he was called Norbu Dorje. He was cruel to the prisoners. Later, we heard that during the Cultural Revolution he was sent to the study session in Kongpo and he committed suicide. He said again, "You definitely have collaborators in the prison cell. Otherwise, you couldn't [know] such things because you are young." I told him "I don't have any collaborators. I am the person who made them keep the knife and the pen and made them work for only half a day and let them pray. The other inmates are not to be blamed." Another problem was they searched my collection of English words. I thought that I might forget my English and I just wrote down the words that I remembered in an alphabetical order, like a dictionary. I thought from the beginning in case that would be searched out, they would not be content if I just wrote them in alphabetical order. At that time, they were very suspicious of that. The cadre said that it was a serious matter I had even English letters and he asked what contents [Tib. ནང་དོན] I wrote in that. I told him "There isn't any content in that." He said, "Ha! How can there be letters without content?" Then I told him "You don't know that. There are letters without content. For example, if I write all the words in Ka one after another like [ka ra ka ba] what is the content of that? Similarly, I wrote all the English words [that begin] with 'A' like that and then the words [that begin] with 'B'. So there isn't any content."   

**Q:**  At that point, did they shackle your legs?   

**A:**  Yes, at first they put a small shackle [on]. But after the tsampa was searched out [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Did they searched out those things on that very day?   

**A:**  Yes, when I told him that I didn't have any collaborators, he called the blacksmith called Kelsang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང]. He told the blacksmith to shackle my legs with a bigger shackle. At that time, they didn't lock the shackle. They let the blacksmith hit the iron with a hammer and fixed it on my legs. In addition to that, they handcuffed me. That handcuffs were a very tight one, we used to call that Omega. And the cadre told me "We are not going to handcuff you until you hand over your collaborators." I had already sacrificed [myself] and made up my mind not to hand over my friends.   

**Q:**  Would you have sacrificed [yourself] even if you would have died from that torture?   

**A:**  The shackles and the handcuffs were severe torture, but there wasn't any danger of dying from that. We could change clothes only once a month and people used to get a lot of lice, and the inmates had to help us knead the tsampa balls. It was difficult when urinating and defecating. And my shoulders hurt. There was another matter more serious than the above-mentioned which was not exposed at the time. At that time, there were 5-6 inmates, we were talking to each other [about] very serious political matters. The Chinese were making war with the Indians and I thought, in case the Indians made the war up to Lhasa, the Chinese would first shoot the prisoners. That would be like slaughtering sheep and goats and it would be meaningless. If I was to have a protective talisman, I would not die when the Chinese shot us. Perhaps I might have been able to take over a gun from them. At that time, there was Ketsang Lama in that cell. Now he is in Dharamsala. He was six years younger than me. He was about 18-19 years old. I told him surreptitiously, "Please, give me a protective talisman." That was really a matter of losing [my] life because it was in the Chinese prison. After that, he gave me the talisman.   

**Q:**  Did he make it?   

**A:**  Yes, later I found out that he made it by drawing the images and the prayers of the Yamantaka, Jigje, on his white vest. At that time, I didn't know what he wrote on the talisman. The talisman was as big as this I sewed the talisman into the collar of my skin garment. On the day they searched out the tsampa, I was wearing the skin garment in which I had hidden the talisman. That was because I had faith to the Three Jewels and Lamas, so the talisman was not searched out. Even now, I am wondering why Norbu Dorje didn't search my skin garment which I had draped over my shoulder. If he had searched out the talisman, then it was really finished.   

**Q:**  What would it mean?   

**A:**  It would mean that I was going to fight with the CCP and they would ask me who gave me the talisman. I would never hand over the Lama. But, I have to say that I thought of fighting with the CCP and that it would be a matter of losing my life. I could say that I was just praying for independence for keeping the tsampa proof. But, I couldn't say that for the talisman. When the talisman was not searched out, I thought I didn't care whatever kind of torture, like shackles and handcuffs, I would have to suffer. At that point, Ketsang Lama saw that I was shackled, so I was a little bit afraid that he might confess about that. There were some prisoner tailors in that courtyard. Among them was the master tailor called Kaldan La [Tib. སྐལ་ལྡན་ལགས] who was a very trustworthy person. I met him in the toilet and we could say a few words to each other in the toilet. The tailors were allowed to go to the toilet during the whole day and when we were taken to the toilet twice, we would meet some of the tailors in the toilet. I sent a message through Kaldan La "All of the inmates in the fourth team can relax, Ketsang Lama can especially relax." I was implying that I didn't hand them over. I myself was relaxed. In those days, sometimes, the prisoners were made to sit in the sunshine and wash their clothes. Fortunately, the next day they let the prisoners sit in the sunshine and the prisoners could wash their clothes in the courtyard. After I was shackled, I was moved to the first team. In that prison cell, there was the junior fourth rank senampa lay official called Phüntso Dramdü Senang [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དགྲ་འདུལ་སྲས་ནང]. He was a trustworthy person. When most of the prisoners were in the courtyard, I tore the threads of the collar and took out the talisman and put it inside the rafters above the window of the cell. I told Phüntso Dramdü to stitch my collar. That was the second day after I was shackled. When all of the prisoners were shut in the cell after sitting in the sunshine, Norbu Dorje opened the door and asked me, "Where is the letter you kept in your collar?" He was just guessing. Probably, after going to bed, he might have been thinking about how he searched my clothes and remembered that he hadn't searched the collar. So he just guessed and asked me that question. I had already taken out the talisman. That was an amazing blessing from the Three Jewels and the Lamas. I asked him in surprise, "What letter?" And I threw my garment to him. He searched the collar, but there was nothing in there.   

**Q:**  How did he search the collar?   

**A:**  I had my garment draped over my shoulder, so I just threw it to him and he searched the collar. He told me "Whenever you hand over your partners, we will uncuff you." But, I didn't hand over my partners at all. Back then, enough food was given and family members were also allowed to bring food to the prisoners. At that time, there were 2-3 very great lamas in that prison cell. One of them was called Shungpa Chubsang [Tib. གཞུང་པ་ཆུ་བཟང] Lama. His name was Thubden Sherab [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཤེས་རབ]. He was my first Root Guru in the prison. When I was moved to that cell, I was told to tell my experiences in that cell. So Chubsang Lama was very sympathetic to me. When he saw that I was shackled on my bare foot, he tore something like his monk's shawl and wrapped it around my leg. He was so brave to do that. Who would dare to wrap something around my leg because I was a reactionary and I had a serious problem? At that time, there were many people from Lhasa offering foods like butter and pork to the lamas. The Lamas were dividing the foods to all the prisoners in that cell. At that time, all prisoners were doing the wool work. I couldn't work because I was handcuffed. So I could rest for the whole day, though I had pain in my arms. I was always praying to the Three Jewels. One day, Chubsang Lama came to my side and he whispered and gave the teaching called "giving and taking" [Tib. གཏོང་ལེན]. According to Buddhism, that meant giving one's happiness to all the sentient beings and taking all the sufferings of the sentient beings on oneself, and I was praying "May the suffering of my shackles and the handcuffs help to displace [Tib. གོ་ཆོད] the sufferings of all the sentient beings." For doing that meditation, there was a short prayer with four verses; "My compassionate Root Guru. May my suffering help to displace the sufferings of the sentient beings who had been my mother. May I give my happiness to all the sentient beings [Tib. des na rje btsun bla ma thugs rje can/ mar gyur 'gro ba'i sdig sgrib sdug bsngal kun/ ma lus da lta bdag la smin pa dnag/ bdag gi bde dge gzhan du gtong ba yis/ 'gro kun bde dang ldan pa byin gyis rlobs]." After he whispered the above verses, I practiced that by visualizing the Dalai Lama and Chubsang Lama, and praying for displacing the sufferings of all the sentient beings and cleansing my negativities. Usually, whenever the prisoners were shackled or handcuffed, they would have lice because they couldn't change their clothes. I was shackled and handcuffed for nine months and eight days, but I didn't have any lice. During that time, I became fat and healthy. At that time, the inmate sitting next to me was Ngari Singa [Tib. མངའ་རིས་གཟིམ་འགག]. He was one of the bodyguard tsidrung of the regent [Tib. ཤོད་གཟིམ་འགག]. He would help me kneading my tsampa balls, and after the morning meal until lunchtime, I was doing my prayers. I had a gown to wear and I was covering my mouth with the collar of the gown and doing my prayers. After lunch, I would sleep until dinnertime. That was because, I was keeping myself happy and I was determined that no matter how long they shackled and handcuffed me, even for several years, I would never hand over my friends.   

**Q:**  Did you have sores on your legs and hands?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. At night, I had some pain in my arms, so one night I spat my hands and pulled one of my hands out of the handcuff because my hands are small. I slept for 1-2 nights pulling my hands out and it was very comfortable. At that point, I thought, I had to go through this torture for cleansing my negativities committed in my previous life and this was the Karmic result that I had to repay. I was praying may my suffering help to displace the sufferings of the sentient beings. If I took my hands out of the handcuffs, I couldn't help to displace the sufferings of the sentient beings and couldn't repay my Karmic result. Thinking that way, I put my hands in the handcuffs and didn't take [them] out for 9 months and 8 days. One day, I had kind of a feeling, like a prophecy or prediction, thinking that if the cadres would search above the windows of the prison cell, my talisman would be searched out. After 1-2 days, the prisoners were told to sit in the sunshine and wash clothes. I couldn't throw my talisman in the toilet. If I did that, I would commit a serious negativity. I told my Root Guru Chubsang Lama about the talisman and requested him to do the ritual called Shegsöl [Tib. གཤེགས་གསོལ] to get rid of the talisman. Shegsöl was meant for asking the holy spirit of the deity to go up to heaven and then destroy it. At that moment, the other prisoners were washing clothes and taking baths. Then I gave him the talisman and he took it out. When he came in he almost burst into tears. He said, "The protective talisman was made so good according to the Yamantaka Jigje deity. Ketsang Lama was really great. But, I did the ritual and washed that clothe." The next day, Norbu Dorje came and searched all the places above the windows.   

**Q:**  Can you swear by the Three Jewels that it was true?   

**A:**  Yes, I can. Why should I tell lie? At that time, I had a feeling like a prophecy or prediction. If we trusted the Three Jewels and the lamas, it was so effective. When Norbu Dorje and 1-2 [other] people came to search above the window, he took a kind of thin iron piece and poked all the places above the window. I felt very relaxed at that time. After that, I felt very happy and didn't care what happened to me. After 9 months and 8 days, the cadres were kind of tired of me. Because, the more they kept me shackled and handcuffed, the tougher I became. So one day, Norbu Dorje just uncuffed me and told me that I had to write a guaranteeing report that I would behave well in the future. I didn't have a problem with writing that report.   

**Q:**  After that, did they move you to the fourth team?   

**A:**  No, they didn't move me at that time. I didn't hand over a single person, so they didn't have a problem. At that time, it became kind of famous in the Taring jail.   

**Q:**  How many prisoners were there in the Taring jail?   

**A:**  I think there were about 300 prisoners. He uncuffed me and left the leg shackles. But, I didn't have any problem with my legs shackled. I felt like I didn't have the shackles on my legs after I was uncuffed. For quite a long time, I couldn't stretch my hands. When I stretch my hands, I had a severe pain in my shoulder and arms. After that, I was doing the wool works and I felt very happy. They left the shackle for about 5-6 more months after I was uncuffed, and after that, they removed my shackle also. One day, the cadres called me and asked me "What kind of request do you have?" They probably wanted me to say, "Please remove my shackle." I told the cadre, "Last time, I was uncuffed, that was great. It would be very good if you would remove my shackles also." And then they removed the shackles. Ketsang Lama had written in his life story about the Chinese informer and I was shackled and handcuffed, and many people in Taring knew about that. After that, I was sent outside to work with the inmates in the fourth team. At that time, they held my hands and said, "You had a very hard time. You, one person, took all the responsibilities, so we didn't have any problems." In 1964, we were moved to the new prison called the Gutsha [Tib. རྒུ་ཚ], located on the east side of Lhasa City. We were shut in Gutsha for a couple of months and then we were sent to Trapchi [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི]. That was called the First Prison of the TAR. That was at the end of 1964. In that year, they gathered all the lamas and the kudrak from all parts of Tibet.   

**Q:**  Were the kudrak in Chamdo included in that?   

**A:**  There weren't any kudrak prisoners in Chamdo at that time. They were gathered from Tsang and the north and other places. Some of the high ranking people were shut in Sangyib [Tib. གསང་ཡིབས], the rest of the lamas and the monk and lay officials of the Dewashung were gathered in the 5th brigade in Trapchi.   

**Q:**  How many people were in the 5th Brigade?   

**A:**  I remember there were about 130 prisoners. When I wrote down all the names when I was writing my life story, I couldn't remember all 130 people. I remembered about 115-116 names of the people then. There were all the lay officials and tsidrung above the 7th rank. The rupön in the regiments. The abbots and the lamas above the Tshogchen Trulku [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] in the monasteries. When those people were [in] separate brigades, they were given one jin of extra butter.   

**Q:**  That was strange.   

**A:**  Yes, that was a policy from above. After that, they gathered all the people who were getting the extra butter in one brigade and we were given butter tea every morning. And the other one brigades had butter tea only on alternate days.   

**Q:**  Why they were doing that?   

**A:**  Who knows? The other prisoners who were from the labor people had comments about us saying, "They were oppressing and exploiting people in the past and now, in prison, they are getting better food." That was the policy implemented in 1964-65. And they were giving the 5th Brigade better quilts. The prisoners in other brigades were sleeping on earthen brick platform beds and we were sleeping on wide wooden beds on which about 10 prisoners were sleeping. There weren't any Dewashung officials executed openly.   

**Q:**  Do you think that was kind of a policy?   

**A:**  Later, we knew that was a kind of policy. In the beginning, we didn't know that. We thought that we were also going to be executed when they killed a lot of prisoners every month during the Cultural Revolution. Sometimes they killed five prisoners at once.   

**Q:**  Was that a policy implemented from the beginning?   

**A:**  That was the policy from the beginning. We didn't know about that because they didn't announce that policy. In 1965, we were in Trapchi.   

**Q:**  That was the prison, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that place used to be the Trapchi Regiment in the past and it was made into a prison. The regiment was small, but they took possession of a very large area around that. There were five brigades and altogether 600 prisoners. In those days, the food that was given quite good and we were given vegetables, though we had meat only during the festivals and ceremonies. In the beginning, I had a hard time when I was working in the vegetable gardens.   

**Q:**  When you were in Trapchi, did they allow family members to bring food?   

**A:**  It was quite difficult to meet family members. Sometimes they would take the foods from the family members once every 2-3 weeks and deliver it to us, and we were not allowed to meet our family members. They allowed a few prisoners to meet their family members. We had to carry the human excrement and urine fertilizer on our shoulders with the pole. I had been doing that for about a year and it was very hard labor, and it was very heavy when carrying two tins on my shoulder.   

**Q:**  Did you have to put the fertilizer in the tin by yourself?   

**A:**  There were other people putting it in the tin. It took about 10 minutes to get to the vegetable garden. I was not very healthy at that time. In those days, there were some prisoners stitching clothes with sewing machines in our brigade. That was much easier and I wished to stitch clothes. But, if I were to tell the cadre of the brigade that I wanted to stitch clothes, he would say, "You don't want to carry the excrement, right?" In 1965, I started to learn Chinese in Trapchi.   

**Q:**  How did you learn Chinese?   

**A:**  At that time, I met the Chinese called Zhang Kaimin who used to be a general of the GMD and played the monkey and went to all the places in Tibet. He was with us in the same cell for a month or so. Actually, I was learning from the beginning, so I couldn't learn the high standard Chinese. At that moment, Zhang Kaimin told me "I will be killed soon." At that time, he was shackled and handcuffed and going to be executed soon because he joined the Chushigandru and made war with the Chinese. He had already sacrificed everything and he was a great man. He told me "You can find teachers to teach you ordinary Chinese. But, I will teach you Chinese poems. You will not find a teacher to teach you the poems." When I knew about 100-200 characters, he started to teach me poems. He said that he was good at writing poems. At that time, it was not allowed to learn other poems, but he taught me the poem written by Mao Zedong. Mao was a poet and there were many poems written by him. I told him that I couldn't understand the meanings. He said, "Never mind, you should learn the poems by heart and try to learn them. In the future, you won't find a teacher to teach the poems. After a month, he was taken away.   

**Q:**  How did you learn the spoken Chinese language?   

**A:**  I learned the Chinese language through the characters. In the beginning, I learned 10 characters per day.   

**Q:**  Did you have paper and pens?   

**A:**  We didn't have paper, though we could get pens in the prison. I didn't have paper to write and collect the new words. So I cut the four edges of the newspaper and made narrow books to write the new words. I didn't have any paper to practice writing. So applied a little bit of grease on the lid of a wooden bowl and I put some tsampa on it and practiced the characters with a twig. That was like the samtra [Tib. སམ་ཁྲ], the traditional message writing board. I had to write every character 50 times. Otherwise, I couldn't keep them in my mind because it was very complicated. At that time, we had to work 8 hours. During the summer, there were three hours [of] rest at noon. At noon the prisoners had to sleep. But, I was not sleeping and I was practicing the Chinese characters. The old man sitting next me didn't know that I was learning Chinese. When I was writing on the lid, they thought that a mice was making the sound "to to".   

**Q:**  What was your purpose for learning Chinese?   

**A:**  I had kind of a strange purpose. Back then, I didn't think that I could go to India and [I thought] that the Chinese language would be so useful for me. At that time, we needed [to know] the Chinese writing and spoken language in the jail. If we didn't know that, we would suffer losses, for me and also for the other prisoners. In those days, there were only 1-2 people who knew Chinese out of about 130 prisoners. One was Phüntso Gyentsen Tsarong [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཚ་རོང] and the other was Rinzin Namgyal Khyungram [Tib. རིགས་འཛིན་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཁྱུང་རམ] who is now the principal of the middle school in Lhasa. He learned Chinese in the jail. Two of them were informers and activists in the prison. Those people not only informed the matters that they saw or heard, [but] they were speaking Chinese and making false accusations and informing the Chinese cadres. When the other prisoners who were falsely accused were called by the Chinese cadres, they had to find an interpreter who would be the very person who made the false accusation. At that time, some of the old prisoners who were falsely accused told me, "Rinzin Namgyal made a false accusation and the Chinese Brigade Leader called me. When I had to testify the truth, I had to take him as the interpreter. I don't know Chinese. When I said 10 words in Tibetan, he only translated it into two words." When I heard about that, I felt very sad and thought that it was too bad and I thought, I, myself, might also encounter that kind of false accusation. I thought that we needed another interpreter when they were making the false accusations. That was my reasons for learning Chinese. I never thought that I would become the Chinese interpreter to the Dalai Lama. We were afraid of dying in the jail, we never thought that we would go to India. I learned very hard and at the end, I realized my goal.   

**Q:**  Who taught you the Chinese characters?   

**A:**  There were some Chinese prisoners who taught me some characters. But, they didn't stay with me for a long time, they were sent to other places. In the beginning, I had the problem of not knowing the meanings of the characters. I requested the Chinese prisoners to teach me the pronunciation of the characters and try to get the meaning as much as possible. I knew a little bit of English and the Chinese phonetics called pinyin were based on the English alphabet. There were the pinyin phonetics in the small Chinese dictionaries. I sent a letter to my wife and told her to send me a Student's Chinese Dictionary. I received that small dictionary and that was like my teacher for learning the correct pronunciations because the way of spelling the words was more or less like English except four the four tones. For example, the Chinese word for slow was "man." That was exactly as same as "man" in English.   

**Q:**  Did they allow you to send [receive] that dictionary?   

**A:**  Yes, because that was for learning Chinese. After I got the small dictionary, I didn't have any problem with learning the pronunciations, but I had a problem with knowing the meaning of the words because in China there was no Tibetan and the Tibetans who knew some Chinese would never teach us the meanings, and the Chinese didn't know Tibetan. At that time, the prisoners were given two yuan per month for buying toothpaste a toothbrush and a little amount of sugar. I saved that two yuan for three months and I had six yuan. Back then, books were cheap and we had the four volumes of Tibetan version of the Selected Works of Mao Zedong. We had to read it every day. I thought of buying the four volumes of the Chinese version of the Selected Works of Mao Zedong and I guessed one book would cost a little more than one yuan. One day, I told the Tibetan cadre called Genyen [Tib. དགེ་བསྙེན] to buy me the Chinese version of the four volumes of Chairman Mao's books. He said, "Do you mean all the four books?" I said, "Yes." He asked me if I had the money. I told him "I saved six yuan, is it enough for buying the books?" He said, "That is enough for buying the four books." He bought me the books on the next day. The cadres did not know my reason for learning Chinese. They might have thought that I wanted to learn Mao's books and that it was a good thing. After 2-3 days, they held a meeting in the prison. When the cadres gave the lecture, [they said,] "Nowadays, the situation of this prison has improved a lot. Some people saved their monthly two yuan and bought all four volumes of Chairman Mao." Actually, I was not converted to the Mao Zedong thought, but I needed his book for my textbook for learning Chinese. There were some Chinese newspapers, but it was hard to find the Tibetan version of that article or news. The four books of Mao were translated exactly the same, they didn't even miss a single word. I knew that they had translated his book very carefully. Then I compared all the words in Chinese and Tibetan in the four volumes, which took me two years. I learned the pronunciation from the dictionary and learned the meaning from Mao's book and practiced the writing.   

**Q:**  Did you know the meaning of that book?   

**A:**  Yes, not only the meaning, [but] I also knew how to use the terms because I compared each word, each phrase and each sentence. In the beginning, I had a little bit of a problem knowing the correct equivalents in the sentence. But, later I got used to finding the equivalents much easier through constant practice. I felt happy when I could find the equivalents. When I was learning Chinese very hard, I was a little bit tired when I had to carry the human excrement fertilizer. After, I could speak Chinese quite well and I was doing the interpretation for the prisoners when they had to testify [against] the false accusations in front of the Chinese cadres. Those people were making false accusation continuously. At that point, the accused prisoners would call me to be their interpreter. Those old men didn't know how to talk to the cadres and I was just speaking to the cadres in an appropriate way which an old prisoner should talk and testify his matters. The Chinese didn't know Tibetan, so they thought that the old man was saying that and their attitude was quite calm. When we came back, the old prisoner asked me, "What did you tell the cadres today? Usually, the leader would bang his fist on the table and scold me, but today he became so calm." I could help many prisoners in that way, and furthermore, I could be very helpful when the prisoners had to go to the hospital.   

**Q:**  You started learning in 1965, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I could read the newspapers after 2-3 years. I learned over 3,000 characters. When I knew 3,000 characters well, I could read the newspapers. Especially, after learning the words in Mao's four books, I didn't have problems reading the newspapers because in those there were all the terms relating to politics, economics, culture and military. I was engrossed in learning Chinese. The cadres of the brigades were Tibetans, so if I told them I wanted to learn to tailor, they would scold me [saying,] "You don't want to carry fertilizer, right?" So I had to be smart. At that time, there was a higher Chinese leader of all the brigades called Brigade Leader Wang. He was a powerful leader. His office was located where we were working in the vegetable gardens. One day, I knocked on his office door. He said, "Come in." At that time, I could speak some Chinese, though I couldn't speak [it] fluently.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1966. When I went in, he told me to sit down. I was very glad because usually, they wouldn't say that. Then I spoke Chinese and told him "Usually, I cannot go see the superiors. Now I know that was wrong." In those days, the Chinese were telling the prisoners that they should come see the leaders and tell them their opinions. That was regarded as a good attitude. I told him "I have a lot of feelings to report, can I tell you my feelings?" He said, "Yes, you can tell me, that is alright." At that time, he gave me a cigarette. Then I showed a very sad look and told him "I feel very regretful about the crimes that I committed in the old society. We were sucking the blood and the sweat of the laboring people. We were parasites sucking human blood." I pretended to almost have my eyes water. Then I said, "Now the government is telling me that I should become a new person living by one's own toil. I want very much to become a person living by one's own toil, but I don't know any kind of skill in crafts." Actually, I wanted to stitch clothes. I told him "Even I were to be released right now, I don't know any skill in crafts. I am worried about how can live by one's own toil." He didn't know in detail about the brigades. So he asked me "What kind of skill in crafts do you have in your brigade?" Then I told him "There is a tailoring workshop in our brigade. If I can learn a skill in crafts, I can serve the people after I am released." He said, "That would be alright, your thinking is good realizing that you sucked the blood and sweat of the people and that you want to live by one's own toil. This is very good. I will tell the cadres in your brigade." I was extremely glad, but the next morning, the cadres said that Ngawang Tsemphel [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཚེ་དཔལ] should go to the tailoring shop. The leader had mentioned the wrong name ... [unclear] and Ngawang Tsemphel. I thought, now it is finished. Ngawang Tsemphel was the Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར] Khenjung. He was much older than me. He was carrying excrement. He didn't have any thought of learning tailoring. At that point, Ngawang Tsemphel said, "Oh! I can't learn tailoring." After two days, they made it clear that the name was wrongly mentioned and it was ... [unclear] After I came to the tailoring workshop, I could practice my Chinese very well because the work was much lighter. At that time, I had to stitch 100 back pockets of the workers' jean pants using the manual sewing machines. It was difficult, but I could do that. Back then, the doctors were all Chinese and when the prisoners would go to the hospital, there wasn't any interpreter. That was a serious problem for the prisoners because the doctors didn't know Tibetan. I was called to be the prisoners' interpreter many times in the hospitals. At that point, my purpose was realized. In the 5th Brigade, there was a tsidrung called Gyentsen Champa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་བྱམས་པ]. He was in the same cell with lay official Rinzin Namgyal Khyungram and Khyungram was the tsugdrang. He didn't like Gyentsen Champa and he was holding hatred towards Gyentsen Champa. So, he made a very serious false accusation against Gyentsen Champa. Gyentsen Champa had a book of the Selected Works of Mao Zedong. Rinzin Namgyal accused Gyentsen Champa saying, "You have destroyed the photo of the Mao Zedong on Mao's book." Later, I saw that photo. Actually, Rinzin Namgyal himself had surreptitiously applied ink on the lips of Mao's photo and accused him.   

**Q:**  He was malicious, right?   

**A:**  He was extremely malicious. During the Cultural Revolution it was said that whoever opposed Chairman Mao, his dog head would be smashed. That meant whoever opposed Chairman Mao, he would be killed. Rinzin Namgyal made the false accusation during that period. At that point, Gyentsen Champa was extremely shocked when he heard the false accusation. Fortunately, at that time, I had already learned Chines,e but I didn't get much chance to use my Chinese. At that time, Gyentsen Champa had to write a report testifying that Rinzin Namgyal had made the false accusation. So he told me to write the report in Chinese. He was so scared that he couldn't talk clearly and he couldn't hold [calm] down his breath. I told him to get permission from the cadre for writing the report. Then I would write it for him. Then he got permission. Fortunately, at that time, a Chinese Section Leader called Li came to our brigade. He was probably demoted from a very high position. He was wearing the suit called the Zhongshan fu, like Mao Zedong, and changed the color of the suit every day. At that time, we were surreptitiously telling each other that the Dalai Lama had sent him to our brigade. He was very kind to us, though he was also scary if we didn't work well, and he would give good food to the prisoners. Rinzin Namgyal's false accusation coincided with the arrival of this strange leader. Rinzin Namgyal didn't like me and he was jealous of me because I learned Chinese very hardly. In those days, they were locking the prison cells only at night. When Gyentsen Champa and I were writing the report, Rinzin Namgyal was looking at us while he was going to the courtyard. So I purposely looked at him implying, "Yes, I am writing the report." That was the first time I used my Chinese in real work. At that point, Gyentsen Champa was very scared. I told him "Don't be afraid. You should relax and tell me about the matter." I wrote the report as clearly as I could. Later, we knew from the confession of Rinzin Namgyal that he went and spoke Chinese and made the false accusation to the Chinese leader Li saying that Gyentsen Champa destroyed the photo of Mao on Chairman Mao's book. The Chinese leader had a rich experience in dealing with prisoners and he knew that Rinzin Namgyal was making a false accusation, and he asked Rinzin Namgyal "In which book [did] Gyentsen Champa destroy the photo of Chairman Mao?" Rinzin Namgyal answered, "He destroyed the photo of Chairman Mao on the book that belonged to Gyentsen Champa, himself." Actually, he would never destroy the photo on his own book. Then the Chinese leader banged his fist on the table and told him "You did that by yourself." Then Rinzin Namgyal told the leader "I will think about it." Later, the prisoners held a struggle session against Rinzin Namgyal during the big meeting. Actually, when I was writing the report, Rinzin Namgyal was already exposed. But, at that time, we didn't know that. At that time, Rinzin Namgyal had to suffer the negative consequences of his actions, like the proverb "The goat hair slingshot hitting the goat's neck [Tib. ར་སྤུའི་འུར་རྡོ་ར་ལ་འཁོར]." I heard that the Tibetan cadres said that we shouldn't hold far-fetched struggle sessions against Rinzin Namgyal because his act was far-fetched and he made the false accusation when he didn't have anything to accuse. Actually, he didn't mean to do bad things against the government. But the Chinese leader Li said, "Actually, we should kill him because he opposed Chairmen Mao. But if we don't kill him, we should hold a struggle session against him during the big meeting," and Rinzin Namgyal was made to stand up among the 120 people and [they] held a struggle session against him.   

**Q:**  Did they beat him up?   

**A:**  The cadres didn't let the prisoners beat him up. But, the prisoners criticized him very much. One day, the higher leader called Wang who made me stitch clothes came to the brigade. I told him that I had an opinion to report and I told him "I have been learning Chinese writing and spoken language for about two years. Please give me permission to use my Chinese. I am willing to work a little bit for the government." In those days, the cadres would let the prisoners translate the confessions written in Tibetan into Chinese. He asked me, "Do you know Chinese writing?" I told him "Yes, I have practiced writing Chinese." He said, "I am going to give you a test whether I can understand your Chinese writing or not. So you write your own life story from the age of eight in Chinese." Then I said yes and wrote my own life story in Chinese. I wrote 27 pages. I could write that, though it might not have been written well. At that time, I didn't dare show it right away. Then I told the Chinese cadre "I have written my life story, but before handing it over to you, can I show it to Gao Sanyuan, who is a Chinese prisoner, who was an acupuncturist, and ask him to make some corrections?" He said, "Yes, you can show it to him." Then I showed it to Gao Sanyuan. He went through it and told me that in that report there were some sentences which didn't read smoothly. But he could understand all the content. So I just handed over the report. After 2-3 days, a study session was held where four teams were gathered together in bigger rooms. The so-called study session was nothing else than cornering and questioning the prisoners [about] what they were thinking. Then I was told to make notes in Chinese when the prisoners were talking in the study session. I told the cadre, "I probably can't keep up with when they are talking." The cadre said, "If you can just note the points, you can write one word when they said 10 words." At that time, I became almost famous saying that I was making notes in Chinese. There was a prisoner from Tashilhunpo. He was an official under the Panchen Lama. He was a very stupid person. He was not involved in the revolt.   

