# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0430.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང, ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee was born in Lhasa to a well know aristocratic family and became a government official in 1954. This interview is a continuation of H.0430.01 amd here he continues to discuss the establishment of the TAR and explains the work he did for that organization. He explains how he was appointed as the Saga Dzongpön (district head), but stayed in Lhasa until 1959. He describes how the Khambas offered the golden throne to the Dalai Lama, and how he sent his name to the anti-Chinese Dedön Tsogpa orgaization in Kalimpong with the hope of becoming a member and getting to do some secret work. He registered as a volunteer for the Lhasa revolt, which he describes in detail. He also describes how he was arrested for being a reactionary and was taken to Taring Prison.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0430_02/H_0430_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  In the beginning, the inaugural meeting was held in the big hall. When Chen Yi came to Lhasa, all of the Dewashung officials were told to go to welcome him at Gyetseluding [Tib. སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ཀླུ་ལྡིང] [on the] west side of Lhasa. That was an order from the government.   

**Q:**  At that time, what were the Dewashung officials thinking? Did they think that the TAR was good or bad?   

**A:**  When the meeting was held for the first time—I had never seen the Dalai Lama attend a meeting. I always saw him sitting on his thrown. At that time, the Dalai Lama, Panchen Lama and Chen Yi were sitting on chairs on the stage.   

**Q:**  What did they say at that time?   

**A:**  That was the first time I saw the Dalai Lama attend the meeting. Therefore, I felt very strange.   

**Q:**  Was that strange in a negative sense [Tib. སྡུག་པ]?   

**A:**  At that moment, I didn't think in a negative way right away. Some people thought in a negative way, and all of a sudden they became kind of insane. I didn't have that kind of feeling, but when I saw that the Dalai Lama was sitting with the Chinese leaders side by side and he gave the lecture—After that the Panchen Lama, the Sakya Dakchen [Tib. ས་སྐྱ་བདག་ཆེན], and Vice Premier Chen Yi gave lectures. In the beginning, I felt kind of sad. But, after that, when the Dalai Lama himself was talking about the importance of the TAR, I thought, Tibet had been liberated peacefully and even if the Dalai Lama might not have full power in the TAR, he was appointed as the Director [Tib. ཞུ་རེན] of the TAR. He was the main leader. Therefore, I thought that the Zhongyang and the Tibetans would have a good friendship. After the meeting was held, I was kind of relaxed. I thought that was the only choice that we had because we were unable to cope with the Chinese with making war. I thought that would be the only way to go after the peaceful agreement was signed and that it would be good.   

**Q:**  Which of the speeches was most influential to you?   

**A:**  At that time, the speeches were more or less the same. Even the Dalai Lama's speech was drafted by the Chinese cadres and he was just reading it. We knew even at that time. The Panchen Lama's speech was also the same as what Chen Yi said. After the meeting, a very elaborate party was given in the Shugtri Lingka under a large canopy. All of the Dewashung officials were given very good gifts and the food was so elaborate—I had never seen such an elaborate party.   

**Q:**  Did they give you gifts?   

**A:**  Yes, Chen Yi gave us enough brocade for making one chupa and many other things.   

**Q:**  Did they give the gift only to the kudrak?   

**A:**  Yes, to all of the Dewashung officials. There were about 100 round tables, and the tsidrung of the Dewashung were serving the food because the Dalai Lama was there at the party. The tsidrung were also serving us the food. The Dalai Lama was sitting at the round table. Each round table had eight people. They put a special tent up for the Dalai Lama and there were only 1-2 tables in that tent with the officials of the Zhongyang, like Chen Yi and Zhang Jingwu, and the Panchen Lama. But we couldn't see the other people clearly. Anyway, we could see the Dalai Lama having his meal. I heard that on that day, Chen Yi ate a lot of boiled mutton and his doctors had to stop him many times. He was eating too much, so the doctors were afraid that he might get sick, and they took away the mutton forcefully. That was good. Nobody was acting like that from the Tibetan leaders. At that party, Chen Yi and the Dalai Lama gave speeches and I was kind of happy. I thought if I would get the chance to work under the leadership of the Dalai Lama, then it wouldn't make any difference to me. I had that kind of feeling because the Dalai Lama was the Director of the TAR. In the evening, a cinema [movie] was shown in the hall.   

**Q:**  At that time, when you heard about the troubles caused by Alo Chöndze and those people, what did you think? Did you think that some Tibetans were just causing some strange troubles?   

**A:**  At that time, when I heard that the Mimang Tsogpa had risen up, I didn't think that their tsogpa was bad. But, I may have said that it was good. I didn't know in detail about that. But I was kind of mentally standing on the side of the Mimang Tsogpa. Though the Chinese were paying us a salary, deep inside in my mind I was thinking that the Mimang Tsogpa was representing the people. But I didn't know in detail what they wanted and what they were reporting that they were going to do. I worked in the Preparatory Committee of the TAR for 5-6 months. At that time, we didn't have much work to do. We were taught some of the Chinese language.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know anything about the experiment of the reform?   

**A:**  I just heard about the postponement of the reforms for six years. I didn't know about the experiment. They were just saying that we should implement the reforms. Probably, when those offices were opened, we were also supposed to work to implement the reform. In the beginning, they recruited a lot of people. They told us to take all the people in the family to the office. They told me to take both my wife and me into the office. The wives were unable to work. But they said that they could just study. They also wanted us to take the servants and they were going to let them join the cadres. The reform was probably going to be implemented. After that, we didn't have much work, we had to go to the office. But we were just learning some Chinese. We had to go to the office and they were paying the salary.   

**Q:**  Did they pay you a good salary?   

**A:**  At that time, the highest salary was 600 dayan per month to the director, chuzhang.   

**Q:**  Was that regarded as a high salary?   

**A:**  Yes, it was regarded as very high. The section leaders were getting about 400 dayan. We were paid 170 dayan per month. We were called the Keyön, [Tib. ཀེ་ཡུཨན] which was a little bit higher than the ordinary cadres.   

**Q:**  At that time, how much was it for one khe of barley?   

**A:**  At that time, a khe of barley cost about 150 sang. That was equal to 6-7 dayan. And the wives were also paid 70 dayan. At that time, they held a lot of dance parties everywhere and we were going to dance.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go to the office every day?   

**A:**  Yes, but we didn't have much work to do. In those days, an interpreter was very rare. There was just a female interpreter who was from Kham. She used to build roads and at that time, she was called to be the interpreter. She couldn't translate well. So the Chuzhang Panda Yamphel had to be the interpreter and the leader also. Panda Yamphel was speaking Chinese.   

**Q:**  How did he know that?   

**A:**  He knew Chinese when he was doing business in China at the time of the GMD. He probably didn't go to the school. He could speak the Chinese used in general. The interpreter from Kham was unable to translate the words like construction and she was just explaining the words saying building houses and roads and bridges and so on. After 5-6 months, it became like putting cold water into boiling water. The reform was postponed for six years. So most of the cadres were curtailed [Tib. ཁུ་བསྡུ]. At that time, they were using a tactful method and they put forward a list of names and told us that the cadres who were on the list should go to the office from the next day on. The cadres who were not on the list were laid-off. At that time, we were learning Chinese-but there used to be some arguments in the office and we were always on the side of the Dewashung. At that time, when I was in that office, the main Chinese leader called Li told me to come to have lunch with him. He was a high leader and he was kind of advising me and pulling me onto their side. At that time, I was 19 years old. In those days, in the Chinese work unit, they had the custom of the big stove and the small stoves. The big stove was the general mess of the cadres and the leaders were eating from the small stove. The food in the small stoves was like giving a party or feast every day. There were about 15-16 different kinds of dishes with rice and steamed buns.   

**Q:**  How was the food at the big stove?   

**A:**  There were two different dishes every time and rice and steamed buns.   

**Q:**  Was the food good?   

**A:**  The food was good. Having lunch with him was not the purpose. After lunch, I was called to his bedroom with an interpreter. At that time, I needed an interpreter because I didn't know Chinese well. He said through the interpreter, "You are young, so you should go to the school in China with your wife. There will be no future if you depend on the Dewashung. In the future, the Dewashung will not exist. If the two of you are going to China now, we will make the arrangements. Among the people in this unit, we have a lot of hope for you." At that time, if I had gone to China, I would have become a real communist or a progressive person. But I was a very traditional person [Tib. ཀླད་པ་ལྗང་གུ] and I didn't want to go to China. I just went to the office according to the order from the Dalai Lama. I didn't have the thought of going separated from the Dewashung, so I didn't like that. But I had to say something in a tactful way. I couldn't tell them that I was not going. I told him that I would think about it and let him know. Later, I wasn't attentive to him and later he didn't say anything.   

**Q:**  At that time, what were you thinking?   

**A:**  I was thinking I shouldn't stand on the side of the CCP. No matter whatever the result would be, I should stand on the side of the Dewashung.   

**Q:**  Were you worried that the Dewashung might be abolished?   

**A:**  At that time, I didn't believe that the Dewashung would be abolished. Even if the Dewashung were to be abolished, I had made up my mind to follow wherever the Dalai Lama went. Actually, at that time, the Dalai Lama was the director. I could have gone to school, but I didn't want to go to China. The Chinese leader told me, "You will not get your shiga in the future and the Dewashung will not exist. If you go to school, that would be best [for your] future." He was telling me all these things.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you believe in him that the shiga would be lost?   

**A:**  I didn't believe him right at that time that the shiga would be lost and that the Dewashung would be abolished. In those days, it seemed that we would not become real communists if we went to the TAR because that consisted of the Dewashung, the Labrang and Kham, lead by the Dalai Lama. So we should not say that we were not going to work there because the Kashag sent us to that office. We were thinking that if we went to China to the school, we would become real communists, and I didn't want to become that kind of person. That was why I was involved in the revolt.   

**Q:**  At that time, in case the Dalai Lama told you that the miser system was not good and we had to implement the reforms by ourselves, what would you have done at that point?   

**A:**  If the Dalai Lama had told us something like this, I would have hundred percent accepted that with respect [Tib. brsi bkur]. Later, I stayed in India because the Dalai Lama wanted me to stay. It was also like that. At that time, the Dalai Lama set up the Reform Office, Legjö Legung [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས་ལས་ཁུངས], and he was supposed to implement the reforms and take back the shiga of the government officials, and we were given 24 khe of barley as a salary.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1956-57. Another purpose of the Legjö Legung was to take over the dzong and the shiga by the government. At that time, the salary was paid, but they were unable to take over the shiga that belonged to the kudrak. They were unable to do that because when they took over the shiga of the kudrak, they had to take over the shiga that belonged to the monasteries. It was said that the monasteries opposed that. But I didn't know in detail who stopped that. We took the salary, actually what was the use of taking the salary? That was really a stupid act, they should have paid the salary after taking over the shiga.   

**Q:**  Was the salary paid for one shiga?   

**A:**  That was for one person. According to the economic condition, then that was not a big amount. It was decided according to the general condition. Actually, they didn't need to pay the salary because we had the shiga.   

**Q:**  Paying 24 khe of barley was a small amount for a kudrak, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, one estate could produce about 1,000 khe of barley, and even the smaller shiga could produce 300-400 khe of barley. But that was supposed to be paid after the shiga were taken over by the government.   

**Q:**  Was that 24 khe the salary per year?   

**A:**  It should have been per year. At that time, if the Dalai Lama told us that we should offer the shiga to the government, I would have offered the shiga happily and voluntarily. I think most of the kudrak might have had the same kind of thinking. I was determined to do whatever the Dalai Lama told me to do because he is also my lama. After the Chinese curtailed the cadres, we were kind of laid-off or driven out. So my relationship with the CCP was completely broken. As I mentioned above, they put forward a name list of the cadres that they wanted.   

**Q:**  Who were those cadres?   

**A:**  Those were the few cadres that they wanted and selected by themselves. There were probably 5-6 out of 30 some people. Most of the people who were not trusted by the Chinese were laid-off. That was at the beginning of 1957 when the relationship with the CCP was completely broken. Originally, I didn't like the CCP but I had to go to the TAR because I was sent by the government and I didn't want to join them voluntarily. If I would have joined the offices voluntarily-at that time, I could have joined wherever I would have liked to join. When they laid-off a person holding that kind of viewpoint, the distance between the CCP and me became more far away. In 1958, I was appointed as the dzongpön of Saga in Tö [Tib. ས་དགའ་འགོ་པ].   

**Q:**  That was in the nomads area, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and there was a tsidrung partner.   

**Q:**  Before that, some Khambas went to Shang [Tib. ཤངས] and there were some disturbances, do you remember those events?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, my wife's family, Gabde's house, was located on the way to the Lingkor [Tib. གླིང་སྐོར], the circumambulation around Lhasa City. There were many Khambas and Amdos who rented their houses. Those who were in the Chushigandru. At that time, the Khambas and the Amdos were telling us about their suffering while the reforms were implemented in their homeland. It was really strange. We would hear about the sufferings in Kham and Amdo, but we were still kind of ignorant [Tib. རྨོངས] of the situation. Actually, they couldn't stay in their homeland and fled to Lhasa-and it was that the Chinese come to central Tibet. Furthermore, a newspaper came out from Ganzi [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས], and that was the most widely known [paper] in Lhasa. In that newspaper, it was written a lot about the destroying the religion and all the bad things that happened in those places.   

**Q:**  Was that the newspaper of the CCP?   

**A:**  I heard that those things were written in a newspaper, but I don't know for sure what kind of newspaper of the CCP it was.   

**Q:**  Was that a private opposition newspaper?   

**A:**  That was probably a newspaper of the CCP where it was written about the reform in Ganzi. I heard many scary things from the Khambas, like many people suffered and many of them died.   

**Q:**  Before that, didn't you think that such things would happen?   

**A:**  No, I never thought such things would happen. We heard about those things only after the Khambas came. I also rented rooms to some Amdos who fled from their homeland. At that time, many Khambas and Amdos came to Lhasa. We could hear about the situation in Kham and Amdo, but at that time, I was 21 years old. But probably, I was not mentally mature like the elderly people. Actually, what they had today is going to take place in our place tomorrow. But, at that time, I was unable to get that idea. Deep inside my mind, I had the impression that the CCP was bad and they were destroying the religion.   

**Q:**  At that time, you didn't think that they would do that in Tibet so quickly, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I never thought that we would be destroyed so quickly. I knew that it was bad, but I didn't know that the bad thing was going to fall on my head in such a short time. In Gabde's house, there were important personals of the Chushigandru. We knew that they were important people after the revolt. At that time, we didn't know they were important, but we knew that they were the Chushigandru. They were preparing guns and going to Lhoka. Some of the Amdos had just a small pistol, but they were taking that and going to Lhoka. At that time, they didn't have enough guns. We had some guns, but I didn't think of giving them to the Khambas because at that time, guns were expensive and we were keeping them for ourselves.   

**Q:**  Didn't they tell you to support them?   

**A:**  No, they didn't tell us to give them guns. At that time, they had to buy guns like buying other things. We were just keeping our guns, regarding them as wealth. I knew that they were buying guns.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you hear the name Chushigandru?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that.   

**Q:**  Was that kind of a secret?   

**A:**  No, at that time, there were a lot of people from the Chushigandru in Lhasa. But the importance of the people in the Chushigandru was a secret. When the Chushigandru offered the golden throne to the Dalai Lama, people knew about them. After that, they became famous. At that time, I was in Lhasa and they collected a lot of donations. They got a great amount of gold as donations. Otherwise, they needed an unexpected amount of gold.   

**Q:**  What were the people saying about the purpose of offering the golden throne?   

**A:**  It was said that it was for the longevity of the Dalai Lama. In the history of Tibet, people had never offered a throne made from pure gold [before].   

**Q:**  Before the cadres were curtailed, did you hear about the plan made by the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. bod las don u yön lhan khang] regarding the experiment for the reform?   

**A:**  I didn't hear about that. At that time, they talked about the reform in our office, but I didn't know in detail about the experiment and how the reform would be implemented.   

**Q:**  When you heard about the postponement of the reform for 6 years, what did you think?   

**A:**  I thought that was very good and that now we could relax. All the people knew that it would be bad if the reform was implemented. I thought that the postponement of the reform was a victory for the Tibetans.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you suspicious about that the Chushigandru might be preparing to make war?   

**A:**  At that time, [we were] not only suspicious, [but] we could see them going to Lhoka carrying guns. And the organization of the Chushigandru was set up in Lhoka. We could hear them making war in Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར].   

**Q:**  In what month did you go to Saga?   

**A:**  I didn't go to Saga, although [I was] appointed as the dzongpön.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was at the end of 1957 and the work was supposed to start in 1958. Actually, I had to go in 1958, but I didn't go. At that time, I was young, so I could send a servant as a representative to the dzong with the tsidrung.   

**Q:**  If you did that, did you have to tell the government?   

**A:**  We would report the departure [Tib. ཐོན་ཕྱག] to the Kashag and the official above the fourth rank had to go inside the Kashag and report to the Kalön. The ordinary lay official would report to the Secretariat of the Kashag, gag [Tib. འགག]. I reported the departure and I stayed in Lhasa. Actually, that was kind of against the rules, but they didn't say anything.   

**Q:**  After you were appointed as the dzongpön, did the government make plans for the work that should be done?   

**A:**  No, when the former dzongpön would hand over the position, the former dzongpön would talk about the work that should be done. I was in Lhasa in 1957-58. During that time, I didn't have any work and I didn't need to attend the ceremonies. I was just enjoying myself. In that period, I would hear about the Khambas' revolt. At that moment, I liked the Chushigandru because they were saying that they were the Army to Defend the Religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དམག] and that they were fighting with the Chinese. After I was laid-off from the Chinese office, at one time, I had a thought of going with the Chushigandru because I had many Khamba friends, like Radru Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]. He rented a room in Gabde's house. And there was Chantreng Dawa [Tib. ཆ་ཕེང་ཟླ་བ]. But, I thought that if I went in that way, that was not the order from the Dewashung and I was a Dewashung official. In 1958, Sigyab Chandzö [Tib. གཟིགས་སྐྱབས] was staying at Gabde's house. The Sigyab Lama was from Tashilhunpo. After the revolt, we knew that they were the Payroll Office of the Chushigandru and many things like telephones and certificates to be given to the soldiers of Chushigandru were searched out from their rooms. And they had stored a lot of grain, tea, and butter in the storeroom. Before that, we thought that they were just traders. We didn't know that they were the Payroll Office.   

**Q:**  Where did they keep the grain and those things?   

**A:**  They kept those things in the Gabde's storeroom downstairs. At that time, we liked the Chushigandru, but we didn't actually support them and they didn't request for that.   

**Q:**  Did you think that they could cope with the PLA?   

**A:**  I didn't think that they could cope with the PLA until the end (victory) [Tib. མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ]. At that point, we were thinking it was good that they were making war, and we had the empty hope for help from America. I was holding out hope until I was imprisoned. That was really an empty hope. On the 10th of March, the demonstration took place. At that time, although the Chinese hadn't completely eaten Tibet, the situation had become very tense. At that time, I used to look at the sky many times. Hoping that some American plane might be flying from the south. Later, we came to know that there was nothing from America. Not only were many Tibetans not thinking that the Chushigandru exclusively could defeat the Chinese, but people were holding an empty hope for the support from America and the British.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know about how Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ] and Shakabpa had an organization?   

**A:**  Not only did I know that they had the organization, but I had registered my name in the Dedön Tsogpa [Tib. བདེ་དོན་ཚོགས་པ] lead by the Jenkhentsisum [Tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ]; Gyalo Thondup, Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ], and Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན]. I didn't do the work, but I registered my name in that organization. That was done secretly, but we didn't get the chance [to work] for them.   

**Q:**  How did you do that?   

**A:**  That was in 1958. I registered my name through Chabtsom Chime Gyalpo [Tib. chab tshom 'chi med rhyal po] who was one of the members of the Dedön Tsogpa staying in Lhasa and working secretly. He was the uncle of my wife. I told him that I wanted to join the Dedön Tsogpa and [for him to] please send my name to them secretly. But, they didn't get the chance to make me work for them.   

**Q:**  What were you planning to do?   

**A:**  I thought of serving the government in a secret way. At that time, we knew that the Dedön Tsogpa was set up by the Dewashung and it was working for the free Tibet.   

**Q:**  When you sent the name, did you submit a paper?   

**A:**  No, I just told Chabtsom to send my name to them. At that time, the Dewashung was in a very difficult situation because they had to implement the policy of "Trying to stop the disturbances of the Khambas and trying to get the anger of the Zhongyang to subside [Tib. khamp pa'i zing cha 'jags thabs dang krung dbyans dgongs pa dwangs thabs]." So they had to be tactful, the zhongyang, and at the same time, they had to tell the Khambas to stop the disturbance. At that time, Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང] and Trekhang [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] Khenjung were sent to talk to the Khambas and they didn't come back.   

**Q:**  At that time, was it possible for the Dewashung to seize the Khambas and send them to Kham?   

**A:**  No, they wouldn't have done that because the Dewashung knew that the Khambas were defending the religion and internally, the Dewashung was standing on the Khambas' side. But they had to be tactful with the Zhongyang. That was how the Khambas got the guns from Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. དགའ་ལན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. At that time, we would hear about those things and the news was widely [circulated] at that time. Outwardly, it appeared that the Khambas kind of robbed [took] the guns from Shang. Actually, they didn't rob [take] them. The Dewashung knew about that.   

**Q:**  At that time, who was supporting the Khambas in the Dewashung? Was it the Kashag, Phala or Ngabö?   

**A:**  No, Ngabö was not supporting the Chushigandru. At that time, it was apparent that people like-Phala was one of the important people in the Dewashung. At that time, people were saying that he was an important person. When the Dalai Lama came to the Jokhang during the Mönlam Festival, Phala Drönyerchemmo used to stay in our house. At that time, we were not talking about those things, but people were regarding him as a very important person. At that time, among the officials of the Dewashung, there were the outsiders, the inner circle and the secret person [Tib. ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གསུམ]. People like Ngabö looked like [they were] standing on the Chinese side. Surkhang and Phala and those people were regarded as reactionaries according to the Chinese point of view. According to our point of view, they were the main persons in the Dewashung. And there were some people like Chabtsom Chime Gyalpo and Gyalo Thöndrub who were working secretly.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the outsider was India?   

**A:**  No, at that time, outsider was meant for the people like Ngabö. At that time, among the officials of the Dewashung, it had apparently become like different groups. Ngabö, Shölkang [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང], Trekhang [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] Khenjung, and some official, were standing on the Chinese side. For example, Bumtang Tsendrön [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་རྩེ་མགྲོན] was a tsidrung of the Dewashung, but he became a cadre in the Chinese office before the revolt. He didn't get along well with Bumtang Trunyichemmo, who was then the main in charge of his monk household and moved into the Chinese office. Trunyichemmo was a conservative and his pupil was a pure communist. At that time, I didn't get the time to work secretly, though I was enthusiastic to do something for the Dewashung. I had made up my mind to do whatever the Dalai Lama told me to do until now.   

**Q:**  In 1958, some of the kudrak had moved their belongings to India. At that time, did you ever think about moving your things?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that some of the kudrak were moving their things out. In that-I was a dzongpön of Saga, so it was very easy for me to take the belongings and just go to Tö. Saga is near to the border, so I could have gone to India. But, I didn't have any kind of thought of running away.   

**Q:**  Did you think that the war would be lost?   

**A:**  I didn't think that war would be lost. I was just holding the empty hope to get support from America. At that time, I knew that the Dewashung could not cope with the Chinese. In those, there were a lot of talks regarding America.   

**Q:**  Did you hear about the people trained in America and dropped in Tibet?   

**A:**  I didn't hear clearly about that. Those were all top secret things. In 1958, I didn't need to run away because I had reported for the departure and I was about to go to Saga, and I had done all the preparations [and] I had sent the message for my horses and mules to come to Lhasa. If the revolt didn't break out in 1959, I would have gone to Saga.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was at the beginning of 1959.   

**Q:**  Did you plan to run away?   

**A:**  No, I didn't plan to run away. I was planning to go to Saga Dzong to work.   

**Q:**  Why were you planning to go to Saga?   

**A:**  That was because I was the dzongpön. I sent a servant as a representative at first, but it would not have been right to send a servant during the whole term, which was four years. After that in the second month of 1959, the disturbance in Lhasa took place. If I had a thought of fleeing, I would have taken all my belonging with me. I was just planning to go to Saga to work. When I was just about to depart, on the 10th of March, the demonstration for the Tibetan uprising took place and people killed the Chamdo, Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] Khenjung. At that time, I had already reported for the departure. So I was not allowed to go the offices of the Dewashung. When the Dalai Lama took his exam at Sera and Drepung Monastery, I was in Lhasa, but I was not allowed to attend the ceremonies. On that day, many people were going to Norbulinga. I heard that it was the demonstration for a free Tibet. So I wore a Tsechuma, which was like a plain dress, and I wore a cloth mouth mask and went to Norbulinga riding a bicycle. I was just going to watch what was happening. When I reached Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བེ་གླིང] Monastery, one woman was shouting, "What the hell are you going there for? Are you going to die miserably? I heard that just now they killed a person." At that moment, I regarded that woman as a manifestation of my protective deity and knew that Phagpalha Khenjung was killed. At that time, most of the Tibetans were not wearing a cloth mouth mask. That was kind of a Chinese custom, and I was not wearing my [government official] uniform.   

**Q:**  You probably looked like a spy, right?   

**A:**  Yes at that moment, I might have been looking like a Chinese spy. I didn't know that woman at all. Therefore, I believed that woman might have been the manifestation of Shri Devi [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྷ་མོ], my protective deity. Then I turned back my bicycle and ran home. I heard that on that very day, Phagpalha Khenjung was wearing a cloth mouth mask. If I had gone there, people would not have known me because I looked like a government official and also not like an official. I was wearing a hat and I don't remember whether I had a pajok [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག] or not. I was lucky to be able to go back home. If I hadn't reported for departure, I could have gone inside the Norbulinga, but I had reported for departure, so I couldn't go inside. So I really [would have] became [something] like a spy if I had gone there. Therefore, I didn't see them killing Phagpalha Khenjung and dragging his body.   

**Q:**  What time was that when you went to Norbulinga?   

**A:**  It was around 9-10 a.m. At that moment, they had already killed Phagpalha Khenjung.   

**Q:**  Where was your house located?   

**A:**  It was located on the south side of Barkor just at the south side of the Jokhang. After 1959, they set up a Tibetan hospital in my house. It was a three-story building. From when the demonstration took place and before the revolt broke out, there were about 9-10 days. During that period, the CCP was broadcasting through loudspeakers on many roofs.   

**Q:**  Did they set up the loudspeakers at that time?   

**A:**  No, they had set up the loudspeakers in 1956-57 and they were broadcasting news and songs. At that point, the CCP was using the loudspeakers and broadcasting to all the Tibetans, "Now all of you Tibetans should think for yourself and come to the side of the Zhongyang. You can come to whichever work unit. If you don't come, all of you will become ashes of the cannons. If you depend on the local government, you will not have any future. If you depend on the Zhongyang, your future would be bright." They knew that they were going to make war. They had been repeatedly broadcasting that for about 10 days. There was a loudspeaker right on my roof, so it was really annoying. At that time, if I wanted to go to the CCP, there were Chinese staying at Kapshöba's house, which was located opposite to my house. If I had stepped in that house, I would have become a progressive person.   

**Q:**  Did you think about that?   

**A:**  I didn't have any thought of going to the Chinese side. What I was thinking was to join the revolt.   

**Q:**  Did you have guns?   

**A:**  I had 2-3 rifles and 2-3 pistols. I wanted to join the revolt, though, at that moment, the revolt hadn't broken out yet. During that period, I also could get through if I ran away because my horses and mules had arrived in Lhasa and I could go to the Chinese. But I neither wanted to flee nor go to the Chinese side. I wanted to join the Dewashung in safeguarding the Potala Palace and Norbulinga. Since the demonstration took place, the Dewashung stationed people for safeguarding Norbulinga, and many people like the Khambas gathered around Norbulinga. I wished to join the people for safeguarding Norbulinga. The revolt took place on the morning of 11th of the second month. On the ninth of the second month, I went to Norbulinga and reported my arrival [Tib. འབྱོར་ཕྱག]. I was supposed to have come back from Saga and reported the arrival. At that time, the Kashag was held in Norbulinga. The officials above the 4th rank had to go inside the Kashag to report the arrival. At that time, the kadrung was Gyegyepa [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ] Tenzin Dorje, [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]. He was related to me. I used to call him uncle. I told him that I wanted to report my arrival. He was kind of surprised and said, "What? You want to report your arrival?" I said "Yes." Actually, I had to go inside, but he said, "Today you don't need to go inside. I will report it for you." After the revolt, I came to know that the kalön had already fled. But, at that time, I was sure that the Dalai Lama and the kalön were all there. Just after I reported my arrival, I went to the Command Center [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང], which was held in the Shabden Lhagang [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལྷ་ཁང]. At that time, Tara [Tib. རྟ་ར] Khenjung and Tsipön Shügüpa [Tib. ཤུད་ཁུད་པ], and there was the tsidrung of Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Labrang called Lobsang Dorje [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ] who was making the notes-I registered my name at the Command Center saying that I was going to serve voluntarily [doing] whatever kind of services, like safeguarding the palaces. Then he wrote, "... has reported that he wants to serve as a volunteer." At that time, they were not assigning the work right after people registered their names. They said that they would send a message about the assignment. I wanted to be assigned to safeguard the palaces, and I wanted to carry my gun and go to the palaces. At that time, it was said that they were going to hold a meeting on the next day, on the 10th, but that day was an inauspicious day [Tib. ཡན་ཀོང]. So the meeting would be on the 11th. Actually, the situation was so critical and they shouldn't have considered about whether the day was auspicious or not. But the meeting was delayed for one day. After the revolt, we came to know they were supposed to announce the departure of the Dalai Lama on the 10th. I had registered my name, but while they didn't get the time to assign my work, and the revolt broke out on the morning of 11th of the second Tibetan month when I was staying Gabde's house. If they had held the meeting on the 10th, people would have known about the departure of the Dalai Lama and I would have been assigned some kind of work.   

**Q:**  Before the revolt broke out, did you consult with your relatives about what should we do?   

**A:**  At that time, my father-in-law was there. But I was not asking him what to do. I was definitely sure of going to Norbulinga and doing the work.   

**Q:**  Did you ask anybody else?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. My father-in-law was also sure that I would act like that. After the demonstration and before the revolt broke, Ngabö sent the lay official Netö [Tib. སྣེ་སྟོད] twice to tell Gabde to come to the Chinese office. Netö's wife was related to Ngabö. That was really dangerous. At that time, the people of Chushigandru were staying in Gabde. Netö came to Gabde's house at that moment. At that time, my father-in-law told me that Ngabö had sent Netö.   

**Q:**  Was your father-in-law related to Ngabö?   

**A:**  They were not related, but they probably had some kind of relationship. If he had gone at that time, he would have become a progressive. But Gabde was a conservative person [Tib. ཀླད་པ་ལྗང་གུ]. He would never have gone to the Chinese. He told me, "Ngabö has sent for him, but we are grateful to the Dalai Lama from generation to generation. So we shall never go against the Dewashung." He was so enthusiastic at that time. I was not called like him, but if my father-in-law had gone to the Chinese, perhaps I might have gone with him. But, at that time, both of us didn't have any thought to go to the Chinese side. At around 2-3 a.m. they started firing cannons. Then all of us got up saying that the war had started. I wasn't assigned work for going to the Potala Palace or Norbulinga, so I didn't dare to go without the assignment. That was like Phagpalha Khenjung. If I were to go to Norbulinga without the order from the Dewashung, that was also dangerous. When the revolt broke out, as I mentioned above, Sigyab Chandzö, the main person of the Chushigandru, was still in Gabde's house. He said, "Now we should make war. We should build bunkers on the roof with sandbags." So we put sandbags on the roof of the Gabde [house].   

**Q:**  At that time, you were not staying in your house, right?   

**A:**  No, I forgot to tell you something. My family moved up to the Gabde's house, taking our valuable belongings, thinking it would be safer because the people of Chushigandru were living there.   

**Q:**  When did you move up there?   

**A:**  That was just after the demonstration and before the revolt broke out. I just left a watchman in my house. Sigyab Chandzö was really a hero. He was amazing and he had made up his [mind] to fight. He had four servants.   

**Q:**  How old was he?   

**A:**  He was probably in his forties or fifties.   

**Q:**  Where was he from?   

**A:**  He was from Ganzi. At the front side of the Gabde, there was Polinga [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ག] where a Chinese work unit was located. They were shooting against the Gabde's house very severely [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  What kind of bunker did you build?   

**A:**  It was just sandbags put on the roof. They [Chinese] didn't let a single person come out on the roof by [as they were] shooting continuously. The Chinese might have been thinking that we were shooting from the bunker.   

**Q:**  Did they shoot guns or cannons?   

**A:**  They didn't fire cannons at the house, they were firing guns and bullets were falling like a rain shower. They were firing the cannons on the right and left sides. If Sigyab Chandzö was still there, we might have gone on the roof and shotguns or went out to do something. Actually, we couldn't see any person to shoot. We just had to listen to whatever Sigyab Chandzö was telling us. He told us, "Wait for me for a while. I am going to set fire to Shölkang's house where there are Chinese staying." At that moment, he was injured very severely and the bullet hit near his shoulder, and it came out under his armpit. After he was injured, we were unable to do anything and we didn't dare go up onto the roof. Then we pulled down the bunkers. After that, it calmed down a little bit, but they were still shooting the windows. We stayed at home like that. Before the Chinese came to Lhasa-last time I told you about the newspaper in Ganzi. At that time, there was also a document for publicity. It was probably distributed from the Khambas' side. In that document, they had put forward a kind of proverb for the CCP which I didn't remember till now. The proverb was made about three different birds; "At first they will sing pleasant songs like the cuckoo bird [Tib. དང་པོ་ཁུ་བྱུག་འདྲ་བའི་སྐད་སྙན་སྨྲ་བ]. Second, they will talk a lot like a parrot [Tib. གནིས་པ་ནེ་ཙོ་འདྲ་བའི་སྨྲ་བ་མང་དུ་ཤོད་པ]. Third, they will openly show a bad omen like an owl. [Tib. གསུམ་པ་སྲིན་བྱ་འདྲ་བའི་ལྟས་ངན་དངོས་སུ་བསྟན་པ]." In those days, when an owl came on the roof it was regarded as a very bad omen.   

**Q:**  Was that document handwritten?   

**A:**  No, that was printed.   

**Q:**  Was that printed in the Tibetan way of printing?   

**A:**  No, that was printed in the modern way.   

**Q:**  Was that in a newspaper?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Might it have been from India?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't from India. I heard that it was distributed from Kham. At that time, the Khambas were also saying that many times and they said that the CCP would do [things] like that in Tibet. At that point, the CCP had already done that to them. They didn't do that at our place. But we didn't get the idea that they would do that in our place also. The people like Radru Ngawang and Chantreng Dawa of the Chushigandru living in Gabde's house had already left for Lhoka. After, Sigyab Chandzö was injured very seriously. He couldn't move, but he could talk a little bit. After that, the four servants couldn't do anything and we also didn't dare to go out. My father-in-law was also at home and he was quite old. His son Lhundrup Dorje [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྡོ་རྗེ] was assigned as a guard in Norbulinga. Gabde's mother was also there and I had a baby at that time.   

**Q:**  You didn't know what happened outside, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we could only see the Potala Palace from one of the windows facing the west side. We saw how they fired the cannons at the Potala Palace. We had binoculars. We could see that even without binoculars. When they shot many cannons at the same time, we could see the red color on the walls of the Potala rising up with the smoke in the sky. At that moment, we thought that the Potala was destroyed. But when the red color and the smoke calmed down, we could see the Potala as before. It was strange that they shot so many cannon shells, but they couldn't destroy it. Later, I heard some of the Chinese were saying that they just went through the motions of shooting cannons, but they didn't really target the Potala. I couldn't believe that because if they didn't target it, how could the red color have risen up in the sky. At that moment, we thought that was really strange and miraculous. The Potala was indeed a sacred one. At that time, the police station of the Dewashung was our neighbor. We heard that they made war and fired many guns. We could hear a different sound of a gunshot shooting from a place just near to us. That was the Police Regiment. But, we didn't know where they were shooting and how many Chinese were killed.   

**Q:**  Was that on the first day?   

**A:**  They were shooting the entire time on the first and the second day, and until the morning of the third day when the whole area surrendered. After Norbulinga and the Potala were lost and they captured the people from Norbulinga, the Chinese made some of the prisoners like the fourth rank lay official Menkyiling [Tib. སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང] talk on the broadcast from the Military Headquarters [Ch. si ling bu] at dawn. We could recognize his voice. He was saying, "I am Minkyiling." At that moment, the fighting in Lhasa City had not stopped, they were still fighting. Minkyiling said through the loudspeaker "Norbulinga, the Potala Palace and Jogpori are all lost and we are in prison. Please stop fighting and shooting guns in Lhasa City. The Dalai Lama has already left." That was the first time we knew the Dalai Lama had left. Sigyab Chandzö also didn't know about that. At that time, all the people were worried about the Dalai Lama when they were firing so many cannons. We didn't care whoever else would die. We were very worried about him. At that moment, It was really like the Tibetan proverb, "Breathing doesn't stop even when people are going to die [Tib. མི་ཤི་ནའི་དབུགས་མི་འགྲོ]." Sigyab Chandzö had been seriously injured for two days and he was like a dead body, but he didn't stop breathing. I was very glad to hear that the Dalai Lama had left and I thought that he would feel relaxed to hear about that. When I told him "Chandzö La! The Dalai Lama has already left." He said "Oh! That is great [Tib. འོ་ད་འགྲིགས་སོང]," and he stopped breathing at once. This means that at that time, he was almost dying, but he was worried about the Dalai Lama. So something was holding his breath. He died at dawn. So if we left his body in the house, the Chinese would have said that we were involved in the revolt. So we just buried his body under the ground of the Gabde's storeroom. We were trying our best so that the Chinese would not know about that. After half an hour, I thought the Chinese would have come and smelled the odor of the body. I heard that during the revolt, many people were killed in the Barkor street. Even the beggars were killed, so there were many bodies in the street. Therefore, we told some people to carry his body and leave it among the other bodies in the street. At that time, during the revolt, we had taken off the Tsechuma, which was worn by the kudrak, and we were wearing ordinary chupas and tying our belts a little higher. After the revolt was put down, we wore the Tsechuma again.   

**Q:**  Did you put on your earring?   

**A:**  We didn't put on the earring during the revolt, but after that, we put on the earring and we wore the Tsechuma. That was for showing an appearance of [coming in a] peaceful manner. After that, when the PLA came into our house, my father-in-law and [I] went out right away and surrendered to the PLA. Before that, we attached a khata on a stick and put it outside the window as a sign that the house had surrendered. But if the people in the house didn't surrender well, like with Thönpa [Tib. ཐོན་པ] Khenjung who was killed because he didn't surrender. He had been so stupid when the PLA came to his house. Thönpa was our neighbor in the Barkor. The whole area of Lhasa had surrendered, so if he had come out and surrendered, that was alright. But, he was kind of too scared and he didn't come out to surrender, and he was running up and down in his house, and he went on the roof and shot at the sky. If he was going to shoot, he should have shot the PLA, but he was just shooting at the sky and at last, he was so nervous that he hid in the storeroom where hay was kept. I heard that he was putting his head into the hay and showing his rear end out. At that moment, the PLA shot a sten-gun and killed him on the spot. At that time, the war was lost and the Dalai Lama had left, so we would never have done [anything] like that. At that moment, the soldiers were holding their guns towards us and trying to seize us, but when we came out smiling and surrendered, they were surprised.   

**Q:**  Did you go outside?   

**A:**  No, after the soldiers entered our courtyard, we went out and surrendered all the guns. They arrested four servants of the Sigyab Tsang right away. They might have thought that my father-in-law and I were in the same family. So they said one of us should go with them. At that point, I insisted that I was going. But, my father-in-law was insisting that he would go. And he was arrested on that day. Later, he died in Gansu where many prisoners died from hunger. At that time, there were about 60 prisoners sent to Gansu and only about 20 of them survived. They didn't arrest me right away. I stayed at home for 17 days after the revolt was put down. Later, I heard from the watchman in my house in the Barkor, that the soldiers came to my house and when they saw my big photos hung on the wall, they asked, "Where is this person?" When the watchman told them that he went to Gabde. The soldiers were angry and scolded him, "What the hell are you talking about? You are lying," and they scared him by shooting in front of him. And then the soldiers took my photo. The watchman told about how they killed Thönpa Khenjung. When the soldiers came to Gabde, I came out right away, so they didn't arrest me at that time. But, after that, I didn't feel happy at all because I had been to Norbulinga and had registered to volunteer. I had become a reactionary. So it was definite that I would be arrested. At that point, I didn't think of running away, even if I thought of that it had become very difficult to flee because the whole Lhasa area was captured by the soldiers. In the morning of the 10th of April, in 1959, I was asleep. Usually, I would sleep late until 8-9 a.m. When I was asleep, I heard the words, "Get up, Get up." Some of them were speaking Chinese and some of them were speaking Tibetan. It was like a dream. When I opened my eyes, I saw 5-6 muzzles of guns were pointed to me. They had come to arrest me.   

**Q:**  Were they Chinese soldiers?   

**A:**  They were Chinese and Tibetan militias. They were not PLA. After the revolt was put down, all people inside Lhasa City were arrested by the militia men who had guns. At that time, I wasn't scared because I knew I would be arrested. So I just got up slowly and they took me to the Jokhang pointing their guns from all the directions. I saw there were some cadres sitting in the Jokhang and the kudrak Changöba [Tib. བྱང་ངོས་པ] was among them. And there a few monks arrested with me. At that point, I was just wondering what they were going to [do] with me. They were speaking Chinese, but at that time, I didn't know Chinese.   

**Q:**  Were those leaders Chinese or Tibetan?   

**A:**  There were both. There was Changöba and a few Tibetans. Most of the others were Chinese.   

**Q:**  At that time, did they tie your hands?   

**A:**  No, they neither tied me up nor handcuffed me.   

**Q:**  Did you stand up there?   

**A:**  They told me to sit down. After awhile they said, "Let's go." There were 4-5 militias holding guns and they took two monks and me out. At that time, they took us along the outer circumambulation road around the city [Tib. གླིང་སྐོར་ཕྱི], towards the east where the house of Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང་བ] was located. I thought they were going to kill us outside the Lingkor road because the militia was showing a very frightening face. So I recited my prayers and prayed for awhile. After that, they entered Sambo’s house which was located next to Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང]. At that time, I didn't know that Taring and Sambo’s house was the prison. When we entered the Taring house, the main prison was in the courtyard of Sambo. They just opened a lock of a room and I was shut in that room, and they took away the belts and shoelaces. I never thought that there could be so many people shut up in that room. The room was four pillars and they had shut in 54 prisoners in that room. That was the prison cell and there were many people I knew, like some tsidrung.   

**Q:**  At that time, they didn't tell you anything when you were brought to the Jokhang, right?   

**A:**  They didn't tell me anything. They just arrested me. They interrogated the people after 2-3 months. In that prison cell, I saw the tsidrung of Jangling Tshong Khang [Tib. བྱང་གླིང་ཚོང་ཁང] and the lay official Dogönpa [Tib. རྡོ་དགོན་པ]. And there were about 3-4 government officials and there were the master painters [Tib. ལྷ་བྲིས་ཆེན་མོ], and most of them were from Lhasa. All of them were prisoners involved in the revolt. After that, my wife came to bring my bedding. At that time, there wasn't anything like a cushion or bedding in the jail. When she saw me, she was crying very much. They were giving a little amount of rice. The problem was that there was no space for 54 people to sleep. One prisoner's leg had to be laid on another prisoner's body. It was like storing things in a storeroom. At night, when I was sleeping, I had a feeling of something hot touching my face and I smelled an odor. When I woke up, I saw that a Khamba who was next to me was putting his dirty feet on my face. At that point, I didn't blame and quarrel with him because he didn't have the space to stretch his legs. So I took his feet from my face and placed it on my chest. That was a little bit better. Otherwise, the feet odor was terrible. In 1959, the Chinese didn't make us to work. Most of the time, they were interrogating the prisoners.   

**Q:**  When did they start interrogating?   

**A:**  That was after a month or so. At that time, they were not calling all the people one by one except for some important persons. They made all the prisoners write their life stories from the age of eight. At that moment, I found a great Tibetan teacher in the prison and after that I could improve my Tibetan. Before that, my Tibetan was not good. When I became a government official, it was okay if we could just pass the exam. My teacher was called Tsendrön Champa Tendar [Tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན་བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར]. His family name was called Tsadora [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར་བ]. He had been a professor at the Zhongyang Institute of Minority Nationalities [Tib. ཀྲུང་དབྱང་མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ]. His standard of Tibetan grammar and poetics was excellent. He spoke a little bit of Chinese. He was with me in the same prison cell. Later, the prison cells were not so crowded and there were about 16-17 people in a cell. So there was space to sleep and at that point, enough food was given. At that time, they were giving the prisoners the tsampa stored in the treasuries of the Dewashung, like the Shöl Legung. In the prison, some of the prisoners' writing was good and some of them were not good. The Chinese couldn't get the information clearly if the writing was not good. Therefore, they told my teacher, the professor, to help all the people in the cell write their life stories. At that time, he couldn't write because his hands were tied up very tightly to the back side [behind his back] when he was arrested in Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ]. So he dictated the life stories of all the prisoners to me and I wrote them down. At the beginning, the spellings were very difficult for me. He was a professor and my Tibetan was poor, but I could write quite fast. The prisoners would tell him their life story and my teacher would put them in order and dictate to me. At that time, there were 17 inmates in the prison cell. I had to write the life stories of all of them. I would start writing early in the morning and there was no lunch for the prisoners. They gave black tea at noon and tsampa in the morning and the evening.   

**Q:**  Did they give you tea with the tsampa?   

**A:**  Yes, that was a kind of black tea.   

**Q:**  You were given two meals, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but at that time, we had enough tsampa to eat. We didn't have any problems with food in 1959. At that time, family members were also allowed to bring food to the prisoners. I was writing from the morning until I could [not] see in the evening. There wasn't any limit to the hours. I was writing 70-80 pages a day. One day, the teacher told me that I had written over 100 pages. Now, I don't believe myself. How could I have written 100 pages in one day? Although it was dictation, it was very difficult. At the beginning, when I met my teacher in the prison, when he first saw my confession report, he told me "This is indeed the writing of a senampa." He was making fun of me saying that I was the fourth rank senampa and put a golden Gau on my pajok, but my writing was very poor. That ridiculing was very useful for me. Let alone getting angry at that, I told him, "Teacher, thank you very much. Please teach me Tibetan so that I can become independent in writing Tibetan." Then he took me under his wing and taught me Tibetan. I am very grateful to him because I didn't have anything to give him for a fee. I was not allowed to write a single wrong spelling. He said, "Do not write a single wrong spelling. If you don't know, just ask me. Don't act vainly, there is nothing to be ashamed of if you don't know the spelling." He also had a sharp tongue. In the beginning, I almost didn't know [any of] the spellings and I had to ask him a lot of spellings. There were so many words in those life stories. He never got angry no matter how many words I had to ask him. If I wrote a single wrong spelling without asking him, he would criticize me saying, "Look at this, you wrote a wrong spelling again."   

