# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0430.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 16 January 2004  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tsewang Namgyal Shelling Sey [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཤེལ་གླིང་སྲས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 66  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsewang Namgyal Shelling was born in Lhasa to a well known aristocratic family and became a government official in 1954. In this interview he talks about some of the reforms and changes in the 1950s.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0430_07/H_0430_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell me about the reforms in 1950s.   

**A:**  One of the most important reforms implemented by the Tibetan government during the 1950s was that-usually, there were only the monk officials and the lay officials who had the hair knot [Tib. སྤ་ཅོག]. But after the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས་གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] was set up, from 1965-1959, there were some Tibetan government officials who were called the Sogpo [Tib. སོག་པོ], Mongolians. They were not Mongolians, but the reason they were called Sogpo was that they were dressed in Mongolian dress [Tib. སོག་ཆས]. They were not allowed to have the hair knot like the lay officials and they were not allowed to wear the uniform of the lay officials.   

**Q:**  They were a new [type of] government official, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So how did they become government officials?   

**A:**  In the beginning, some of the monk officials who lost their celibacy became like Mongols (Tib. སོགཔོ). They were wearing the Mongolian style dress and they were working in the government offices located in Lhasa. They had the same right as the 7th rank lay official. But I didn't hear that they went to the dzongs and the estates of the Tibetan government to become county heads [Tib. རྫོང་སྡོད]. Later, even if they were not monk officials who lost their celibacy, any ordinary person was allowed to take an exam and if their Tibetan writing and reading were okay, they were admitted to be Tibetan government officials through the exam. There were many people admitted in Lhasa and there were at least 30-40 of them. Many of them were also incarcerated in the Chinese jail and they were treated the same as the lay officials.   

**Q:**  They should have had the Western style haircut [Tib. བང་ཀ་ལི], right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably, they could have been bald, but they were not allowed to have long hair. They didn't have the estates. They were probably paid a salary when they worked for the Tibetan government. I don't know how much they were paid. After that, the monk officials who lost their celibacy became Sogpos though they were not allowed to become lay officials.   

**Q:**  Were they the same as the clerks in the Tsechag Treasury [Tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག་ཇོ་ལགས]?   

**A:**  They were higher than the clerks. They were real government officials. In the Chinese jail, the clerks of the Tsechag were classified as the representatives of the serf owners [Tib. མངའ་ཚབ]. All of the Sogpos were among the real government officials. This was the most important reform. They didn't differentiate the people and there weren't any back door relations.   

**Q:**  Who gave the exams?   

**A:**  The Financial Bureau [Tib. རྩིས་ཁང], probably gave them the exams. I am not sure about this. But, the exam was probably not that strict or hard like with high standard poems and grammar. If they were good with regular Tibetan writing and reading, it was okay.   

**Q:**  When they meet people on their way, did they call them "Your excellency, Kungo [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ]"?   

**A:**  Yes, they became kungo. But, they were called Sogpo in general, and they become more and more in number.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1957-58?   

**A:**  It was from 1956-1958. When the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, there were the cadres from three sides; the Tibetan government, the Labrang and Kham [Tib. གཞུང་བླ་ཁམས་གསུམ]. So a large number of Tibetan government officials had to be sent there. So at that time, there weren't so many lay officials. So I guess they increased the number of the lay officials and admitted the Sogpos. Some people were telling me that except the monk officials and thelay officials who had hair knots, the ordinary people were not allowed to become government officials. Actually, the monk officials were from the ordinary people and the Sogpos were also from the ordinary people, and they were allowed to become government officials.   

