# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0430.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང་ཚེ་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Shelling, Tsewang Namgyal [Tib. ཤེལ་གླིང, tshe dbang rncam rgyal]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tsewang Namgyal Shelling was born in Lhasa to a well known aristocratic family and became a government official in 1954. In this interview, the subject continues to discuss his time spent in prison, focusing on the ways the Cultural Revolution spread to prison life. He describes the execution of prisoners and discusses the "Destroy the Old and the Establish the New" movement. In the prison, there was a secret organization in which the Biru Shabdrung composed a longevity prayer for the Dalai Lama and found 21 prisoners to recite the prayer secretly. In 1960, the Muslims in Lhasa claimed to be Muslims from Kashmir and were imprisoned in the same jail as the interviewee.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0430_05/H_0430_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Shall I tell you about the organization in the prison? It is very important.  

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  That was in 1967-68. The head of the organization was the lama Biru Shabdrung Khedrub Tenzin [Tib. འབྲི་རུ་ཞབས་དྲུང་མཁས་གྲུབ་བསྟན་འཛིན]. He was a famous, sacred lama in the old society and passed the Geshe Lharampa [Tib. ལྷ་རམ་པ] degree. He was the lama in Biru and he was one of the commanders [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི] in the revolt in the Kham area in 1960. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> prison, Biru Shabdrung surreptitiously composed a new longevity prayer [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་གསོལ་འདེབས] for the Dalai Lama. The prayer was called the Shabden Norbu Gyatso [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ནོར་བུ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]. There were a lot of verses in that prayer.   

**Q:**  Did it start all of sudden in 1969?   

**A:**  That was in 1967-68 and it was composed in the prison surreptitiously. We didn't have paper to write the prayers on. So he wrote the prayers on Chinese toilet paper which was made from grass. It was a very rough yellow paper. He composed four stanzas [Tib. ཚིགས་བཅད] and the clerk was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Champa Tsültrim [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས] who is now in the private office of the Dalai Lama. His <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> was called Gyatso Tashi [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. Under Biru Shabdrung, there were four important personnel. They were called the four big vases [Tib. བུམ་ཆེན་བཞི]; Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར] Lama Ngawang Lobsang, the lama in Jagra Pembar [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར]. He was the younger brother of Biru Shabdrung, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> Gyentsen Champa, he died. The abbot of Champaling [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གླིང] Monastery called Thubden Sherab [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཤེས་རབ] and Champa Tsültrim, the clerk. There were 17 ordinary members under the four big vases in the organization for reciting the longevity prayers surreptitiously in the jail, and I was the 5th. At that time, they gave secret names to each member and I was called Pendrub Gyatso [Tib. པན་གྲུབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]. All of the last names were Gyatso. I heard that Champa Tsültrim had the copy of the prayer. He could keep a copy. But I didn't get that because I didn't have enough time when I was in Dharamsala.   

**Q:**  Was that a new prayer for the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, it has 21 verses.   

**Q:**  How did they gather the people in the prison?   

**A:**  At that time, the method was very tactful. We were allowed to meet in the toilet only and the cadres could not come in the toilet. There was only one big toilet in the jail. There was no one watching and listening in the toilet. We were making relations in the toilet. After Biru Shabdrung had composed one verse and it was written by Champa Tsültrim, he would pass down the prayers in the toilet to the members of the organization surreptitiously. At that time, the four big vases knew who the other 17 members of the organization were. But, the ordinary members didn't know the other members of the organization. The secret was kept quite well. Even if I were to expose the organization, I could only expose Biru Shabdrung and Champa Tsültrim.   

**Q:**  Did the ordinary members know the four vases?   

**A:**  No, the vases knew the ordinary members but we didn't know who the four vases were at that time. I didn't know who was next to me.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, how did you make the relation? Did the Lama call you?   

**A:**  Shabdrung Lama himself and Champa Tsültrim told the prisoners that he had composed the longevity prayer and asked them whether they wanted to recite it or not. If the prisoners said that they would recite it, then they had joined the organization. At that time, many prisoners were afraid and refused to recite the prayer. That was a matter losing their lives because it was in the Chinese prison. But, afterward, the organization was exposed, but they didn't execute any of the members. That was really strange. At that time, all of the members knew Champa Tsültrim because he distributed the prayers to all the members. I joined the organization because I had a deep faith in the religion and I was thinking, "I don't care even if I am killed if I can recite the longevity prayer of the Dalai Lama." We were reciting the longevity prayer composed by Lingtshang [Tib. གླིང་ཚང] Lama, the senior tutor to the Dalai Lama. But, in the new prayer, there were a lot of politics mixed with the prayer, like the independence of Tibet. Biru Shabdrung was a great scholar and he composed it according to the situation then and the verses were composed very well like those ancient scriptures, and Champa Tsültrim's handwriting was very good.   

**Q:**  How did you get the pen?   

**A:**  We had pens because we had to study in the prison and write many opinions. But, they wouldn't give paper for that kind of purpose. They would pass the prayer in the toilet.   

**Q:**  Two people sitting side by side urinating and they passed the prayers secretly, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was written on the yellow toilet paper and we learned the verses surreptitiously by heart whenever we had time, like in the toilet. After learning it by heart, we just tore the paper. Even now I don't know the other ordinary members. Later, when the organization was exposed, I knew about the four vases. In the year 1969, when they were executing a lot of prisoners in the jail, we were reciting the longevity prayer silently. In 1968-69, every month there were at least 2-3 executions in the prison.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  That was during the Cultural Revolution. At that time, they killed prisoners, like [they were] getting mad. When they were fighting outside, they killed prisoners in the prison.   

**Q:**  Were they new prisoners or old?   

**A:**  There were both new and old prisoners. But, there weren't any Dewashung officials among the people who were executed. That was strange.   

**Q:**  What kind of people did they kill?   

**A:**  Gurteng Künsang [Tib. གུར་སྟེང་ཀུན་བཟང], the leader of the Woman's Association [Tib. བུད་མེད་ཚོགས་པ] during the revolt in Lhasa. She was one of the old prisoners killed at that time. They killed four other women with her in one day. What a pity! Their hands were tied up in the back and they had mucus running from their noses. We were made to watch them when they announced the sentences, and they took them in trucks to Serashar and killed them there. Their bodies were just buried in the sand below the sky burial. I didn't see them getting shot.   

**Q:**  Who were the other women?   

**A:**  There was a young woman from Kham. She was executed only for having faith and praying to the Dalai Lama, and she was hoping for the revival of the old society. Künsang was indeed the leader of the Women's Association and she had secret relationships with many people in the prison. But those other women didn't have any serious problems. One of them was a woman who used to go into trances in the old society. At that time, Sersang Lobsang Gombo [Tib. གསེར་ཟངས་བློ་བཟང་མགོན་པོ] who was a lama from Ganden Monastery was also executed. The Lama was old and he had a stroke and became paralyzed, and he was in the hospital. When the five women were killed, the Lama said at the study session, "Oh! what a pity [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ]!" Only for that reason, the Lama was killed soon after that. That was what the Chinese themselves announced at the meeting of the death penalty. They said, "When we executed the five women, Sersang Lama Thubden Gombo said, 'What a pity.' Therefore, today we are going to execute him." He was an old prisoner arrested because he was a lama and he didn't go to make the war in the revolt. The CCP was killing people like in seasons, when the season of killing came, they would kill prisoners, even for minor crimes. When it did not coincide with the killing season, they didn't even kill the prisoners who committed serious crimes. At that moment, it was the killing season of the Cultural Revolution. I heard that during the Cultural Revolution the authority of killing people was given to the county level. Before, they had to report the Zhongyang when they had to execute Tibetan people. Every month, there was an execution and five was the highest number. Sometimes when there were two executions, the prisoners would tell each other, "Fortunately, there were only two this month." They were killing human beings like slaughtering sheep. When the meeting of the execution was held, all the prisoners were made to watch them when they announced the sentence. They had set up machine guns in all directions. They were suspicious that the prisoners might rise up when the other prisoners were executed. At that time, Sersang Lama was in the hospital. They dragged him out because he was paralyzed. His hands were tied in his backside and his upper body was naked. He was trying to shout a slogan and he was raising his head and looking at us. But, at that time, I heard that they would poke the prisoner's tongue with a wire and twisted it when they were going to be executed. In 1965, they didn't execute Tibetan prisoners. The first execution was a Chinese driver who was then 24 years old. That was before the Cultural Revolution. He used to be a worker in the Thuman Gelek Coal Mine. He was a political prisoner and he tried to kill the cadre in the prison and release all the prisoners in Sangyib Prison in Lhasa. He put that into action, but he was unable to kill the cadre. When he was executed, he shouted a slogan. At that time, they were not twisting the prisoners' tongues with the wire. That was the first time, and the Tibetan prisoners saw the execution. We didn't know how they were executing prisoners. They hung black posters on both sides and it was written: "Leniency to those who confess their crimes and severity to those who refuse." His name was Zhang Yuanwu. His hands were tied and when he was brought to the execution meeting and when he saw the prisoners, he raised his head and shouted, "Be united and overthrow Mao Zedong [Ch. tuan jei qi lai da dao mao ze dong]!" That was really amazing. At that time, I knew a little bit of Chinese and I could understand that. Most of the prisoners didn't know Chinese. So the old prisoners were wondering what he shouted. They were whispering and asked me in the toilet, "What did he say?" when I told them the above slogan, they were folding their hands and saying "Oh my [Tib. འ་ཙིས]!" After that, all of the executed prisoners couldn't shout. They were making a sound "har har". Dumkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. ldum khang rnam rgayl], who was the clerk of Andrutsang [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང], was also executed. He was a son of a lay official. At that time, our secret organization as not exposed yet. We were praying for the longevity of the Dalai Lama continuously when they were executing people.   

**Q:**  When you were praying, did you make sounds?   

**A:**  Let alone sound, we were not moving our lips. When we were praying, our heads would be still and we were moving our tongues inside and reciting prayers from by heart. But, it was apparent that we were praying because we were sitting in a very concentrating manner. In the beginning, the prisoners were wearing the mouth cloth mask and doing the prayers. That was not good. When they were praying, the cloth mask would move a little bit. In Taring, there was a prisoner from the north. He had a short beard on his chin and he had braided it and attached a red cloth on the braid. When he was wearing a cloth mask and praying, his beard braid would move. So he made a special kind of cloth mask with a round piece attached at the bottom. Therefore, the Chinese were suspicious and made a rule for not allowing the prisoners to wear cloth masks. The cadres said that the prisoners were doing superstitions under the black cloth masks. Later, the prisoners and the Chinese both became smarter and we were not wearing cloth masks when we were praying. During the Cultural Revolution, the movement of "Destroy the Old and Establish the New" was held in the prison. We destroyed all the old things, even the leather pouch for kneading bag [Tib. ཐང་ཁུག] was destroyed. All the chupas were made into garments and trousers and spoiled a lot of things. At that time, they were making the prisoners suffer by holding struggle sessions in the prison. Some of them were beaten up and some of them were not beaten.   

**Q:**  Who was holding the struggle sessions?   

**A:**  The prisoners were holding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a>s against the prisoners. At that time, they taught the active prisoners how to hold the struggle sessions. We knew that later on. In the beginning, they called the activists into the office and we could hear a sound "a a". Later we knew that they had gathered 14 activists and they trained them for holding the struggle sessions. I heard that they put something like a book on the table which was supposed to be the person the struggle session was held against and they were shouting and asking him questions, and they were also shouting the slogans at the meeting "Destroy the reactionary [Tib. ལོག་སྤྱོད་པ་རྩ་མེད་གཏོང་དགོས]." "Leniency to those who confess their crimes and severity to those who refuse [Tib. ཁ་གསལ་ཞུས་ན་གུ་ཡངས་ངོ་རྒོལ་བྱས་ན་དྲག་གནོན་ཡོད]." After they were trained, they were made to go among the prisoners and hold the struggle sessions. At that time, our organization was not exposed, but later, Shabdrung Lama had to suffer a struggle session. In 1968, when they were shooting each other outside we could hear the gunshots. The cadres were asking us a lot of questions about what we were thinking when we heard the gunshots.   

**Q:**  Where were they shooting the guns?   

**A:**  We didn't know where they were shooting. That seemed to be on the west side but we could hear the gunshots. They were probably suspicious that the prisoners might have been thinking that the war of Tibetan independence was taking place. But, actually, we didn't have that kind of thought. We only had some hope during the Sino-Indian War. We were just wondering what the fighting might be.   

**Q:**  How long did you join [were you in] the secret organization?   

**A:**  I stayed in the jail until 1971. In that year, my prison term was over. In that year, I was moved to the labor camp. Until then, the organization was still there. After I was moved to the labor camp, I heard that organization was exposed. At that time, the situation was not bad.   

**Q:**  You were lucky, right?   

**A:**  Yes, nobody was executed in that organization. It was fully exposed, but it was exposed at a good time.   

**Q:**  How did the cadres know that?   

**A:**  There was a lot of argument regarding who exposed it. Some people were saying that Thubden Tsöndu [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟམ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས] told about at. We don't know clearly who exposed it. Anyway, in the end, Biru Shabdrung himself had to confess about that in detail after other people exposed it. He had a very good memory and he could tell all about the 21 members in the organization. I had to confess that long after that and I didn't get punished because I was in the labor camp. When I first heard that the organization was exposed, I was very much shocked because we didn't know about the policy. The leader of the labor camp was a woman cadre called Namkhang [Tib. གནམ་གང]. One night, she called me into her office and she asked me, "Do you have anything to be cleaned [about] when you left the prison?" I told her "I don't have anything to confess. I have confessed all the matters." She said, "Never mind, I know how stubborn you were in the prison and I know about your history in the prison. I don't feel strange when you said that you don't have anything to confess. But, everything was finished and I will tell you about that. Don't you remember Norbu Gyatso?" That was the name of the longevity prayer.   

**Q:**  What did you think at that point?   

**A:**  I was kind of astonished and almost burst into tears because at that time, Pema <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> was born, so I was worried about my wife whose health was not good, and she couldn't work and she had the baby. I was worried about what kind of hard time they would have in the future. I was not afraid for myself being killed. I felt sad about my wife and child thinking that they would have a hard time if I died. I was just showing a sad look. Then the cadre asked me "What are you thinking?" I said, "I feel sad." She said, "Don't you feel afraid that you might be killed?" I told her "I am not afraid of being killed because if I were to be afraid of being killed, I would never have joined that organization." That was true because if it had been exposed in the prison, we would have been killed. At that time, who knew we were not going to be killed? "Now I think that I will be executed and my wife and child will have a hard time, so I feel sad." At that time, the policy had been changed and she told me right away "You can relax. You will not be executed, but you have to confess clearly." I could do that because other people had exposed the organization.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was probably in 1972.   

**Q:**  You were lucky, right?   

**A:**  Yes, if the organization had been exposed at that time, we might have been executed. But later on, we heard that some of the prisoners tried to get an answer from the cadres in the prison, and they went to see the cadres when they were asked what they were thinking. They told the cadres, "I think I will be killed because I committed a serious crime." At that time, there was a cadre called Tsewang [Tib. ཚེ་དབང]. He was from Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ]. He said, "People in your category will not be killed. There is a special policy for the people in your category." We found that out after a long time. If we had known about the policy at that time, we would have been relaxed. Actually, they didn't openly execute any Dewashung officials during the entire time. But, we were suspicious that one person was killed secretly. That was Lhakpa Tsering [Tib. ལྷག་པ་ཚེ་རིང]. He was not a real lay official of the Dewashung. He was the head of the people who carried the palanquin of the Dalai Lama [Tib. ཕེབས་བྱམས་འགོ་པ] and he had a fifth rank position. He was taken away from our prison cell at night and we didn't see him at all.   

**Q:**  Do you think the cadres were specifically respecting the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>?   

**A:**  That was a kind of policy from above.   

**Q:**  Were the clerks of the treasury offices [Tib. ཇོ་ཇགས] included in the officials?   

**A:**  No, they were not included in that.   

**Q:**  Why did they do that? That was really strange.   

**A:**  They implemented that policy after 1965. Before that, there wasn't such a policy. For that, the other prisoners had a lot of comments.   

**Q:**  Did they say their comments at the meetings?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying a lot. Furthermore, some people were lying that they were government officials. There was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་སྡོད་པ] Aristocratic government officials who served by virtue of holding an estate.">shabdöba</a> [Tib. ཞབས་སྡོད་པ] staff of the Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང]. The other labrangs also had that kind of staff. He told the cadres that he was the Dewashung official and we wanted extra butter. Then the cadres told him, "We know that you are not a Dewashung official. You are a staff [member] of Kündeling." The prisoners of the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུག; རུ་ཁག; ch. 队] A large administrative unit in Tibetan communes that consisted of several villages. The full name for brigade was &quot;production brigade&quot; (tib. ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཁང; ch. 生产队), although most Tibetans just used the abbreviation &quot;ruga.&quot; In Tibet, communes/brigades were initiated primarily in the late 1960s.">brigade</a> commented, "They oppressed the people and we suffered oppression in the old society. But, in the prison, they are given better food and our food is worse than theirs. What is the reason for that?"   

**Q:**  What did the cadres tell them?   

**A:**  "This is a policy of the Party. We can't do anything about that. Even if you resent it [Tib. མིག་ཚ], there is nothing that you can do about it except bear the misfortune [Tib. སྡུག་གྱོང་རེད]." Later, they kept quiet but they were not happy. Later, we heard that if people in our category were to be executed, they had to seek permission from the Zhongyang. The lower level authorities were not allowed to kill us. Therefore, we were not killed. Otherwise, we did the things that we should have been killed [for].   

**Q:**  What happened with the Muslims who were in the prison?   

**A:**  Yes, that was in 1962 when we were in the Taring prison. Most of the Muslims who were arrested used to be cadres of the Chinese offices. When they were taken in the prisons, the Muslims were also [wearing] the same clothes as the cadres, and the cadre who was taking them was wearing the same kind of clothes. When they were coming together along the courtyard, we didn't know who was going to be shut in. At that time, the Muslims were shut in separately. In each cell, one Muslim was shut in. All of the Muslims were good persons. They would never inform things to the cadres. At that time, their friends who were bringing food to them were all cadres. When he asked them why they were arrested, they said that they were not Chinese citizens and that they were Indian citizens from Kashmir. Actually, they were the offspring of the Chinese Muslims living in Wapaling [Ch. he ba liang].   

**Q:**  When you looked at them, was it difficult to differentiate them?   

**A:**  It was difficult to differentiate them and it was also difficult to trace their generation. But, the Chinese knew about that clearly and they were telling them that "You are Chinese Muslims." At that time, I heard that the Muslims said that they were not going to eat the rations from the Chinese and were not going to live in the house, and they stayed in tents in Dogde [Tib. དོག་བདེ] located on the north side of Lhasa near Sera Monastery.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  They were saying that they were not the citizen in the city.   

**Q:**  How many people were there at that time?   

**A:**  I don't know for sure the number of their people. There were probably about 200-300 people.   

**Q:**  Did the Muslim cadres go with their wives and children?   

**A:**  Yes, the cadres withdrew from the offices and went to Dogde. Later, they were arrested. At that time, there were 17 cells. In each cell there was one Muslim. Later, they became less. When we asked them what the reason was, they said that some of them confessed that they were Chinese citizens. They were released as soon as they confessed that they were Chinese citizens. Those were the Muslims arrested in 1962. But, the head of Muslims in Lhasa [Tib. ཁ་ཆེ་དཔོན་པོ] and a few other old Muslims were arrested in 1960 and probably, they were not released and died in the prison. The real Kashmir Muslims were sent to India.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the Tibetans treating them the as same as the Tibetans?   

**A:**  Yes, we were getting along very well. They were very good persons. They didn't lie, steal and inform the cadres. They received very good food from their family and they gave us some food. They spoke Lhasa dialect like Tibetans. In 1960, a young Muslim was arrested and shut in our prison cell. I heard that he wrote a poster in Lhasa Street. That was probably an anti-Chinese poster and he wrote in Tibetan cursive. When he was writing his confession, he might have been thinking that the Chinese would recognize his hand-writing. So he was always writing his confession in Tsugtung, the third smaller letter. He was supposed to be smart. Actually, that was like a stupid person trying to be clever. The Chinese would know that. I heard that they had a hard time when they living in Dogde. Once, some Muslim came at the front of the Taring prison gate and they were shouting and yelling. They did something like a demonstration. That was after some of the Muslims were arrested, I don't know whether they were the family members of the arrested Muslims.   

**Q:**  They were courageous, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but later some of the Muslims told us that now we were losing the air of the ball.   

**Q:**  Were the cadres in the prison Tibetans or Chinese?   

**A:**  There were both Tibetans and Chinese supervising the prisoners.   

**Q:**  How did they supervise the prisoners from the morning?   

**A:**  Taring was a real prison. So the door of the cells were closed except the time when the prisoners would go to the toilet to defecate twice. The prisoners had to urinate in the tin placed in the cell. When we came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> all the prisoners had been sentenced, so the doors were closed only at night. But, we were not allowed to go out the courtyard of the brigade. If we needed to go outside the courtyard, we had to seek permission from the cadre.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in your fifth <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུག; རུ་ཁག; ch. 队] A large administrative unit in Tibetan communes that consisted of several villages. The full name for brigade was &quot;production brigade&quot; (tib. ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཁང; ch. 生产队), although most Tibetans just used the abbreviation &quot;ruga.&quot; In Tibet, communes/brigades were initiated primarily in the late 1960s.">brigade</a>?   

**A:**  There were about 120 people.   

**Q:**  Were the leaders of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུག; རུ་ཁག; ch. 队] A large administrative unit in Tibetan communes that consisted of several villages. The full name for brigade was &quot;production brigade&quot; (tib. ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཁང; ch. 生产队), although most Tibetans just used the abbreviation &quot;ruga.&quot; In Tibet, communes/brigades were initiated primarily in the late 1960s.">brigade</a> Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes, they were changed every several months. The longest time was about a year. I heard that was a policy. The main cadres were not changed. The lower level cadres were changed.   

**Q:**  Did you live with the cadres together?   

**A:**  The office of the cadres was the first room near the gate. The prisoners had to go to that place when we had something to tell them.   

**Q:**  Was that like a compound with rows and the cadre was staying in the first row, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the cadres would stay in the first room of the row.   

**Q:**  Where were the guards?   

**A:**  They were stationed at the watch towers and they were watching the prisoners day and night.   

**Q:**  Was there electric light?   

**A:**  Yes, at night, the watch tower had a very big electric light and the light in the prison cell was not allowed to be turned off. We didn't have the switch inside the cell. Sometimes, the soldiers would come down and patrol around the rows.   

**Q:**  Did they supply clothes and shoes to the prisoners?   

**A:**  Yes, we were supplied with summer and winter clothes in Trapchi. The color was black.   

**Q:**  Did you have to stitch that?   

**A:**  The government would stitch it and give us the clothes. The winter clothes were cotton padded and boots were supplied. But, the prisoners were not given shirts and underwear.   

**Q:**  When you were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, were you allowed to meet your family members?   

**A:**  Sometimes a few of the prisoners were allowed to meet their family members. They had built a meeting room in a corner of the big outer prison courtyard where the prisoners would meet their family members. That was only once every 2-3 months. But the cadres would take the things from the family members and deliver it to the prisoners, and they would send short letters along with the things saying that they were well. But, they were allowed to send real letters by post.   

**Q:**  After the work was over, did you have to study at night?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to read the newspapers every night and we had to say our own opinions at the study sessions. That was called the "discussion [Tib. གྲོས་སྡུར]."   

**Q:**  Did you have to note them down?   

**A:**  We had to note what opinions the prisoners said at the study session. That was the duty of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 组长] Team leader.">tsugdrang</a> of each team or tsug [Ch. zu]. During the Cultural Revolution, prisoners had to recite by heart, like reciting prayers, some of the articles like "Serve the People [Tib. མི་དམངས་ལ་ཞབས་འདེགས་ཞུ]," "The foolish man who wants to remove the mountain [Tib. ཡུས་ཀུང་གིས་རི་བོ་སྤོ་བ]," "Commemorating Bethuen [Tib. པེ་ཆིའུ་ཨེན་ལ་དྲན་གསོ་ཞུ]," and "The Canadian Doctor in the Selected Works of Mao Zedong." There were many monks among the prisoners and when they were reciting those articles they were reciting them with tones like reciting prayers. At that time, the cadres would say, "You are not allowed to recite the article like reciting prayers." But, the prisoners used to recite it in that way. So the prisoners were reciting those articles with a big noise. The prisoners were made to learn by heart some of the quotes of Mao Zedong. At the time of Lin Biao, it was said that all the prisoners had to report in the morning and in the evening. The so-called report was to say "Long live Chairman Mao and the Vice Chairman Lin Biao." We had to say that several times in the morning and in the evening. At that time, there were 14 prisoners selected from the prisoners in the 5th Brigade trained as the activists. They were called the nominated 14 people. When they were calling them to the meeting, they would say that the cadre was calling the 14 nominated people. And they would go to the meeting like attending the meeting of the Zhongyang. Among the activists, 2-3 of them destroyed the photo of Mao and made false accusations against other people, and later they had to bear the consequences of that. At that time, Sogdepön [Tib. སོག་སྡེ་དཔོན] Norbu Tsering [Tib. ནོར་བུ་ཚེ་རིང], the Vice Commander [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་གཞོན་པ] of the revolt in 1960 in Sogde area, was with us. In the beginning when they lost the war in Sogde when the Sog Tsandan [Tib. སོག་ཙན་དན] Monastery was bombed, he was injured. When he was arrested, he didn't tell the Chinese that he was Norbu Tsering. He said that he was Bu Dündül [Tib. བུ་བདུད་འདུལ] who was probably, the Vice Commander next to him [answer not finished]   

**A:**  At that time, they didn't sentence any prison term for him. Those people were either to be executed or to be released. But, he was not executed. In 1965, when the cadres told the prisoners in a lenient way that they had to confess to whatever crime, they had to confess. At that moment, Norbu Tsering said that he was going to confess to killing <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> [soldiers] during the revolt in 1960 in Sogde area. He said, "I took aim and killed 50 PLA [soldiers] one by one in the revolt in Sogde. We shot a lot of guns against many PLA soldiers, but I can't tell for sure that I killed those soldiers because many people were shooting together. I never wasted a single bullet." After that he told us the truth and he said he killed at least one hundred PLA [soldiers] one by one. A strange coincident was that one of the PLA soldiers making war in Sogde came to 5th Brigade as the leader where Norbu Tsering was shut in. He recognized Norbu Tsering. Actually, he should have hated him but instead of holding hatred to him, he was treating Norbu Tsering very nicely. One day, he called Norbu Tsering and told him "When you were riding the horse, it was like you were just stuck on the horse's back and you never fell from the horse, weren't you? Once when we were stopping for a meal, how did you attack us?" I heard they fought a very severe battle. He confessed that he killed 50 soldiers, but they didn't sentence him to a prison term. When all the prisoners in 1959 were released, he was also released. Norbu Tsering told me that when they were making war in Sogde, one person was air dropped in their place, probably from America. He was called Tashi Tseden [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་བརྟན]. He was the Senior Commander. The Dalai Lama sent to Norbu Tsering through Tashi Tseden some kind of card. On one side a teaching of the Dalai Lama was written and on the other side, there was a photo of the Dalai Lama and binoculars. He received the appointment as the Vice Commander in the Sogde area and he was a decent person.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama was in India, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he appointed Norbu Tsering from India. He died after he was released. They fought a lot in the Sogde area. This was a special kind of person in our brigade. The other people were all involved in the revolt in 1959. In 1971, I was moved to the labor camp [Tib. ལས་མི་རུ་ཁག] and after that, the situation was kind of different.   

