# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0109.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Tao Changsong   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** March 2001  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Tao Changsong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 63  
**Date of Birth:**    
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tao Changsong graduated from the Chinese Literature Department at the East China Normal University in 1960. In the same year he came to Tibet and worked as a teacher in the Lhasa Middle-High School (Ch. lasa zhongxue). During the Cultural Revolution he became the famous leader of the Lhasa Revolutionary Revolt Headquarters [Ch. la sa geming zaofan zongbu (zaozong); Tib. gyenlo (གྱེན་ལོག)]. In this interview, he talks about the Fourth Command Headquarters and how it was for ordinary citizens. He discusses becoming a teacher in Tibet and how he is proud of his students, but also how he does not feel satisfied with regards to the way teachers teach. He talks about various leaders he’s worked with and his opinions on them, and also the work he did as a teacher when the Revolt Headquarters did not meet.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0109_03/H_0109_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Could you talk about the Tibetan members in the Revolt Headquarter?   

**A:**  Typical Tibetan members who were active at that time... Mamen jiacuo was one.   

**Q:**  Is he the one in the Academy of Social Sciences?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And he's now working at the Worker's Union?   

**A:**  Yes. He was the commander of the Fourth Command Headquarter, which, as I just told you, was for ordinary citizens. He represented ordinary citizens. He was full of ideas. I remember he often came to us, telling me that he was going to visit ordinary people, telling them about the current situation.   

**Q:**  Which community was he in?   

**A:**  The Shengli Agency [Ch. Shengli banshiqu] on Baguo Street. Besides him, there were Renzhen, Nazhen... I think Mamen jiacuo was good at mobilizing people. Usually it was not an easy job to talk with the ordinary people about politics and the current situation, but he did it pretty well. For example, when I led people into the Dazhao Temple, many young kids, who were just about 7 or 8 years old, knew it and they called my name when they saw me. Elderly people knew about me too. The situation then was exactly like what Chairman Mao said, "You should concern yourselves with affairs of state and carry on the revolution." All the families knew this. So, I'd say that Mamen jiacuo was the most typical one. He was very warm-hearted. Let me give you an example. Someone in our Second Headquarter killed a pig which belonged to the ordinary people. A few Tibetan kids came to report this to us soon after it had happened, so we had to do some investigation. So we ordered the person who killed the pig to pay for it, at a price much higher than the market price. You see, the ordinary people came to us whenever something happened and we did take care of everything for them. There was no telephone at that time. People came to us on foot or by bike. We literally knew almost everything happening in the region as people trusted us and came to us when things happened. It was amazing how much the ordinary people were mobilized at that time. Something funny happened during that period of time. The Second Headquarter... A kid went to tell them that someone was raping a cow. And I later found out that it was true.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes. So you see, people let us know whenever "bad" things happened and it was easy for us to deal with crimes and disputes.   

**Q:**  I know that you majored in Chinese in college, so how did you learn Tibetan?   

**A:**  How should I put it? I'm interested in learning languages. More importantly, it was because of my job. As I told you, soon after I came to Tibet, in 1961, we started to work on the founding of the Teacher's School. Almost all the people working at the Teacher's School were Tibetans. Very few Hans worked there and they all knew Tibetan. I was sent there to work as a teacher, in charge of a class with another teacher, a Tibetan. The Tibetan teacher didn't know Chinese, so I had to learn Tibetan. The second year I went back to Lhasa Middle School, and I was assigned to be in charge of a freshmen class. My students were just out of primary schools and they didn't know Chinese, so again, I had to learn Tibetan. In order to encourage my students, I told them, "I've never learned Tibetan before, but I decide to learn it and would like to have a competition with you. From now on, in our class, you speak Chinese and I speak Tibetan." Of course, it was hard to do at the very beginning, but we managed to carry it on. In the first year, I needed interpreters when I visited my students' homes. Gradually, I could do it myself. Let me tell you something funny. There are terms showing politeness in Tibetan. The first thing I would say to the parents usually was, "Pardon me, I don't know the polite terms." I started our conversation with this all the time, for I didn't want to sound rude or funny. The parents usually didn't care that much. They were happy that I visited them.   

**Q:**  Could you tell me about your students who are having prospects of success in life?   

**A:**  Well, prospects of success... this is hard to say. There are a few students of mine who are now ministry level chiefs.   

**Q:**  Who are they?   

**A:**  Shuangleng duojie, chief of the Meteorology Bureau; Jiayang zhuaba, Party secretary of the Tibetan Management Bureau of the Sichuan Airline Company; and Jingmi, who works with the Foundation of the "Helping Tibet" Funds [Ch. yuan zhang jijin hui].   

**Q:**  Oh, he was a student of yours.   

**A:**  Yes. Ciren jingmi. And the vice-director of the Women's Alliance [Ch. fu lian], Ciren coma. And there are many others who are doing very well professionally.   

**Q:**  Could you name some?   

**A:**  Wangdui.   

**Q:**  The one at the newspaper publishing house?   

**A:**  He's a song writer at the Singing and Dancing League [Ch. ge wu tuan]. He has written words for many songs. Ciren duonie, a painter. Wangnan and Pingnan both were my students. Also there are merchants, like Tudan yixi, Weijiahua, etc. Many of my students are doing very well now. They all feel that their teachers at school were very responsible and taught them some useful stuff. One thing they complained about is that we were too strict to them and restricted them too much, so that we don't feel at ease with today's market economy. They are not good at making money, I guess that's what they mean. Generally, I think most of my former students are doing pretty well now.   

**Q:**  Is there anything in your life that you're most proud of?   

**A:**  Proud of? It's hard to say.   

**Q:**  I'm not talking about politics but your life as an intellectual. Is there anything...   

**A:**  As a teacher, I'm proud of my students. It's not just my personal opinion. Leaders of the Autonomous Regions say "thanks to the teachers in Lhasa Middle School, we now have so many talented and qualified people in Tibet." Party Secretaries Zhaotian and Danzen both said that "Lhasa Middle School graduates are now backbones at various work units. However, none of them are provincial level leaders. Those leaders are mainly from the Tibet Nationality Academy." It's not a bad comment. I'm very proud of my students.   

**Q:**  Is there anything that you regret?   

**A:**  I don't think there's anything so far. Of course there are things that I don't feel satisfied with, but I don't really regret... For example, the Central Committee has devoted lots of energy and money into Tibet, but it's a pity that the development in Tibet is not as rapid as it should be. If the money had been put in the interior areas, more things could be done. As for education in Tibet, the facilities now are much better than before, but people don't really pay attention to the fact that not many real talented and qualified people have been cultivated. Talking about regrets, these are the things I feel bad about, but they are not my regrets as long as things are still improving. I often talk to the leaders at the Education Bureau that it is not right to simply emphasize the importance of the facilities. They should think about how to make good use of them. It's definitely a good thing to have more new classroom buildings, but they're not making full use of the classrooms. Usually you'll see a new building of 20-30 classrooms holding only 20-30 students. And the quality of the teachers, political and professional, is far less than satisfactory. Some teachers, I don't want to talk about politics, but let me give you an example. Some teachers think it's right if a student makes a sentence in Tibetan like this, "[someone? Tibetan word] is the greatest person in the world." How can this be a correct sentence? There may be other mistakes more serious than this, but let's do not talk about politics anymore. As for professional abilities, some teachers even can't thoroughly understand the textbooks. The moral standards of some teachers are even lower than their professional abilities. For example, the Education Bureau has made it clear that no extra lessons should be taught during the summer and winter breaks. However, some teachers insist in giving lessons during the breaks and more seriously, they charge students for the lessons and lie to the students that the money will go to the "higher authorities" rather than themselves. Each teacher can get more than 1,000 yuan every summer or winter break. Things like this happen all the time. How can the education in Tibet develop if we allow problems like this to go on? Now it's very rare for teachers to visit students' families. Some teachers can hardly visit one student for the entire semester. They even don't like it if parents contact them asking about how the kids are doing at school. Those teachers are so rude. So there are many things that I don't feel satisfactory about. The Autonomous Region and all work units in Tibet should think about the problems. I got the feeling that some leaders are good at talking but never take any actions to make things better.   

**Q:**  As you've been working here for years, which leaders, Tibetan or Han, do you admire or you believe are really nice people?   

**A:**  All the leaders. It's hard to say. Many of your questions are easy to ask but hard to answer. For example, Zhang Guohua, his spirit of defending the motherland was worth admiring. However, people like Zhang Guohua didn't care much about the life of ordinary workers. They deducted the salary of ordinary people twice in order to be "equal" with workers in the interior regions. That was not a wise decision. As for Zhou Renshan's generation, they encouraged leaders to "be the same with the ordinary people in three ways" [Ch. san tong], which was really good.   

**Q:**  I photocopied a few reports done by Zhou Renshan when he was inspecting in the countryside. His ideas were different from a few other major leaders at that time.   

**A:**  Yeah, he spent time inspecting in the countryside [Ch. dun dian], which was very nice and quite useful. However, he failed to do things according to the unique situation in Tibet. He was very active when helping [name of a place/person? Not clear] with a certain movement. He was too much on the left side politically, so it's really hard to judge him. And it's impossible to find a leader who has been admired by all the people and has done almost everything right. Every leader has his achievements and shortcomings. As for Yin Fatang, he was good at communicating with people and did go through hardships to learn about the real situations of people's life. He once told me, "It's sad that people's lives have not been changed much in 40 years since liberation." He even donated 160,000 yuan to build a primary school. However, it was also hard for him to get rid of the habit of being a Leftist. His ideas about struggling against the Dalai Lama, Banchan, and the East Tibet Youth Democratic Alliance were too far away from the real situation in Tibet and were definitely not practical. He was probably right to struggle against the Dalai Lama, but he went too far to try to struggle against Banchan and the East Tibet Youth Democratic Alliance Leaders in Tibet are just carrying out the decisions of the Central Committee, but not all of them are doing a good job. For example, the problem of Chen Kuiyuan, I should say it was solved quite well, as there are no people trying to stir up trouble in the temple now, at least we can't see any on the surface. However, who knows how people really think about it?   

**Q:**  That's what I told Lafang. I used the example of the Zhebang (Jokang) Temple, but he didn't like it.   

**A:**  It's fine if he didn't like it. You may keep your own opinion. History will give us an answer. Leaders I know are all a little bit too much on the Left side. For example, in 1998, I went to the Zhebang Temple to interview [Someone? Not clear]. Party leaders who went with me said, "People at this temple are all followers of the Dalai Lama." I said, "Don't put it that way." So it's not easy to give up what you've believed in for a long time. Say is it possible for us to give up Mao Zedong's theories now? I don't think I can do it. The problem of the Dalai Lama is the same. We're criticizing him, calling him different names, but it is very hard to make people really understand why we criticize him. Some people may agree with us on the surface, but they are probably not convinced deep in their hearts. So we can't say that a certain leader is perfect. Chen Kuiyuan has published a collection of his poems, namely the White Cloud and Snow Mountains. I was asked to participate in the discussions before it was published, but I didn't go. I think some of the poems about the events happened in Tibet are good, but others, I should say, are not that good. He pictured Tibet as a terrible place and I bet nobody dares to come after reading his poems. He emphasized "having trouble to breathe, losing control of HIS feet, and pain in the chest." Things like these in a poem... How can I put it... It's hard to say. Now that Guo Jinglong is coming. As decided by the Central Committee and the Autonomous Region, we'll not give in, but the problem now is how to make use of him. The religious circle has changed a lot recently. And it's not right to think that every religious person is a follower of the Dalai Lama. Actually many people don't really know about the Dalai Lama. Things like this are not easy to say. I do know many leaders of the Autonomous Region, but... I used to be close to Zeng Yongya and Ren Rong, who I believe were trying to follow the instructions of the Central Committee, but they just didn't know how to do that. For example, I used to tell Zeng Yongya that it was impossible to make everyone equal. I was being frank with him, but he didn't listen. He insisted on equalizing [Ch. dui deng], which was an instruction from the Central Committee. Soon after that, Ren Rong disagreed with him by arguing "the Communist government is not a united government" and Ren Rong favored one faction controlling the other. Of course, there were problems with Ren Rong's ideas and the bad influences are stilling lingering today. Some people say that it was Hu Yaobang who came to inspect the work in Tibet and left Tibet bad influences. I don't agree with this argument, for more than 20,000 people left Tibet in 1973 and 1974, which was already a sign of the problem. So many workers were transferred away in those two years, and Tibet was short of laborers. That was why later many people came from the interior areas to "support Tibet" [Ch. yuan zang]. I used to challenge the idea of "supporting Tibet", as I thought that "support" was a term used to describe foreign affairs. Feng Huada talked with me about that. He said, "You'd better be careful when making comments. 'Supporting Tibet' is not our idea. Premier Zhou approved it."   

**Q:**  Talking about the Revolt Headquarter, did you have a lot of power while working there?   

**A:**  Not really. We were like a congress. We got together only when there were problems to discuss. Of course we sometimes talked about killing people, which made us really feel like in power, but actually we didn't have any real power.   

**Q:**  What did you do when there were no meetings?   

**A:**  I worked at the Lhasa Middle School.   

**Q:**  As a leader, did you have excellent pay and conditions?   

**A:**  I don't think I had any. My monthly income was 91 yuan. When I visited the army, I needed to pay for the food out of my own pocket. A day's food in the army would cost 1.37 yuan and I paid it every time although they told me that I didn't need to. In those days, 1.37 yuan was a lot of money for a day's food if you compare it to how much we earned a month. Some of us were not satisfied. They said, "we're fed by pig and dog food, but are working like horses and cows." This is what they said about our salary and conditions. As for me, I admired the spirit of the Paris Commune. I had cars, the famous Shanghai brand, picking me up and dropping me off whenever there was a meeting. I always refused using the cars and preferred to ride my bike.   

**Q:**  Talking about the Paris Commune, which book of Marx or Engles do you like the best?   

**A:**  I've read some of their works, but not all of them, especially the thick ones like "On Capitalism," which I didn't get a chance to read. The ones I read were all short articles, talking about how to serve the people. I liked the idea and was always trying to do it in my everyday work. Although I earned only 91 yuan a month, I worked very hard for the people. There were many things to do at that time, especially inside our faction. Our people wouldn't listen to the Military Region whenever things happened. For example, [our people] used trucks to block the gate of the Military Region Headquarters. The Headquarters tried their best to negotiate with our people, but nobody listened to them. We then had to go there, talk to the drivers, explain to them that it was not a good idea to block the doorway... Only we could solve problems like this, for our people listened to us. Things like this happened all the time. Generally people like me never thought about the poor salary and we believed that it was the truth of socialism that we should serve the people. I feel funny though when I think about it today.   

