# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0109.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Tao Changsong  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, China (Tibet Autonomous Region)  
**Date of Interview:** March 2001  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anon  
**Name:** Tao Changsong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 63  
**Date of Birth:**   
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tao Changsong graduated from the Chinese Literature Department at the East China Normal University in 1960. In the same year he came to Tibet and worked as a teacher in the Lhasa Middle-High School (Ch. lasa zhongxue). During the Cultural Revolution he became a leader of the Lhasa Revolutionary Revolt Headquarters [Ch. la sa geming zaofan zongbu (zaozong); Tib. gyenlo (གྱེན་ལོག)]. In this interview, he talks about the 9 gyenlo headquarters (in Lhasa) and his experiences as a Red Guard leader. He then describes the situation that occurred when the newspaper publishing house was surrounded and how once he surrendered he was sent to jail. He also describes the unity within his faction and the famous Jokhang (Ch. dazhao) Temple incident, as well as Mao's instructions following the event.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0109_01/H_0109_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  They were ... in 1973 and 1974. A few of them (people)may not be possible to find, like Liu Shiyi, a former member of our Lhasa Revolutionary Revolt Headquarters. (Ch. la sa geming zaofan zongbu (zaozong)).   

**Q:**  Yeah, I've heard of him.   

**A:**  I don't think he's still keeping the copies. He might have taken them away with him when he left.   

**Q:**  Where is he now?   

**A:**  Isn't he the chief editor of Ningxia Literature?   

**Q:**  The one in Beijing?   

**A:**  Yes. I think you may have opportunities to meet him. However, it's almost impossible to get things from him, for he was a major suspect during the "Examination of the Factions" and the "Consolidation of the Party." His home was probably searched during the movements. Other members of our Lhasa Revolt Headquarters, like Long Chunhua, are all intellectuals. He may have kept some flyers, not only the flyers of the two factions, but also those from the interior regions.   

**Q:**  Is he from Guangxi?   

**A:**  Shanghai. He likes me to call him, but I haven't called recently. So for things like this, the flyers of the two factions, we can get them if we contact some people, mobilize some people; it shouldn't be a big problem.   

**Q:**  It'll be better if we can find some people in Beijing and Chengdu.   

**A:**  There's a person, probably he's in Mianyang [a city in Sichuan Province] now... It's been years since I saw him. He was the responsible person of our paper, the "Red Highland." We didn't call him "chief editor" at that time though. I think he's still keeping copies of the "Red Highland," for he is a very thoughtful person.   

**Q:**  What's his name?   

**A:**  Luo Shaoxian. I think he's now in Mianyang.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  Yeah. I don't know whether you've heard of him or not.   

**Q:**  I think the name rings a bell for me.   

**A:**  I don't have time for things like this now. If I had time, I could contact some people and I know for sure I could make things clear in no time. There's another one I'm not sure about.   

**Q:**  Which one?   

**A:**  The one in the Meteorology Bureau. His last name's Lui. His full name's_probably Lui Chunbao. That person impressed me with his hobby of collecting things. Raw materials like the papers are very important if you want to do research. Also you need to find some people concerned. For example, the Special Case Group used to have a big problem, which was the focal point of the argument between the two factions. [interview interrupted]   

**Q:**  What's the name of that person in Guangxi?   

**A:**  Rong Quanhua.   

**Q:**  How about if we ask people in the Chengdu's Office of the Cadres [Ch. ganbu ban] about this person's address?   

**A:**  It's impossible for them to know that. I have that person's phone number and address. He lives on Taoyuan Road, inside the Institute of Electrical Power, or maybe it's the Institute of Engineering. He is the chief of that institute. I visited him once. It took me a lot of time to find him. Taxis were not so popular at that time and I had to take the bus. People like him - if you want to meet them for your research, you may still be able to find them. Do you remember Guo Guozhong?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Did he tell you anything?   

**Q:**  No, we didn't talk much. I know he has written some articles. I'm eager to read his works, but some people don't like his articles. I've been looking for him, but no luck.   

**A:**  Actually there's nothing serious.   

**Q:**  What's the name of that person in Beijing?   

**A:**  Liu Shiyi. He was a chief editor. I don't know for sure whether he's still a chief editor or not. He's a little bit weird. He used to be at the National People's Congress. He seemed to be very mysterious at that time. He once wrote to me, telling me that our writing to each other should be kept a secret. I don't think it was a big deal though. Sometimes he didn't mail his letters but asked other people to bring them to me, for he didn't trust the post office. He used to be the Secretary of the County Party Committee. People like him - you may be able to contact them while you're in Beijing and I'll try to keep an eye on them for you. It isn't that I am not interested in the Cultural Revolution, I just don't have time.   

**Q:**  I was eager to collect as many materials as I could, but sometimes I just couldn't get access to useful materials. Even if there were materials I needed, those materials were usually not allowed to be publicly published.   

**A:**  It's not like that now; not that serious, I should say. I asked Secretary Kang whether there were still materials about the Cultural Revolution. He said he didn't have any and I believe he was telling me the truth. So as I said before, you should try the archives. I know they keep various materials of that time. There were many special case groups and the materials collected by them that needed to be stored after the investigations. Almost all the materials went to the archives.   

**Q:**  So exactly how many special case groups were there?   

**A:**  I don't know. There were many of them. For example, there was a special case group investigating Feng Gouda. And there was one for me. Mine was located next to the detention house, with a sign hanging outside, "the Special Case Group of Tao Changsong." And there were a lot of others bearing different names. All the "headquarters," ministries, and departments had their own special case groups to investigate the people in their work units.   

**Q:**  How many "headquarters" were there?   

**A:**  Nine.   

**Q:**  [?]   

**A:**  I don't know for sure. The First Headquarter was in the north suburbs,it included the Machine Fixing Factory, and the so and so Institute. The Second Headquarter was in the west suburbs, and included the Road Maintenance Team and the Motor Vehicles Team. The Third Headquarters was strange. It only included the Lingzhi and Zhangdingchang. The Forth Headquarter was for local residents, including several agencies.   

**Q:**  Which agencies?   

**A:**  Well, as for the agencies, we focused on factory workers. The First and Second Headquarters were the strongest. At that time, we had a food problem and the First and Second Headquarters could provide transportation, so we therefore put more effort on them. And another problem was the armed struggles. What should we do if that happened? Our counterpart had guns, but we didn't. So we made our own weapons in our Machine Fixing Factory. They were very afraid of our "three connections demolitions."   

**Q:**  "Three connections demolition"?   

**A:**  Yeah. A small pack of dynamite was connected to a big pack, which could be very powerful when ignited.   

**Q:**  How did you do it? You ignited the small pack and let it kindle the big one? Why was it called a "three connections demolition"?   

**A:**  Actually there were only two steps. As you just said, the small pack would kindle the big one. That was it. Of course it took a lot of skill to make and use this special instrument. If the packs were too close to the target, it might hurt innocent people. Anyhow, they called it the "three point style."   

**Q:**  Who made that?   

**A:**  Old army men did. They were experienced at making things like that, although sometimes they failed. The Machine Fixing Factory once tried to make cannons, but the shell was ignited before leaving the mouth of a cannon and the explosion killed several people. Well, what could we do? We had to hold memorial meetings for those who died. Their death was glorious. It happened in 1968. As for guns, if I'm not mistaken, the first time we used guns was on January 18th, 1968.   

**Q:**  Where did that happen?   

**A:**  It was on the Luisha River. An engineer who worked for us lost one of his eyes because of the gunshot.   

**Q:**  Was that a real gun?   

**A:**  Yes, a real one. And we got very nervous after that accident. As our skill was limited, there were no sighting devices on our guns, and it was very possible to have more accidents. Anyway, we did feel safe as long as we knew that we had weapons. We also made grenades. There were also problems with our grenades. Generally, it takes about seven seconds for a grenade to explode. However, ours had problems with the fuse and would explode within one or two seconds after being ignited. Sometimes a grenade exploded on your hand before you could throw it out. We were very frustrated. We had to go through the trouble of holding memorial meetings for those who died, comforting their survivors, and announcing that their death was glorious and they died to protect Chairman Mao. We did feel bad for them. It was a sad thing to see someone die.   

**Q:**  Just now you talked about the "nine headquarters". What was the Fourth Headquarters again?   

**A:**  It was a headquarters of residents. They were the ordinary people on the bottom. It was a big team though. When we held grand meetings or parades, they were a major team.   

**Q:**  Do you know the number of people in that headquarters?   

**A:**  We didn't count the number. However, workers were a major component, although I don't know how many there were. Whenever we had a parade, our team looked great with lots of people and many vehicles. At that time, the ordinary people were very much into politics. The Fifth Headquarters was for cadres and clerks in government organizations, like the District Party Committee, the local People's Congress, etc. They were mainly intellectuals. Well, among the intellectuals, people like the secretary of the district Party Committee favored the other faction instead of us. Maybe it was because they were closer to the leaders of the autonomous region since they worked for them. So our headquarters were kind of flexible. We didn't include local areas. For example, Lingzhi belonged to the Third Headquarters, Ge'ermu belonged to the Eighth Headquarters. Both of them were not considered as independent areas and had to be directly connected to Lhasa. We simply counted our headquarters and named those two the Eighth. There were no clear boundaries between headquarters. When the leaders of the Central Committee interviewed us, we were asked how many people we had in Lhasa. I was not prepared for that question and had to say that there might be around two or three hundred thousand (200,000 to 300,000). The Central leaders criticized me saying that "the Lhasa Headquarters should only be responsible for Lhasa, not the whole region." I said that we were not trying to be responsible for the whole region, however, other people wanted to depend on us. I said I had explained to those people and organizations that the Central Committee did not encourage forming alliances, but I couldn't stop them from coming to us. And I did think the situation then was kind of different. Anyway, after the Central Committee issued the "Five Red Items" [Ch. hong wu tiao], our team became even stronger. (laughs) It seemed that the "Five Red Items" helped us strengthen our team. (laughs) This is what I said to Premier Zhou and he was silent for a couple of seconds, not saying anything. (laughs)   

**Q:**  After Chairman Mao's talk, the Cultural Revolution formally started. You were at the Lhasa Middle School at that time. Could you talk about the situation then?   

**A:**  I remember in August 1966, the Red Guards were everywhere in the whole country and Lhasa didn't want to be left behind. Therefore we formed our own Red Guard organizations. It was a concern that there might be problems if students in the minority regions were allowed to get self-organized. I was in my twenties then but still a Red Guard. (laughs) Actually I was a leader of the Red Guards.   

**Q:**  At the Lhasa Middle School?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was your position then?   

**A:**  I was a teacher. I taught Chinese since I had a degree in Chinese language, and I also taught other courses. Most of the students in my school were Tibetans. It was a concern that the Tibetan students might get into trouble, for they didn't know the right direction. Therefore, the Party Branch at the Lhasa Middle School decided to select a few young teachers to join the Red Guards and work as leaders. I remember I used to lead students to "destroy the four old customs" [Ch. po si jue]. There was one thing that deeply impressed me. One day we were supposed to march into the Dazhao Temple (Jokhang). I was very afraid because I knew the Dazhao Temple was world-famous and we could not do anything good to it. However, I couldn't stop the students and had to follow them into the temple. Soon after that, the District Party Committee wanted to talk with me and I immediately told the students to stop going to the Dazhao Temple and wait till I was back. Zhang Zaiwang was there. He was the minister of the Ministry of the [?]. (He) said to me, "Comrade Tao Changsong, we just got instructions from Premier Zhou. It is not allowed to destroy the Dazhao Temple. We know that students from Lhasa Middle School have already marched in so tell them they have to protect the temple." I told my students about the instructions when I went back. The students were quite obedient to the leaders of the Central Committee. They did listen to people like Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou. Therefore, they stopped the action at the Dazhao Temple. Well, of course, they kept on "destroying the old four customs" outside. Whenever they saw someone kowtow, they would immediately stick flyers on that person's back. (laughs)   

**Q:**  What were the flyers about?   

**A:**  To destroy the "four old customs". They did not allow people to kowtow, which was considered one of the four old customs. People were afraid of this and did stop kowtowing.   

**Q:**  How many Red Guards were there at the Lhasa Middle School at that time? When were they organized?   

**A:**  I don't recall the exact time, probably in August, 1966. They got organized in no time. Well, the Red Guards in Beijing were organized earlier than us. They were in May and we were in August. Two Red Guard organizations had a big influence in Lhasa, the one at Lhasa Middle School and the other one at the Teacher's School.   

**Q:**  The Teachers School?   

**A:**  It was the predecessor of the Tibetan University.   

**Q:**  How many Red Guards were there in Lhasa Middle School?   

**A:**  Well, all the Red Guards were carefully selected, and had to be the "red five groups of people" [Ch. hong wu lei]. There were not a lot at the very beginning, about 100.   

**Q:**  How old were they?   

**A:**  They were all middle school students.   

**Q:**  I mean were there senior high students or just junior high students?   

**A:**  Both. Most of them were junior high students. A few students left deep impressions on me; they were all junior high students. Well, as I said before, how should we review the Cultural Revolution in Tibet? If you ask me, as I was there from the very beginning until the end, I should say we were following the instructions from the Central Committee closely. Whenever we got an order from the Central Committee, we acted immediately. That was the way we did it. Anyhow, there might have been mistakes in our understanding of the orders. For example, regarding the "January Storm," we didn't quite understand it, but the newspapers said that it was correct to take the power.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  It was in 1967. The "January Storm" was in 1967. The power of the Shanghai Party Committee and the city government were taken. The Central Committee affirmed it. This movement had great impact in the entire country. We then thought about what we should do and not long after that, we took the power over the Tibet Daily. (laughs)   

**Q:**  The people at the Tibet Daily, like Jin Sha, do you know about them?   

**A:**  They had lost control of the paper long before we took the power because the Cultural Revolution started with them, the leaders at the newspaper publishing houses and the police bureaus. People in the Police Bureau, like Zhu Zeming, Gao Liyi_ _   

**Q:**  Zhu Zeming was in Lhasa a few days ago.   

**A:**  Really? People like him were dismissed from office very early. At that time we thought that the publishing house should be controlled by the proletariat, and as ordered by Chairman Mao, we should be the representatives of the proletariat to try to keep the publishing house in our control. Well, actually, things were still complicated after we took the power. The counter-seeking of the power, fighting among the people, and even fighting with weapons, all these problems eventually led to the imposition of military control by the Central Committee. We simply followed the orders of the Central Committee to take the power and were not prepared for all the problems. We definitely had no idea when the Tibet Military Region Headquarters came to take the control. They got permission from the Central Committee. I was then in charge of the publishing house and had to negotiate with the army. I told them that we would hand over the power if they could show me the order from the Central Committee. The army, to tell you the truth, they favored the other side and deliberately refused my request. It could have been very simple though, they would show me what they had and I would give them what they wanted. However, they just didn't do it that way. (laughs) Well, I then said, "Fine, I believe that you have the permit from the Central Committee and we'll get out of here immediately."   

**Q:**  When did this happen?   

**A:**  It was in 1967, probably on February 26th. You may know the person who negotiated with me, Wei Ke.   

**Q:**  Oh, yes.   

**A:**  He was utterly unreasonable. I told him that I believed him and my men would leave right away. However, it was already too late.   

**Q:**  How many people did you have in the publishing house?   

**A:**  About two to three thousand.   

**Q:**  In the publishing house?   

**A:**  Yes. Well, how should I put it? People came to the publishing house out of their own will. They were there to protect the publishing house, protect the fruit of the Great Cultural Revolution. (laughs)   

**Q:**  How long had you been there before they came?   

**A:**  What?   

**Q:**  How long had you been at the publishing house before the negotiations?   

**A:**  Before the negotiations_ Well, I was in charge at the publishing house since we took power.   

**Q:**  About how long? Six months?   

**A:**  Not that long. About twenty days or maybe just ten days. So it was getting complicated after we took the power. We mainly published information about the Cultural Revolution, and some local news of course. We organized people to write for us, and I myself wrote for the paper. We couldn't leave blanks on the paper. (laughs) You can imagine, life was pretty hard for us. We had to find people for the Tibetan version of the paper. I don't know Tibetan, but those who were in charge of the Tibetan version always came to me when they had problems.   

**Q:**  Who was in charge of the Tibetan version of the paper?   

**A:**  We hired some temporary workers for that. Most of them were Tibetan, a few were Han. One of them contacted me very often at that time. He was a Han named Song Demin. Song Demin used to be the principal of the 2nd School, the 1st Middle School, and then he went to the Lhasa Political Consultative Conference and served as the vice general secretary. He used to come to me a lot with all kinds of questions. I said, "I don't know Tibetan. How can I help?" I told him we should discuss together whenever there was a problem. It was on January 11th that we took the power and the army came on the 26th. After the negotiations, the army did not let us go and we were kept there until late that night when a telegraph was sent to us from the Central Committee. There were our men in the post office and they read the telegraph first. The telegraph was sent to me and everybody was happy because then we knew we were saved. We then had a party in the publishing house, celebrating the "2.24" telegraph from the Central Committee, which did not reach me until February 26th.   

**Q:**  February 26th?   

**A:**  Yes, two days after February 24th when it was sent. We had a party to celebrate because the telegraph was addressed clearly to "the revolutionary masses in Lhasa" so we were addressed as a "revolutionary organization." The telegraph ordered us to establish the "revolutionary three connections" with Zhang Guohua. We were very happy at that time and we even had a parade inside the publishing house. Using the opportunity of the parade, we organized our people and were ready to leave. However, we were stopped. The army literally encircled us.   

**Q:**  The army?   

**A:**  Yes. They didn't let us go. On the 26th, 27th, 28th, March 1st, and 2nd. On March 2nd, I said that we shouldn't let it go any further. First of all, they didn't allow us to get food from outside and the food stored in the publishing house was limited. I could only have one steamed bun for a whole day. Secondly, our communications with the outside was cut off.   

**Q:**  They didn't allow even one person to go out?   

**A:**  No. None of us could go. However, they did allow people to come in, so there were more and more people who gathered at the publishing house. We had trouble providing food for all the people and couldn't reach any agreement with the army. So I decided on March 2nd to surrender myself together with a few other leaders. We then went out and were immediately caught by the army.   

**Q:**  Whose order was that?   

**A:**  It must have been the Military Region Headquarter's. She Banqiao, the army's Chief of Staff, was inspecting the work at the publishing house at that time and we knew each other. I thought I could find a way out by communicating with him. However, that guy was swollen with arrogance because he had the order from the Central Military Committee. And Zeng Yongya, then General of the Army, later told me that he also inspected the publishing house during that period of time. (laughs)   

**Q:**  Is that right? And was the publishing house building connected with the office?   

**A:**  It was facing the back door of the Lhasa Branch of the Xinhua News Agency. Well, the whole drama came to an end when we went out.   

**Q:**  Were you tied up?   

**A:**  Oh, yes. They had informed us that if we chose to go out, we could be freed after being body-searched. (laughs)   

**Q:**  The Great Alliance told you that?   

**A:**  No, the army. They used their loudspeakers. Of course people got nervous. They tied us up on March 2nd, and we couldn't get anything after half a day's interrogation. They wanted me to say that we were used by someone "backstage" and tell them who exactly was using us. It was an easy question and the answer was "those leaders who follow the capitalist road." (laughs) Actually, I would have been happy if I could have named some people "backstage" and then have been set free. I just couldn't do that. Those people I worked with were not my "backstage" controllers. Most of the time they needed to consult me before making any decisions. (laughs)   

**Q:**  Whom did they want you to accuse?   

**A:**  Well, they named a few. One of them was Zhang Baohe, the vice chief editor, the one who often consulted me when there were problems. Another one was Liu Zhaogong, the vice head of the Commerce Department. And Bao Yishan, the former secretary of the Communist Youth League. Those people were the ones whom the army wanted. The army asked me what "bad ideas" they had given me and how I acted according to their will. I said it was hard to say because most of the time they had to consult me before making any decisions. If I disagreed, they dared not do anything. (laughs) The president of the Criminal Court of the Supreme Court, Jin Yuzhang, once interrogated me.   

**Q:**  Did they take you to the Military Region Headquarter?   

**A:**  No. We were first taken to the East Suburb Prison where we spent about 11 days. Later we were transferred to a detention center. Their comments sounded pretty nice, "we'll transfer you to a better place, as the conditions at the East Suburb Prison are terrible." (laughs) We were then put in at the north suburb. What they really wanted was more information from us.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in the prison?   

**A:**  The first time was 71 days.   

**Q:**  71 days?   

**A:**  Yes. That was the first time. I didn't feel like it was a long time though.   

**Q:**  Did the police bureaus make reports on this and let people know about it?   

**A:**  They did. I was set free in May and I found on the streets that there were slogans everywhere, saying "set Tao Changsong free, or tell us about his crimes." (laughs) Those slogans were printed mainly by students. During that period of time, for about 70 days; some students were freed very soon.   

**Q:**  Besides you, how many people were put into prison?   

**A:**  I can't recall the exact number now. Probably more than a hundred. The detention center was full. People like me were considered important criminals and should be kept in private rooms. However, it was simply impossible. I shared a room with two other people.   

**Q:**  Whom did you share the room with?   

**A:**  One was Yang Hanqing, and the other was a student of the Minority University. I forgot his name. People like me had to share a room with two others. However, they did pay a lot of attention to those people in power and treated them even worse. Zhang Guangzhe and other former regional leaders had their pictures taken, and were handcuffed and shackled. We could tell who was there by listening to the sound of the shackles. (laughs)   

**Q:**  Did they beat you?   

**A:**  Not really. I heard that there was a picture of "one hundred ugly people" in the Culture Palace, and I was in the picture. (laughs)   

**Q:**  What was that?   

**A:**  A picture of "one hundred ugly people." I was the first one in the picture.   

**Q:**  What does that mean?   

**A:**  Well, they uglified our photos. There was no solid evidence of our "crimes" though. I didn't see the picture in person but someone told me about it. They repeated to me that I would be freed if I could name one or two "backstage supporters." (laughs) We thought at that time that the Central Committee would justify things like this for us. However, we can see now that it was a naïve idea. And before the incident of our publishing house happened, Zhao Yongfu fired at people and killed more than one hundred in the publishing house of the Qinghai Daily. We didn't know what exactly happened, but we did hear that the army encircled the Qinghai Daily. Zeng Yongya later teased me, "You were so brave! If the Central Committee had allowed the army to open fire, you would have lost your lives!" (laughs) It could be Premier Zhou who said that bloody struggles like the one in Qinghai should not be allowed to happen in Tibet. That was why the army didn't fire at us. However, the army did scare people by shouting through the loud speakers, accusing us of keeping weapons inside the publishing house. After we surrendered ourselves, they started to say that we were hiding the weapons in a well. Actually they later found out that we didn't have anything hidden there.   

**Q:**  How did they set you free after about 70 days?   

**A:**  Well, there was a saying at that time, "It is right to arrest people and it is also right to set them free." (laughs) And they could also say, "there was a reason that we arrested you, but no evidence was found after the investigation." This was what Tan Furong, the army's Vice Chief of Staff, told me when I talked with him about this incident. I said to him, "It's easy for you to put it this way today. However, the army put in so much effort dealing with us at that time as if it was faced with a formidable foe." I don't think we had any wild ambitions, but whenever there was an order from the Central Committee, we were supposed to follow it. We had to obey the orders we understood, as well as those we didn't understand. As for what the purposes were, we didn't know. Last time you came, I talked about this with you. If you ask what our wild ambitions were, whether we wanted to be the controllers of the District Party Committee, I'd say we never thought about that. What we did keep in our mind was that as Chinese and intellectuals educated by the CCP, we should do whatever we could to, as we said then, "keep our landscape from changing it's color." What we really wanted to do was something good for our country, and we didn't mind if we had to suffer. I believe this was what most of us were thinking about at that time. Things came to me after I was actively involved in the Cultural Revolution. When I was in middle school and college, people knew me as someone who was least interested in politics. I never attended any political activities, nor did I ever think about joining the CCP or the Youth League. Late in 1960, before I graduated from college, I was encouraged to join the Youth League. I said, "Fine, I would do it if all the people wanted me to." So you see, I didn't join the Youth League until graduating from college. I don't think people like me have ever had wild political ambitions. I have not dreamed about becoming a high official either. During the Cultural Revolution, people like me who didn't like politics could hardly escape. (laughs) Actually you can find evidence that we were just obeying orders from the Central Committee. Of course, we made our own decisions while carrying out the instructions. For example, we were not very interested in "criticizing Deng and [?]". First of all, we were not in power. "Criticizing Deng and [?]" had nothing to do with us. As we didn't thoroughly understand the meaning of the movement, so we didn't do a very good job. On the contrary, some people in power at that time were very enthusiastic. They had different understandings about that movement and thought that it was a chance to criticize us. We were then put into prison as "anti-revolutionaries." When the Revolution Committee of the Autonomous Region was founded soon after the beginning of the Culture Revolution, we raised questions like, "why so many of us were put into prison." What we got as an answer was a rehabilitation bulletin, which was issued on November 13th, 1968, just a few days after the founding of the Revolution Committee. The first name on the bulletin was mine. All of us were redressed, all the accusations were cancelled. Well, at that time, it was not that you could walk away innocent with a rehabilitation bulletin. You were "anti-revolutionary" forever if they once said you were. Rehabilitation meant nothing. So it was not us who were enthusiastic about movements like "criticizing Deng", but those who were seeking personal interests. Unfortunately, those people later came into power. The Vice Chiefs of the Police Bureau, Chen Zhuo and Li Benshan, both had articles published criticizing Deng Xiaoping. Today you can still find their articles in Tibetan newspapers and periodicals. Those people did not meet any problems even later when people knew that criticizing Deng was wrong.   

**Q:**  There's one thing I don't understand. Why were there two clear-cut factions at that time? You and Liu Shaoming are both intellectuals. Liu graduated from the Public Security University and you had a degree from the East China Normal University. How do you understand the two factions?   

**A:**  Well, at that time, some people listened to the Central Committee. Actually, we didn't have any idea about the Cultural Revolution when we first got involved. We were not sure who were those "capitalist road followers." Without any contact with people at the District Party Committee, we didn't know much about them. However, as the Central Committee issued orders, we thought we should try it and see whether we could find "capitalist road followers" in Tibet. This is what we were thinking about at that time. As for how many "capitalist road followers" there were, we had no idea. Our organization was founded on June 22, 1966. As you know, Chairman Mao said that people could be divided into the Left, the Middle, and the Right. Different people may have different point of view towards the same issue. Some people had close relationships with the leaders at the District Party Committee. They might have thought that those leaders were pretty nice people. When we asked to find out the "capitalist road followers" among leaders at the District Party Committee, those people were not happy. They didn't think there were any. We didn't know how they understood Chairman Mao's instructions. (laughs) And they had their own organization start on February 5, 1967.   

**Q:**  So theirs was founded later than yours.   

**A:**  Yes. And ours had clear aims. We were trying to "turn the world upside down" (laughs) and "find out all the 'capitalist road followers,' knock them off, and step on them." (laughs) That was the language people used at that time and we probably used them on our "Revolt Declaration." Well, those people who were close to the leaders at the District Party Committee were later called "royalists." They argued that the leaders were nice people and had been working hard for the local residents. However, we didn't care about that. What we really cared about was just the orders from the Central Committee and we knew we were supposed to follow their instructions. It was fine if none of the leaders were "capitalist road followers," but if there were any, we would go ahead to struggle against them. The Great Alliance was founded on February 5th. And the two factions were therefore formed. The Central Committee used to say that those people had a deep love towards the Communist Party, and it was natural that they also loved the local CCP leaders. (laughs) Therefore, their stance of "protecting the leaders" was understandable.   

**Q:**  I've read about that.   

**A:**  Well, as you can see, the Central Committee approved their organization. However, those people became very arrogant and they didn't understand what exactly the Cultural Revolution was about. We definitely had different understandings of the situation. Actually, we were not very much into the movement of "suspecting everything, turning down everything." So in the end, it was we who protected Zhou Renshan. We tried very hard to collect Zhou's materials and proved that he was not a traitor; neither was he a "class enemy who snuck into our Party." Well, they then accused us of being "clowns who protected Zhou." (laughs) I should say that people like us were closely obeying orders from the Central Committee and we were very careful when investigating cases.   

**Q:**  Did you have any direct contact with Liu Shaoming? I mean personal contact?   

**A:**  Well, personal contact; It's hard to say. I don't think there was any. He was the secretary of the District Party Committee while I was just a middle school teacher. We had never had any contact before.   

**Q:**  Did you know of him?   

**A:**  Not until the negotiations during the Cultural Revolution. We did meet very often at the negotiation table. Whenever there was a negotiation organized either by the Military Region Headquarters or the Military Control Committee, we got together at the negotiation table. There was a huge gap between our viewpoints and we could agree on nothing. We had different opinions about the leaders. Our side was actually pretty nice to the leaders and we didn't beat them without a reason. However, their side was just the opposite. They beat the leaders very often and it was common to hear that someone's teeth were knocked out or bones were broken. So at the negotiation table, I used facts to show that their side was not closely following the instructions of the Central Committee. Most of the negotiations ended without any positive results and neither the Military Region Headquarter nor the Military Control Committee had the power to ...   

**Q:**  Liu Shaoming was from South China. What do you think were the differences between you and him during the confrontations of ideas and intelligence?   

**A:**  Differences; To tell you the truth, I felt very at ease when negotiating with him. We must respect the truth during negotiations.   

**Q:**  Did it ever happen that people of the other faction came to you and your people left to join them?   

**A:**  Yes, that happened a lot, especially when there were big movements. For example, people in our faction used to be very well united. However, some people gradually changed their minds and they no longer agreed on what we were doing. They chose to walk the "third way" and formed their own organization called the Lhasa Revolutionary Revolt Commune. We were the "Revolt Headquarters" and they were the "Revolt Commune."   

**Q:**  Who were the leaders of that?   

**A:**  A few people like Zhuang Yanhe. They said that; And one more person, who used to be the Vice President of the CCP School of the Autonomous Region; they called him Vice President Ning. They created the "third way." I said, "Fine, I agree." We actually went to congratulate them the day their organization was formed. I didn't really care.   

**Q:**  So they called themselves the "Lhasa Commune"?   

**A:**  Yes. It was not a big organization and there were not many people with them. I didn't know exactly why they chose to do that. Maybe they thought we were not doing a good job and of course they didn't like the other faction either. They wanted to do better than us and I said, "That's fine. I'll support you. As you don't have many people, we can help by asking our people to attend your ceremony" (laughs) They didn't get anything done in the end. As you may know, walking "the third way" is never a good idea. (laughs)   

**Q:**  Yes, "the third way" is usually a dead end.   

**A:**  Right. So funny things happened a lot during the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  I know there were many things that happened then, like the Dazhao Temple Incident (Jokhang Incident). What do you think were the most important incidents?   

**A:**  Important incidents; One happened at the publishing house that was very important. We just talked about that. Our faction was following the instructions of the Central Committee, the January Storm, to seek the power. However, we were suddenly refuted and they actually couldn't find anything wrong with us or with our paper. I didn't know why the Central Military Committee sent them the order. I just didn't understand. Probably it was for stability, which is a term of today. Actually we didn't do any self-defense. It was not like what they said that we hid weapons and everything. As I just said, I could only have one steamed bun for a whole day and it was very possible that ordinary people in our faction were starving during that time. That was why I decided to surrender.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you have any direct contact with people in power, like Zhang Guohua?   

**A:**  No, not at that time. I think they knew about me later than that. In 1967, Zhang Guohua was transferred to the Chengdu Military Region Headquarter. He arrived in August and after that he invited me to visit him. His secretary told me that Political Commissar Zhang wanted to see me to discuss a problem. I then went to meet him at his office in the #5 Building at the Chengdu Military Region Headquarters, which was a tightly guarded building. He asked me whether I could be his secretary. I said, "What kind of secretary?" He said, "Well, to take care of things concerning the Cultural Revolution." I said, "This is not something that I can decide. I have an organization and we need to discuss it at our Leading Committee." He was pretty nice to me, I should say. At Zhang's place, I met Liang Xingchong, General of the Military Region Headquarters. Zhang introduced me to him. The atmosphere was warm. When I went back, I discussed with the Leading Committee about Zhang's invitation. However, the Leading Committee didn't like the idea and I told Zhang that I couldn't be his secretary because I had to obey the decision of my organization.   

**Q:**  Did you go from Lhasa to Chengdu?   

**A:**  I went to Chengdu on my way back from Beijing. It was in 1967, after I was released from prison, I went to Beijing to appeal to the higher authorities for help because I was not convinced. I brought with me some materials we prepared for the Central Committee, but I was not sure whether those materials were sent to the central leaders or not. Actually I didn't care. I just wanted to do what I thought I should and it was the job of the Central Committee to justify the case. At that time, there were many reporters in Lhasa, reporters from the People's Daily, the Bright Daily, the PLA Daily, Xinhua News Agency, etc. They all wanted to interview me and I felt that the situation was pretty good. At Jingxi Hotel, we met with Political Commissar Zhang and I told him that we would like to invite him to inspect in person the situation of the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. I was being polite instead of telling him that I didn't want to argue with him. He said that he was not feeling well. Bao Jieyi told us before we met with Zhang that we should limit our conversation to 40 minutes and I said 40 minutes was enough. I can't recall all the details of that meeting now, but I'm sure it was not a pleasant one. He was not making things clear for us and the argument was still hot when the time was up. I said we would leave right away because time was up and we didn't want to bother him while he was not feeling well, although there were still problems between us. By doing that, I left them a good impression. Ren Rong had also been to our Headquarters. He was embarrassed when we talked about the 6.7 Incident. It was also me who stood up and said, "Political Commissar Ren is not well prepared today and he needs more time to answer certain questions. Let's call it a day now and hopefully Commissar Ren will give us a satisfactory answer next time." (laughs) So as I said, the incident that happened at the newspaper publishing house was a big one. Another one was the Dazhao Temple Incident, which shocked Chairman Mao and Lin Biao. I was not surprised when that happened because it had its reasons.   

**Q:**  So what exactly happened at the Dazhao Temple? I've read something about it, but ...   

**A:**  The Dazhao Temple Incident; I was cool when it happened because I knew the army supported them. They got weapons on January 18, 1968. I was surprised at that time, not knowing how they got the weapons. There were instructions from the Central Committee emphasizing the importance of keeping weapons away from the mass organizations and all the weapons were well guarded from us. So how did they get them? As a leader of our faction, I experienced the armed struggle. On the day of the shooting, the opposite faction mobilized some peasants at the North suburbs and attacked us there. Our Machine Fixing Factory, Science Institute [Ch. xueke suo], and other work units were attacked.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  1968. January 2, 1968. When the shooting started, our people at the North suburb asked me for help. I didn't know what I should do. To tell you the truth, we had little military knowledge and had never been in a war. So I told them, "Just hang in there." They said they would rather fight back. I said, "Be careful, try not to kill people." As our men had steel sticks and things like that, I warned them not to kill people and I said I would not be responsible for the consequences if they killed people from the other faction. Well, I did say that they could "hurt the enemies" so that they wouldn't be able to fight against us. I sent some people to the Construction Vehicle Team as backup. Before they got there, I was told that we had won the fight, and the other faction failed, and many peasants "got hurt." (laughs) I then realized that it was a big problem and the other faction would seek revenge sooner or later because they had guns and had mobilized local peasants, however, they didn't win the fight. The Military Region Headquarters supported the other faction, although they didn't show it on the surface. On February 3, 1968, the Military Region Headquarters decided to form the "Three Revolutionary Alliance" with us. They came to talk with us, carrying the flag of the army. I was very surprised. I didn't understand why the Military Region Headquarters changed their minds in such a short period of time. And even today, I still don't understand this. Maybe history will give me an answer in the future. Of course, they said that they were sincerely supportive of us and it was we who had denied their support. Although I was the general leader of our faction at that time, I was not able to control the situation. Some Red Guards from Beijing made things even worse by verbally attacking Yu Zhiquan, who was then the Vice Commander of the Military Region and was having the talk with us. Vice Commander Yu, as a military commander, was not good at debating and almost dozed off at the meeting. Finally, the army men angrily left the meeting, saying that we had humiliated the flag of the army, which I didn't understand why. I knew that things were getting worse, for it was very rare to see the army men come out with their flag and our negotiations that day turned out to be such a failure. I was pretty clear about the situation then. Later, probably on February 28th, I left for Beijing to attend a study class. I decided to take Zhou Renshan with me.   

**Q:**  How did you do that?   

**A:**  Well, he was a big headache for us. It took us a lot of time to investigate his problems and still we didn't know what kind of person he was. So I decided to take him with me to Beijing. Maybe the Central Committee had a better idea about him. My decision turned out to be the right one. I took Zhou with me instead of Meng Ling, who was a vice assistant director of the Naqu Region. So Meng Ling didn't go and Zhou Renshan went in his place.   

**Q:**  Is he the person you talked about last time who was wearing a surgical mask_   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. It was on February 28th. I told people who were seeing us off to turn off the bright lights so that it was hard to see who was with me. When I was asked whether everybody was there, I said, "Yes, everyone's here, including Meng Ling." It was possible that people did see Zhou Renshan with me instead of Meng Ling, but nobody dared to ask.   

**Q:**  Was he wearing a surgical mask?   

**A:**  Yes, he was. And he was wearing a long coat. I told him that his name was Meng Ling. (laughs) He asked to make things clear to the Central Committee, and I said it was time for that.   

**Q:**  Was there anything like a security check at the airport?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to go through security checks at the airport, but those checks were no big deal for us. At that time, there was no such a thing as a personal ID and there were not many things to check about. A work ID was enough actually. I told him to stay close to me and things were fine. Before we boarded, someone checked with us by calling our names. I answered for him and told people that he couldn't talk because of a terrible cold. (laughs) Ren Rong might have noticed us or maybe at about twenty minutes before we arrived at Beijing, someone told him that Zhou Renshan was on the airplane. Anyway, Zhou Renshan was going to Beijing with us and the Central Committee would be the judge. He was not surprised at all. He said, "That's fine."   

**Q:**  Ren Rong?   

**A:**  Yes. And I said, "'Fine' is not enough, you need to telegraph the Central Committee about this." (laughs) So when we got to the airport in Beijing, there was a special car waiting for Zhou Renshan. Actually he stayed at the same place with us, the Air Force Institute. Why I'm telling you this is to say that the army was not happy after the "1.18" armed struggle, which they failed, and the "2.3" (talks). As we had attacked Zhang Guohua, which they considered as the worst offence, they would seek revenge sooner or later. And they also failed other armed struggles because our side had many workers who were a powerful force in armed struggles. Although they had weapons, they still couldn't win. You know sometimes during the fighting, their weapons might end up in our hands. (laughs) And as I told you, our factories did make weapons. So, finally, the army decided to do it, although they still used the name of the Central Committee. At the Dazhao Temple, the broadcasting station_ They could have just taken the power from us, why should they shoot at us? At the Dazhao Temple, they killed ten of us, if I'm not mistaken. Some of them were shot in the stomach, some in the head, and the ten men all died right away. A few others were injured.   

**Q:**  Why did they want to take the power at the Dazhao Temple?   

**A:**  I don't remember exactly why. Anyway, they said they were there to "take military control." You should have told us ... Of course, they didn't like our broadcasting station. Not just at the Dazhao Temple, but at the Financial Compound, and they shot at us without hesitation. I was in Beijing then, and Liu Shiyi phoned me immediately when this happened. He asked me what we should do. I stayed cool when hearing this. I said, "Don't fight back. Let them shoot." I knew things would be even worse if we fought back. So I told Liu to let the army shoot, and he didn't say how many people we lost. However, we lost ten people at the Dazhao Temple, and two at the Financial Compound--there was a path linking the Financial Compound to the Second Institute and the two were killed there. Many others were injured. Ai Xuehua, a photographer, was trying to take pictures as evidence during the shooting, and was shot at the back. He didn't die but was paralyzed. We decided to honor those who died as martyrs and provide monthly financial help to their families. This was approved by the Central Committee. As for Ai Xuehua, we sent him to the No.78 Hospital and urged the doctors to try their best to treat him. The president of the hospital later told me that he had tried everything he could, but Ai's back nerves were broken and it was almost impossible to make him able to stand up again. So I should say we settled this incident satisfactorily. The reason why this happened was because the other faction had been losing the game time and again, so the army decided to help them. Anyhow, as I just said, we were proud that we properly dealt with the incident. Of course, some of us were very upset when this happened and they were ready to fight against the army. I knew that was not right. A few people even suggested bombing the Electricity Factory in the North Suburb to leave the whole city of Lhasa in darkness. I said that was even more ridiculous and we couldn't do it. Liu Shiyi was very nervous when calling me and he couldn't even talk in complete sentences. After talking with Liu Shiyi over the phone, I said to the military leaders at the study class that it was not right for them to kill our people. Those leaders pretended not knowing anything about it.   

**Q:**  I learned from some documents that the communication system was not functioning very well at that time.   

**A:**  The communication system was fine. They were just pretending that they didn't know.   

**Q:**  I mean yours, the system at your side.   

**A:**  Oh, ours. We relied on telephones. We used long distance calls and whenever they called me, they needed to go to the Telecommunication Bureau. We were lucky that there were our men at the Telecommunication Bureau and it was not very difficult to make the calls. We also had a transceiver, which we never used. Some people suggested using the transceiver, but I disagreed.   

**Q:**  You mentioned that Chairman Mao and Lin Biao were shocked when hearing about the incident. Who said that?   

**A:**  The Military Region Headquarters. They made their reports to the Central Committee and we let them do it, for we knew for sure that we didn't do anything wrong. Chairman Mao gave instructions based on their reports. The instruction didn't come until November 14th, several months after the incident.   

**Q:**  What did Chairman Mao say?   

**A:**  "Leaders of the army didn't try to cover the bad things done by the army men. It is the sign of a prosperous country." And Lin Biao said on January 18th that "Chairman Mao's instructions are very important. They represent the greatest concern and deepest love towards the army." You see it took them a few months to report the incident to the Central Committee. I know for sure there were disagreements among them. If we had fought back, things would have been different. As we didn't fight back, they then had to "find out the responsible person" and they got Yin Fatang. Actually it was not Yin Fatang but Ren Rong who should be responsible for the incident. Yin Fatang was not that powerful at that time.   

**Q:**  He was then the director of a certain office, right?   

**A:**  He was the director of the Political Department, which was actually nothing. However, as they decided to throw out Yin Fatang, Yin simply couldn't do anything.   

**Q:**  Did you have any contact with Yin Fatang?   

**A:**  Yin Fatang, as I said before, had always been having different ideas. After the "6.7" Incident, Yin and I met at the Jingxi Hotel. There we shook hands and he said to me, "Comrade Tao Changsong, I feel terribly sorry for what happened and please send my apology to the cadres and ordinary people in your faction." I said, "It's the experience of history and it'll be fine as long as we learn a lesson from it." I thought at that time that he was not the person who was responsible for the incident. He was very polite to me and apologized sincerely. We met and talked at the study class in Beijing before the instruction of Chairman Mao was issued. After talking with us, the army leaders gradually changed their opinions towards us. Zeng Yongya said to me that they used to believe that people at the Revolt Headquarter were unreasonable, and it turned out that they were wrong. I think it was the Red Guards from Beijing who ruined our reputations and caused all the trouble.   

**Q:**  When you say the "Red Guards from Beijing", do you mean the students from the Beijing Space and Aviation Institute, like_   

**A:**  Nie Cong.   

**Q:**  Yes, Nie Cong. How did she and other students go to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I don't remember how she got to Lhasa. And I guess I was too busy to care about them at that time. There was a whole group of them and some middle school kids. They were extremely leftist, and enjoyed ordering people around. You know me, I used to be a Red Guard and I knew the Red Guards were nothing. So I didn't care about them. Nie Cong was a teacher, and was relatively cool-headed. I was patient with her and talked with her pretty often. When the Red Guards attacked the army, they completely lost control_   

**Q:**  Is Nie Cong still alive?   

**A:**  I think she's still alive.   

**Q:**  I asked people whether it was possible to get to know Nie Cong_   

**A:**  Nie Cong; I went to the Beijing Space and Aviation Institute once to ask about her. I didn't meet her that time and was told not to look for her any more because she had become "sort of insane." This is what I was told then. Later it was said that she was cured and went to America. I don't know exactly what happened to her. And of course Nie Cong was famous for the "Special Committee of Striking the Emperor," which was hated by the army which had sworn to knock it off as a "reactionary organization." I was considered as one of the key members of that committee and I said I was not, but I admitted that I was one of the initiators.   

**Q:**  Is Nie Cong a man or a woman?   

**A:**  A woman. Later we got pretty close with the army and they told me, Zhao Wenjing, a military commander, told me, "Your people accused us of being worse than the Guomingdang during the '6.7' Incident." He laughed while he said that. I said, "Well, how should I put it_"   

