# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0109.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Tao Changsong   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** March 2001  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anon  
**Name:** Tao Changsong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 63  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tao Changsong graduated from the Chinese Literature Department at the East China Normal University in 1960. In the same year he came to Tibet and worked as a teacher in the Lhasa Middle-High School (Ch. lasa zhongxue). During the Cultural Revolution he became the famous leader of the Lhasa Revolutionary Revolt Headquarters [Ch. la sa geming zaofan zongbu (zaozong); Tib. gyenlo (གྱེན་ལོག)]. In this interview, he talks about the Nyemo incident in 1969 and some of the details and events surrounding the incident. He describes, in detail, the second time he was imprisoned, and his experience while at the detention center, including his interrogations and interactions with the guards. He also discusses what happened once he was released from the detention center. Additionally, he talks about how he became the Vice-Director of the Revolt Headquarters and the group's other leading members. Finally, he discusses his schooling growing up including, the schools he attended.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0109_02/H_0109_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What do you know about the Nyemo Incident in 1969?   

**A:**  During the "6.13" Nyemo Incident, more than ten soldiers from the Military Publicizing Team were killed. I think the army was supporting one side and suppressing the other.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  I can't recall the details. We didn't say that those criminals (involved in the incident) should be excused, but at least they should be properly treated. A lot of decisions were made at that time, but very few were carried out until I was away on vacation. I think if the incident in Nyemo was an anti-revolutionary incident, we should address it like that. It's definitely not right to call it a "rebellion." I believe it was very possible that the Military Publicizing Team was supporting one faction and suppressing the other at that time. The Military Publicizing Team was actually full of problems. Things kept happening in Nyemo and some other areas. What the army did to the local people was sometimes unbelievable. They killed the leader of a certain township and cut off his head. Things like that... I said that both of the two factions should do some self-checking. Although those nuns and religious people were "bad guys", the army men were not that good either. This is my understanding of the situation at that time. And you know, the ordinary people had not experienced fighting like that before,so they had no choice but to run into the mountains when the army came. Running into the mountains was a mistake because they might be accused of waging guerrilla warfare in the mountains although ordinary people didn't have weapons. Someone told me that a Tibetan county leader at used to warn people, "Don't run into the mountains! You'll be fooled if you go!" However, those ordinary people didn't understand and insisted on going. Therefore, the army had a reason to shoot at them and many people lost their lives. Well, of course I didn't do any thorough research, but I believe that the army did break the rules and did many bad things at that time. I think there were reasons why the army men were killed and one of the reasons, I believe, was the result of extreme factionalism. Anyhow, it was not right to kill people and some of the soldiers were killed very cruelly. I've seen pictures of those soldiers who were killed. Some were stabbed with long knives, others were pounded with stones. As a general leader, I actually didn't know much about what happened at the bottom level of our faction and I had to tell the Military Region Headquarters that I would discuss this with the Revolt Headquarters and would work out plans on how to handle this incident. I think Zeng Yongya used to have a very reasonable way of handling things like this. He told the army to go to Nyemo without carrying any weapons. However, he was criticized by the Central Committee. Ren Rong, on the contrary, insisted on carrying weapons to Nyemo. That was why Zeng Yongya left office on December 14, 1970, without telling anyone. He told me when he went back in 1985 that he was in - during that time.   

**Q:**  How did that happen? How could he leave office without telling anyone?   

**A:**  He said, "What could I do besides leaving office?" There was a meeting on December 15th, the day after he left, which he knew was about to make things difficult for him. He would be accused of inciting the masses to fight against each other, inciting the cadres to fight against the masses, etc. So he decided to leave a day before the meeting. He asked Premier Zhou for a special airplane and the Air Force Command Post sent him one just in time. A junior commander of the Air Force, whose name I can't remember, was nice to Zeng, and dispatched a team of soldiers to escort him. As you can imagine, Zeng was severely criticized after he left. Feng laughed at Zeng and said at a meeting, "You (Zeng) left without telling us, and I guess Comrade Zhang knows everything about it." Zhang... I forgot his first name, was accused of knowing this. Zeng Yongya told me all these in 1985.   

**Q:**  When Zeng went back, was he punished for leaving office?   

**A:**  No. Actually he had asked for permission before he left. He said he left office in the name of "being transferred to a new post" and he might have lost his life if he had not left.   

**Q:**  Did he go to Beijing directly?   

**A:**  Yes. Premier Zhou talked with him while they met at Shenyang Airport. Premier Zhou said to Zeng that he had already known what happened to Zeng and it was all right for Zeng to leave Lhasa. He then told Zeng that he would send Zeng to work as the Vice at Shenyang Military Region. Premier Zhou was nice to Zeng and Zeng told me when we met in 1985 that Premier Zhou cared about him very much.   

**Q:**  Shenyang Military Region, was that a big one?   

**A:**  Yes, very big.   

**Q:**  How did that compare to the Tibet Military Region?   

**A:**  The Tibet Military Region used to be a second level military region and later was changed to the third level. So you see, the problems of Tibet... "Suppressing the rebellion"... At that time, we were very confused and I talked to people at the meetings that it was ridiculous that 42, 45, or 48 counties rebelled or attempted to rebel. I wondered whether someone would be happy to say that all the people in Tibet rebelled against the CCP, which he might think, was doing nothing good. This is what I said at the meetings, and of course, they didn't like the way I put it. They said that the General Commander of the "1969 Rebellion" was Zeng Yongya, and the Vice-General Commander was Tao Changsong. There was an exhibition at the Exhibition Center. Chen Yin, a department head at the Exhibition Center was very cruel to us, though today they say he appears to be a nice guy. He told the public that the command center of the rebellion was just 200 meters from the Potala.   

**Q:**  So he meant the Second Institute [Ch. er suo]?   

**A:**  Yes, and the Lhasa Middle School. He also said that the General Commander of the rebels was a middle school teacher. It was very clear that he was referring to me. When I heard about that, I was very upset and I went to meet him with a few roughnecks. I thought I would beat him if he dared to say that in person. Well, he didn't dare to say anything when I got there.   

**Q:**  Where were you when they had that exhibition?   

**A:**  I guess I was on vacation or something like that. I was not there. When I came back, people told me that those people said a lot of bad things about me. Problems like this, how should I put it... Those people wanted to make use of problems like this to completely refute our organization. "What does your 'Revolt Headquarter' do exactly? You encourage people to rebel." And some of our leaders were sentenced to death. Of course later all of them were redressed. I still believe that this (Nyemo) incident will be a problem in the future, though we can't talk about that now. Many of us were sentenced to death, and many others died during the fighting. Now we simply can't count how many people lost their lives during that incident. When the case was redressed, each person who died during the incident was entitled 200 to 800 yuan pension. I used to tell people that a life was only worth 800 yuan at most. In some regions, each life was only worth 200 yuan. Problems like this are big ones and I know right now there are many foreigners interested in them. Also there are many people doing research on the Nyemo Incident. I always tell them that it is not the right time to review the truth and they should wait till later. If the truth is reviewed today and used by the foreigners, it won't be good for our country. It's a complicated problem.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  So it's a big headache when the relationships between nationalities get worse. Panchen [Ch. Banchan] once talked about the incident, but he also didn't dare to express his true opinions.   

**Q:**  Talking about the Panchen, what happened during the movement of "discovering and criticizing the Panchen?"   

**A:**  What was that?   

**Q:**  There were pictures about "discovering and criticizing the Panchen." What exactly happened?   

**A:**  We never took part in "discovering and criticizing the Panchen." It was in 1963 and 1964 that he was severely criticized and we didn't know anything about that. People at the Central Academy of Nationalities did that. They even forced him to eat excrement. We heard about it, but never did anything.   

**Q:**  How about in Lhasa?   

**A:**  He was not criticized in Lhasa. We knew very well about that... So you see, Ngabö, Pagbala and other people like them are all very nice to me. They think I'm a reasonable person. Ngabö was taken to Beijing before I could do anything for him. Pagbala was under our control. Our Fourth Headquarters was supervising him when he was forced to do labor. He worked pretty hard, I should say. I told my men not to be too strict with people like Pagbala. It was fine if he didn't want to work. You see, we did follow the rules set by the Central Committee and never treated people like him as "a certain kind of person" [Ch. ji lei ren]. Pagbala and I got to know each other during that period of time and today he's still very nice to me. When we met at the People's Political Consultative Conference, we proposed toasts to each other. There were so many leaders of the Autonomous Region proposing toasts to him and he didn't really care. I should say he was just pretending to enjoy the toasts until he saw me. While I was approaching him, he stood up and came to me, "Hi, it's you!" He was so happy to see me. As for the Panchen, I didn't have any contact with him. I heard that people at the Central Academy of Nationalities struggled against him and I think they went too far.   

**Q:**  The first time you were in prison, you were kept for about 70 days. How many times all together have you been put into the prison?   

**A:**  Twice. The second time was when they "investigated the ins and outs of the Gang of Four" and that one was a real challenge to me.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  It was August 4, 1977.   

**Q:**  How long was that?   

**A:**  A year and a half.   

**Q:**  For what reason?   

**A:**  Well, it was obvious. They said that I had organizational relationships with the Gang of Four. As it was almost impossible to accuse me of having theoretical relationships with the Gang of Four, they said I had organizational ones. "Theoretical relationships" was not a good excuse because nobody knew whose theories I followed, Jiang Qing's or Mao Zedong's. I was put in a special car right after I got off the airplane.   

**Q:**  In 1979?   

**A:**  No. 1977. The Gang of Four was smashed in 1976. I left from Chengdu on August 4, 1977, and I suspected something was wrong right away...   

**Q:**  Were you on vacation at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, on vacation. I stayed at a relative's house and I found out that there was something wrong, so I moved to a hotel. I didn't want anything to happen in my relative's home. On May 3rd, an instruction was sent to Feng Da asking whether he had serious mistakes during the Culture Revolution and suggested isolating him for further investigation. Our people said that Ren Rong was pretty nice to us at that time and it appeared that he was doing what the Central Committee asked him to do. I said you were wrong and Ren Rong was actually focusing his attention on us. You see, it was May 3rd that Feng Da got the instructions and was then isolated. On June 2nd, they asked Zhang Bangwei, a former reporter of the local radio station, to go to Chengdu. Zhang Bangwei was then resting at home, for he had just had an appendectomy. They went to Zhang's home and tied him up in front of his entire family. I think they went too far. They could have just taken him out and put him into a car. This happened on June 2nd. On June 11th, someone came to Chengdu from Lhasa to tell me that Ma Yufeng committed suicide. Ma Yufeng was a key reporter of the newspaper. I said there must be something wrong, for I knew Ma Yufeng and he was a very outgoing person. It was impossible that he would commit suicide. Also at that time, he was ready to be transferred to another place and all his stuff had already been packed and sent away. I said immediately, "Someone killed him!" However, I didn't have any evidence. All these events warned me that we were in trouble. I told my men to get ready. My concerns were proved to be true. On August 4th, right after I got off the plane, people at the airport told me that they had prepared a car for me and I should just follow them. Then I was put into a jeep.   

**Q:**  Where did they take you?   

**A:**  First they took me to a place near the Qushui Bridge. Mao Weihua, who then worked at the Education Bureau, came out from the car behind mine and ran to me. He announced the decision of the District Party Committee, "You made mistakes and committed crimes during the Culture Revolutions. You are now detained." He set off running back after reading the decision. I said, "Don't run I haven't said anything yet." He didn't listen and ran away. Then I was taken to a detention center.   

**Q:**  Which detention center?   

**A:**  The Fourth Department [Ch. si chu] in the North suburb.   

**Q:**  The one near the Third Middle School?   

**A:**  The one in the North suburb, near the Electrical Machine Factory.   

**Q:**  Chengdu Jail?   

**A:**  No. Chengdu Jail was a prison and I was kept at a detention center, which was also called the Forth Department.   

**Q:**  When did they interrogate you after putting you in the detention center?   

**A:**  Well, they gave me a health check first. Finding that I was fine, they immediately started the interrogation.   

**Q:**  Immediately?   

**A:**  Immediately. Three times a day at the very beginning, morning, afternoon, and night. They often started the night session at 8:00 p.m. and it would last till 4:00 a.m. They took turns interrogating me and were trying to tire me out.   

**Q:**  Did the morning session start at around 8:00 a.m. and last till 10:00 a.m.?   

**A:**  No. I was talking about the night sessions. Although there were sessions in the morning and the afternoon, they still wanted to do it at night, from 8:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m., about eight hours. I teased them one night, "It's worth it that I myself can amuse seven or eight of you. And you look tired. Maybe we should call it a day and leave the job for tomorrow." Mao Weihua was yawning. People laughed when they heard me say that and he did let me go to bed. The person in charge was Wang Yuguang, who was just transferred from the Public Security Bureau. Wang Yuguang was not a Tibetan. I asked him whether he was just transferred to Tibet from the interior areas and he got very upset. He shouted at me, "How come that you know about me?" I said, "It's simple. I know almost every leader at the Public Security Bureau and I don't think I've met you." You know why he got upset? He thought there were my eyes in the detention center and I was gathering information about him. Actually before I was locked up, all the guards at that center were transferred away. I was later told about that and I knew they were very careful when handling my case.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay there?   

**A:**  From 1977 to 1979, one year and a half. January 25th, 1977, ...   

**Q:**  Did you have any contact with the outside?   

**A:**  No. It was not allowed.   

**Q:**  So you didn't have any chance to appeal?   

**A:**  It was not a case that I could appeal...   

**Q:**  I mean... Did they allow you to express your opinions?   

**A:**  I could during the interrogations.   

**Q:**  So it depended on them.   

**A:**  Right. And they didn't sentence me. How could I appeal if there was no sentence? All what I could do was to wait patiently. They were eager to get things from me at the very beginning. However, I couldn't provide them what they were looking for and the interrogations gradually cooled down. They stopped interrogating me at the end. Sometimes I even volunteered, "There are things I want to tell you about." They were happy to hear that, but still what I could tell them was not what they wanted. Of course they were trying hard to investigate my case and they did know something. They knew that I had been to Shanghai. "So you must have connections with Wang Hongwen." I said, "That's your imagination. Someone did suggest to me to meet Wang Hongwen, but I didn't go. I didn't care about people in other regions. And I even chose not to meet Kua Dafu while I was in Beijing. I was not interested in the so-called 'five big leaders.'" The "4.22" Incident that happened in Guangxi in some way resembled ours in Tibet and people suggested to me to exchange opinions with the leaders in Guangxi. I didn't do that because the situation in Guangxi was different from that in Tibet and I saw no point of exchanging ideas with them. Some of the people in our faction did attend a "black meeting" held in Beijing by people from Guangxi. I was angry when I heard about that and I made things very clear right away, "Those who attended the 'black meeting' should be responsible for the consequences." Anyhow, when the Central Committee asked me about it, I admitted that "we" attended the "black meeting" and it was our fault. The Central Committee was nice to us, "You attending the meeting was a different story and you did it out of empathy."   

**Q:**  I've read about that.   

**A:**  I admitted to the Central Committee that it was the fault of our faction, but I did ask those people who attended the meeting to write self-criticizing reports to me. So, what I was trying to say is... They spent a lot of time and energy to investigate my case and gathered some information about me. But there were things they didn't know. They didn't know why I might have had a chance to meet with Wang Hongwen. Actually at that time the Military Region Headquarter made some badges of Chairman Mao. A few tuan level cadres came to me, asking me to go to talk with Wang Hongwen and try to get a cheaper price for the badges. I said I couldn't do that. They didn't know any details like this and no wonder they were often confused when investigating my case.   

**Q:**  How did they set you free in 1979? What were their reasons?   

**A:**  They didn't give me any reasons. I was set free on January 25th. On the night of January 23rd, they had a talk with me. Wang Yiguang, Liu Wenzhong, director of the First Department, and the vice head of that detention center talked with me. They were very polite to me and started with silly questions like whether I was fully dressed. I said yes. There were no lights in the detention center and we had to use candles. They said, "You've been here for a long time." I said, "Yes, but I failed to satisfy you. Don't worry, I'll continue thinking about my problems." Wang Yiguang smiled, "Well, your problems are now basically clear and I'd like to tell you that the District Party Committee has decided to let you go home to spend the Spring Festival with your family. You may leave tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. Do you know what the day after tomorrow is?" I said I didn't know. He said, "It's the Chinese New Year's Eve. Enjoy the holiday!" I said, "There's no hurry. I've been here for one year and a half and I don't mind staying longer as long as you can make things clear. Why don't you show me the materials you're going to use to close this case?" He said, "We can show you the conclusion we've drawn any time. And now you may just head home to enjoy the festival." I insisted reading their stuff before going home, but they didn't show me anything. The day after the next, they came to my room and wrapped up my clothes. I knew they were about to let me go and I was not happy about that. I thought that maybe I should try to stay longer, so I said, "I borrowed things from the center, like shirts and coats. Do you think I need to return them?" "No. You can keep them." "How about my belt? The guards took my belt to fix it but they didn't return it to me. And I lost a pen in your office." "We'll buy you a new belt and a new pen." Then they forced me into a car, which belonged to the Public Security Department.   

**Q:**  Where did they send you?   

**A:**  Lhasa Middle School. I learned later that the Party Committee at the Lhasa Middle School didn't want them to send me there. They said they didn't know what to do if I was sent back to them. The day after the talk in the detention center, people there asked the Lhasa Middle School to pick me up, but the Party Committee of the school didn't want to. Wang Yiguang then shouted at them, "You don't understand the law!" However, as the Lhasa Middle School didn't want to pick me up, Wang Yiguang had to find a car to send me back. While I was at the detention center, all together they interrogated me 183 times, held 20 grand meetings to criticize me.   

**Q:**  Grand meetings... Where did they hold those meetings?   

**A:**  The biggest sports field. On September 4th...   

**Q:**  Which year?   

**A:**  1977. I went back on August 4th [from vacation] and was sent to the detention center, which was actually a jail. They didn't let me stay inside the jail, but put me in a two-room apartment outside the wall of the jail, with a guard at the door. They had to wait for instructions from the Central Committee. I learned from the conversations that the instruction from the Central Committee arrived on August 25th. Before that day, they couldn't treat me as a criminal, but starting from August 26th, they changed their attitude and put on a stern face when interrogating me.   

**Q:**  Whose instruction was that?   

**A:**  The CCP Central Committee. The instruction was about dismissing me from the post of the vice-director of the Revolt Headquarters and detaining me. On September 4th, they held a grand meeting at the sports field, announcing the decision of the Central Committee to the public. Hundreds of people attended that meeting.   

**Q:**  Did they tie you up?   

**A:**  No. They just handcuffed me.   

**Q:**  Who were with you at that time?   

**A:**  Nobody. The place where I lived... Zhang Xueyao lived in No.1 & 2. He was shot to death later. I lived in No.7 & 8. All were two-room apartments and there was even a small court yard Zhang Xueyao was shot to death on March 28th, 1977. I came back in August. The instruction arrived on August 25th, the meeting was held on September 4th. An atmosphere was created by then. Tibet was the only place where people were shot to death during the clearing up of the Culture Revolution. So Tibet is different. One or two months after Zhang was killed, they told me that Zhang had a terrible attitude and they had to kill him although he didn't commit serious crimes.   

**Q:**  They were pressing you.   

**A:**  Yeah. I told them, "You have the right to kill him. But could you tell me why you did that?" They didn't dare to say anything. I therefore knew that they understood they were making use of the power and did something that they shouldn't have done. In 1977, provinces and autonomous regions had the right to kill people and they took advantage of that. I knew they couldn't do that to me, for they had to consult the Central Committee before doing anything to me. They were just trying to scare me. They told me this one month after it had happened. Another month later, they told me about Zhang Bangwei, the one I just talked about, that Zhang had committed serious crimes but was set free because he had good attitude. I said I didn't know that Zhang Bangwei had committed serious crimes.   

**Q:**  What was Zhang Bangwei?   

**A:**  He was a reporter at the radio station.   

**Q:**  Is he still alive?   

**A:**  Yes, he is. He's now a professor at Sichuan Normal University. I told them, "What serious crimes did he commit? As far as I know, Zhang did say that if he had power, he would have killed Ren Rong. Was that a serious crime? Yang Zhaozheng from the other faction used to say that he would have killed Zeng Yongya if he had power and nobody cared about that. What other 'crimes' do you think Zhang has committed?" They couldn't answer my question, for I knew everything clearly but they didn't.   

**Q:**  Liu Shaoming... Was he being criticized then?   

**A:**  No. His problems were... Yin Fatang came to office in Tibet on May 22, 1980. No. It should be May 20th, and Hu Yaobang came on May 22nd, two days after that. Maybe Yin Fatang is an upright person and he didn't like the fact that one faction consisted of officials while the other was full of ordinary people. And at that time, the Central Committee was emphasizing "consolidating the Party organization," and [picking out] the "three kinds of people," etc. Activists during the Cultural Revolution were not allowed to get involved in those movements. It was Comrade Deng Xiaoping's idea and I think he was trying to be fair and objective. Liu Shaoming was about to be promoted to be the Vice-Party Secretary of the Shannan Region but he didn't take the chance. He went to Shangri County and County to work as Secretary of the County Party Committee. His guiding principle was that he should slow down his pace. Later it was said that his other problems were reviewed, including financial problems and personal life style. He ended up in the Shannan Civil Administration Department and there he stayed without a definite position. People from Shannan told me that he was very "brave" in finding ways to make money and he had financial problems. I know there was a deer farm in Shangri and pilose antler could bring him a big fortune... Actually we didn't care much about him after the Cultural Revolution. However, I guess that was what Yin Fatang wanted to do. Liu Shaoming was transferred many times and eventually he settled down in our school as a Party Secretary. There he got himself into trouble by borrowing a loan of 65,000 yuan and attempting to keep the money as his own.   

**Q:**  It was a lot of money at that time.   

**A:**  Yeah. If it were me who did that, I would lose my life for it. But nothing happened to him. The person who brought this to light was Cui Jingjie, one of Liu Shaoming's men, the former head of the Bureau of Organizational Affairs Management [Ch. jiguan shiwu guanli ju]. I don't know why this guy exposed Liu. Maybe he was scared. He said that Liu got 65,000 yuan and he got 10,000 yuan. This person was detained for a whole night because of this. As for Liu Shaoming, later it was confirmed that he did get 65,000 yuan and 40,000 yuan was already spent. A problem of 40,000 yuan was serious enough at that time, for there were people who were put in jail because of just a few thousand yuan. I was in Beijing at that time. It was 1997, if I'm not mistaken, when people told me that the Procuratorate was going to deal with Liu Shaoming. I thought it couldn't be that serious, but the rumor turned out to be true. The Procuratorate escorted Liu Shaoming to Chengdu, where he stayed for about a week, waiting for the instructions from the District Party Committee. A week later, a telegraph was sent, saying that Comrade Liu Shaoming would continue his vacation. And mysteriously, Liu's case was then closed. Documents concerning this all said that "Liu has financial problems and is waiting to be transferred to another position." Later he retired earlier than he should and the whole thing came to an end.   

**Q:**  How were things when you went back to Lhasa Middle School?   

**A:**  When I went back to Lhasa Middle School... Things in Tibet are like this, people are always watching the Central Committee. In 1979, after the 11th Third Conference of the Central Committee, they were scared because the Conference emphasized "seeking truth from facts," which they failed to do, so they set many of us free. Of course, they first sentenced some people whose problems they thought were serious, like Zhu Zhiping. What problem did he have? They searched his home and found a homemade gun and that was it. That gun was one of those guns lacking an aiming system, as I just told you, and couldn't kill anybody. Zhu Zhiping was sentenced to three years in jail because of "hiding guns at home." People like me, who didn't have anything serious enough, were set free. I was at ease after they set me free in 1979, but they were still trying to play tricks on me. They told me that they would like to transfer me to the Sixth Middle School, and then the Fifth Middle School. I said, "I won't go anywhere before my problems are cleared." They told me, "Well, if other people said this, we would deduct his salary." I said, "You may deduct mine as well. I don't care." This was in 1979. I often went to talk with them at that time, for Lhasa Middle School was close to them. I guess they simply got tired of dealing with me and were trying to send me away. In 1980, I don't know why all of a sudden they became very strict toward me and issued a document, repeating the old tone, "Tao Changsong made serious mistakes and committed crimes during the Cultural Revolution. Now the District Party Committee has decideed to discharge him from public employment and put him under examination for two years." I said that Ren Rong was not bold and decisive enough, for he could have given me a more severe punishment. Then I was ordered to raise pigs. The Lhasa Middle School had trouble finding me a position... so I was ordered to feed pigs. You know I'm an optimistic person and I said, "Fine, I'll do that, but show me the pigs first." They showed me the pigs, seven all together. I saw the pigs and told them, "You'd better note that these pigs are dying. Where should I get things to feed them? And it's so cold here, I need firewood." They were not ready for this, and had to say, "We'll think about that." They couldn't find any pig feed but they did find me some firewood. I used a lot of firewood everyday. As for pig feed, I picked vegetables from the vegetable garden of the Lhasa Middle School and added some grass and water. They knew I was not doing a good job. Anyhow, it was an easy job for me. I used a small cart to pick vegetables in the garden and saved some for my own meal. People watching the garden knew me and usually they prepared vegetables for me. It took me only about 45 minutes every day to finish everything. I started feeding pigs in 1980 and at the end of that year, I told them, "I don't want to do it anymore. Here's the key!" I also announced, "Now there are 23 pigs and it's a big improvement. I think I deserve a raise."   

**A:**  Sometimes there were young soldiers buying pigs. I told them to get the pigs by themselves because the pigs were so strong that I just couldn't catch them. So I fed pigs for a while... I feel that things that happened in Tibet sometimes are as funny as pure jokes. They said that Liu Yong was dismissed. Liu Wenzhong, chief of the First Section of the Public Security Department, told me, "Comrade Tao Changsong, your salary is so little now that you must have trouble with your finances. How about this - you don't need to pay for your stay at the detention center..." Hearing this, I flared up...   

**Q:**  He wanted you to pay for your stay at the detention center?   

**A:**  Yes, and actually I should. People kept at the detention center needed to pay for their food. But my case was different. They kept me in there without a proper accusation and then set me free. I was innocent! I told Liu angrily, "I don't understand what you're saying. I would like to pay the money for you if you want to stay a year and a half in the detention center." People there tried to patch things up between us, but I was so angry. I told Liu, "You're lucky that I'm not asking you for financial compensation for my suffering at the detention center. It's ridiculous that you offer to exempt me from paying for the food." Ridiculous things like this happened all the time. I also had contact with other people, like Song Zhiyuan. I bothered him a lot by going to him, asking him how my case was going, etc. And Guo Xiannan, he told me, "Your case is difficult and we can't draw any conclusion if you don't admit your mistakes." I said, "Secretary Guo, we've been knowing each other for a long time, and you know that I have nothing to admit. I don't want to trouble you with politics, as we both know that history will eventually make a fair judgement. How about dealing with my financial hardship first?" I earned only 48 yuan per month at that time, which was obviously not enough. Later I kept getting money as financial compensation but I don't know how they calculated that. I was happy to receive the money and the first time I got it I bought a black-and-white TV, which was rare at that time. The second time I got the money, I bought a color TV. I thought I should keep them as souvenirs. Things went on pretty smoothly after Guo Xiannan talked with me. In 1981, I thought it was not a good idea to just wait for their decisions so I decided to apply to the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.   

**Q:**  To be a graduate student?   

**A:**  Not really. I applied to be an assistant researcher. There were 27 people who applied for the position and 3 left after the first examination. I was one of the three. Song Zhiyuan crossed out my name from the list as he didn't want me to go. I went to see him and asked him whether he had read the admission brochure of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. He said, "What do you mean?" I said, "You should know what I meant. I applied for a position at the Academy. Why don't you let me go?" He said, "Who told you that?" I said, "Don't ask who told me that. I just want to know whether you did it or not." I was very angry at that time and he then told me, "You shouldn't have applied for that. Who do you think you are?" I said, "You'd better read the admission brochure carefully and you'll know the brochure says even criminals can apply as long as they are released from the prison. I don't think I'm a criminal and I'm definitely not a 'released criminal.' Why shouldn't I apply?" Hearing this, his face turned red. I continued, "Now you're in power, which is actually nothing, and trying to make use of the power." He was not happy to hear that. He said, "From now on, I'll not say anything about things concerning you." I said, "Thank heaven if you can keep your mouth shut." Later the Tibet Academy of Social Sciences was founded. The Judging Group of the "two cases" told me about that. They also said, "It was a mistake of the District Party Committee that you were not allowed to apply for the position at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences." They didn't say it was a mistake of Song Zhiyuan though. And they asked me whether I would like to join the Tibet Academy of Social Sciences as I was capable and showed interest in that. I asked who was in charge at the Tibet Academy of Social Sciences. They said it was Duojiecaidan (Dorje Tseden), someone I knew very well. I said I would consider it. Soon after that, Duojiecaidan sent me an oral message, asking me to pay him a visit. I visited him and he told me that he was working on the founding of the Tibet Academy of Social Sciences and would start the study on Tibetan issues pretty soon. He asked me whether I was interested and invited me to join him. He even said that if I wanted to join him, he would let me start working right away. It was June, 1981, and I accepted the offer. That's how I got here. You know it wouldn't be of any help if neither of us refused to budge... the District Party Committee and I... I don't think there was a big gap between our understandings, what between us were just personal conflicts. For example, Ren Rong attempted to draw me over to his side, but later changed to attack me as he saw that I was not coming to him. He used to dream that he could use me to fight against Zeng Yongya. I told him that I was not like what he thought and I could tell right from wrong. The way he tried to draw me over was so disgusting. He used to ask me, "As I haven't given you any help, is there anything that I can do for you now?" When we planned to go to Rikeze (Shigatse) to investigate Liu Shaoming's case, Ren Rong asked me, "Have you ever been to Rikeze?" I said no. He said, "Let's go through Majiang (Majang) to get there and visit Congyangkachi on the way back. It's a chance to do some sightseeing." He also wanted me to accompany him to Yadong, where I said I dared not go.   

**Q:**  Why not?   

**A:**  I was just teasing him because Yadong was a military area on the border. I joked that he might kill me when we got there, for he could say that I was trying to sneak out of the country. Actually Ren Rong and I used to be pretty close. So you see, many problems in the Cultural Revolution were basically personal conflicts. Of course, you may consider them as problems of principles, but if you analysis them carefully, you'll see they were just personal conflicts. For example, the military leaders and us hadn't had any disagreement before the Cultural Revolution, but during the Revolution, as our point of view was different from theirs, they decided to attack us and determined to put us to death. Zhang Xueyao, he was actually nobody. He wrote a big character poster against Ren Rong. Have you heard about that?   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  It was August 11, 1974, when he wrote a big character poster that made the accusation that Ren Rong had killed our comrades during the Long March. Later, I was asked whether I knew this and I said I did, for Zhang Xueyao told me about this in April 1974. Zhang Xueyao was happy to tell me the story of Ren Rong back in April 1974, and I told him he shouldn't write that story on a big character poster. I also asked him where he learned the story and he said he heard about it from a merchant, namely Yu Zhidong, a Han who came to Tibet before liberation. This person was a criminal and was then released from prison to seek medical treatment. I told Zhang Xueyao that information got from such a person was not reliable and asked him what he could do if Ren Rong didn't admit it. I suggested he write a letter to the Central Organizational Committee and let them investigate. He attempted to put up the big character poster in April, but was stopped. He tried again on July 30th, and people stopped him again. People even reminded him that I had told him not to do it. However, he did it on August 11th. I went out and read the poster.   

**Q:**  Where did he put it up?   

**A:**  It was on the wall outside the First Primary School. When I got there, I realized that something went wrong. People were taking pictures and notes. The atmosphere was quite intense. That was what Zhang Xueyao did. Do you think he deserved to be sentenced to death? However, Ren Rong did it. Let me tell you something very important. Wang Yiguang later visited me and apologized to me. He said, "Please don't think that we're the killers."   

**Q:**  The one at the Public Security Department?   

**A:**  Yes. He was later the Party Secretary there. He said, "I've been looking for you for a long time and I want to let you know that it was not us who wanted to kill him." He told me that Han Jie, a guy from the Great Alliance, and him went to see Ren Rong and Ren Rong insisted killing Zhang Xueyao. I think this is still a big problem today and you may ask Ren Rong about it when you see him. I'd like to know what he thinks about this. They [Wang Yiguang and Han Jie] told me that they didn't think it was right to kill people without a sound reason, but Ren Rong insisted in killing Zhang and they simply couldn't help. This is one of the top-secrets I can tell you today. And there were details concerning this that I don't dare to tell you. Wang Yiguang said to me, "I don't want you to believe that we didn't understand politics. We just didn't have any other choices." So you see, what problems did Zhang have? They told me that he had two: humiliating a military leader and being my "lackey." Well, I think they should have done some investigation to prove the first accusation and they could have dealt with Zhang after proving he had been lying. And if only he had been lying, he should have been sentenced to jail for at most seven years. As for that he was my "lackey," I don't think it was a problem at all because I was the Vice-Director of the Revolt Headquarter at that time and of course he should listen to me. Wang Yiguang also told me, "I didn't know much about the situation in Tibet before knowing you. And now I understand that the problem of factionalism is so serious in Tibet." At the very beginning, he was active in dealing with us, treating us in various ways he learned as a public security officer. We didn't really care about him. Later he disappeared. Han Jie once inspected the prison. Passing my room, he asked who was kept inside and they told him, "Tao." He walked away immediately I called out, "Hey, come on in. I want to talk to you." So cadres like them were quite sensitive. Why did he come to see me later? One of the reasons was that he was retired at that time. He went to the publishing house of the Woodpecker to be a Party Secretary. When the disturbance happened in Tibet, the Central Public Security Bureau sent an investigation team to Tibet. He was with the team.   

**Q:**  The disturbance?   

**A:**  The "9.27 Disturbance." He didn't come to see me when he was here dealing with the "9.27." He visited me later. After talking with him and Han Jie, I said, "I'll not blame you for killing Zhang."   

**Q:**  What year it was when you were the Vice-Director of the Revolt Headquarter? And how did you get the position?   

**A:**  People elected me!   

**Q:**  In what year?   

**A:**  1968. The Revolt Headquarter was founded on September 5th. Tibet and Xinjiang were the last two. "All the mountains and rivers in the country were red" by then. There was a movie about this and you can see me in the movies. People elected me. On each side three people were elected.   

**Q:**  Who else were elected on your side?   

**A:**  Zhu Jingshan and Cirenlama.   

**Q:**  Zhu Jingshan...   

**A:**  I just told you about him. He was the manager of the Forth Lhasa Transportation Company, one of the members of our Leading Committee.   

**Q:**  And Liu Shaomin...   

**Q:**  Well, on their side, there were also three. Liu Shaomin, Tudanmingang, who used to work at a wood factory, and Ma Ruihua, a nurse. We had to include women in our Leading Committee, and we chose Cirenlama, they chose Ma Ruihua.   

**Q:**  I have another question, which you may not want to answer. I want to know something about Redi [Ragdi]. Was he elected at that time?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. He was just a common cadre at the Naqu (nagchu) Region Public Security Department.   

**Q:**  So Ren Rong put him in that position...   

**A:**  Ren Rong thought Redi was a nice young man. In 1972, Ren Rong was going to transfer him to the Autonomous Region but didn't announce it to the public. There was a "Six-Person Report" and Redi's name was on it together with Ren Rong, Tian Bao, Ba Fang, etc. We were so surprised when reading the report. What was Redi? It was ridiculous that his name appeared on the report with the other five leaders! Soon after that, Redi came to the Autonomous Region. In 1975, Redi was formally announced to be the Vice-Director of the Revolt Headquarters. Well, we could consider this as a natural way of cultivating minority cadres. However, who knows what motives Ren Rong had. Of course, Redi has been doing pretty well and it's been a pretty long time since he was put at that position... He's a roly-poly. I don't want to talk about him anymore.   

**Q:**  Let's talk about you then. What books did you like to read while you were in college? And could you tell me something about your family?   

**A:**  My family... Well, it's obvious that I came from a family of the "Red Five Kinds of People," otherwise I couldn't be a head. My family was classified as "poor peasants."   

**Q:**  You were born in Yangzhou...   

**A:**  Yangzhou. My father lived in Guazhou, a township under Yangzhou...   

**Q:**  Do you consider this as a secret?   

**A:**  No, not at all. Zhang Xueyao's story is a top-secret though. Things like that are still sensitive and I don't know whether my understanding is right or wrong. My father lived in Guazhou. My grandfather had lived in Shanghai for many years before he retired from the Shanghai Dalu Bank.   

**Q:**  Dalu Bank, so your grandfather was a "white collar"?   

**A:**  No, he was a mailman at the bank and later was in charge of the boiler. Dalu Bank financially supported me while I was in primary school and junior high.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes. They supported their employee's children.   

**Q:**  That was before liberation. Which school did you go?   

**A:**  I went to Guazhou Central Primary School, and then Yangzhou Middle School for junior high in 1950.   

**Q:**  Did your father and grandfather teach you at home?   

**A:**  My father had a few years of schooling and he used to work as an accountant. My grandfather was almost illiterate, though he knew a few characters because of his job-he was a mailman. He taught himself. My father and grandfather were ordinary people, without anything glorious in their careers. However, they did teach me to be an upright, honest person. I learned about the morals of Han nationality from them. My grandfather once took me to the Dalu Bank and we met a business assistant there. That person said that I was a smart kid and could work at the bank when I grew up. The Dalu Bank was soon taken by the state and I of course couldn't... My grandfather was a peasant when he was young. My father had some schooling and a relatively good job, however, he thought it was better to own some land so he moved to live with my mother's father in Yichun. As for me, I moved from Guazhou to Yangzhou in order to go to school and stayed at Yangzhou for several years. I lived inside Yangzhou city.   

**Q:**  Could you talk about your mother?   

**A:**  She was illiterate, an ordinary housewife.   

**Q:**  Do you have a big family?   

**A:**  Well, I do have many relatives. My father was the only son of his family and he had a sister. My aunt died young. I don't have any impressions about her. As you know, in the countryside, everybody has lots of relatives and I do too.   

**Q:**  Were there any high officials in your extended family?   

**A:**  No. And I don't know anyone older than my grandfather in the extended family.   

**Q:**  Do you have a family tree?   

**A:**  No. My family didn't pay any attention to things like that. I know some people are very interested in family trees. The husband of my mother's youngest sister is very much into it. I always tell him there's no use of doing that. He holds family gatherings twice a year and I don't see the point of that either. I even teased him that according to his family tree, I should be of his father's generation.   

**Q:**  Was it before liberation when you went to middle school?   

**A:**  I went to middle school after liberation.   

**Q:**  So you went to primary school when it was still the "Republic of China."   

**A:**  Yes. And I still remember that every Monday morning we raised the national flag and sang the national anthem with the Principal. We also recited the will of the Premier. There was a course on citizenship. I think the teachers were quite nice because it was a "central" primary school. Although my family was not rich, I liked going to school very much. There were more than 100 students at Guazhou Central Primary School applying for the Yangzhou Middle School and only five students passed the entrance examination. I was one of the five. When applying for college, a lot of us chose the East China Normal University. Again only five students passed the examination, and I was one of the five.   

**Q:**  Did Guo Zhichen go to the East China Normal University?   

**A:**  No. He was from Jiangsu too. His hometown is a little to the north of mine. I didn't tell you about my senior high. When I was in senior high... I liked sciences when I was young, and I chose to go to the Nanjing Mechanic Manufacturing School. I was naughty at that time and I went outI was playing with a few other kids on the day of the entrance examination. We were late for the math exam and the teacher refused to let us in. After negotiations, we were finally allowed to take the exam and I asked the teacher a question about the test paper when we got in. The teacher was impatient. As a result, I failed the exam. Later I wrote a letter to ask them why. They told me that the cutting line was 370 and I got 368, including a zero on the math exam. I said I was good at math and it was impossible that I got zero on that. They told me it was because I wrote my answers on the scratch paper. Anyway, I decided to go to the Jiangsu Teacher's School of Arts, which was also a good school. I was accepted. So I was a good student from primary school to college. When graduating from senior high, one of my teachers told me that he would like to recommend me to go to the Shanghai Institute of Music. My grandmother didn't want me to go to Shanghai because she said that travelling back and forth would take a lot of money. So I didn't go. Almost all of my teachers at senior high liked me. I didn't want to go to the East China Normal University at the beginning. I wanted to find a job first. At that time, each teacher's school in Jiangsu needed to send one graduating student to Xinjiang to "help with the construction," and I was chosen in my school. All the forms, including a payroll form, were sent to me. I was ready to go, for that meant I would start earning money. However, my teacher suggested that I should try the college entrance examination first and if I failed, I could then go to Xinjiang. I took his advice and then passed the examination. I was accepted into the Chinese Language Department of the East China Normal University. I majored in painting while I was in the Teacher's School of Arts, but I told my teacher I would like to switch to Chinese if I was accepted into college. My teacher didn't believe that I could pass the entrance examination to the Chinese Department, for he thought I should continue with art. I also took the extra test for art majors and was mistakenly asked to play Er Hu [traditional Chinese musical instrument] instead of painting. I did it. And the teacher also asked me to play piano which again was a piece of cake to me. So I was accepted to the East China Normal University.   

**Q:**  What books did you like to read while you were in college?   

**A:**  I read all kinds of books. Majoring in Chinese language, I got chances to read lots of traditional Chinese books and translated foreign books. I didn't read those books for research, but for fun. I was a member of the university sports team, the orchestra of traditional Chinese music, the board-painting club, and the piano group. I was kind of famous at the East China Normal University. People knew that I was a good athlete, and I played Er Hu very well-the Shanghai Orchestra used to ask me to join them. I didn't go because I preferred to keep it as a hobby and I didn't want to be a professional.   

**Q:**  Which year were you...?   

**A:**  I was in the 1956 class. I became the champion of a 1,500-meter track competition right after arriving at the East China Normal University. The head of the university sports team came to me, asking me to join them and I was happy to hear that The university orchestra of traditional Chinese music was interested in me too. They gave me a test in my dorm and accepted me. I also like Russian movies, like the Silent Don, which was being criticized then, and some other movies.... The tape has been going too fast.   

**Q:**  Really? Let's finish this and we'll get going.   

**A:**  OK. So as I said, you should think about it after today's talk. I know you've read more books about the Culture Revolution than I have.   

**Q:**  I have trouble finding out the line running through all the events. For isolated events, I think I can find enough materials to study, however, it is hard to see the relationships between the events. I photocopied the materials compiled in 1969 and part of the materials was collected from individuals...   

**A:**  As for cutting the periods, I think we should stick to the opinion of the Central Committee. Actually it varies from place to place, and each place has its own characteristics. If you want to put this into your book, you should try to make the book interesting by adding more details to it. For example, Zhang Xueyao's story, which I just told you, was not a typical example. And Zhang Xueyao was quite naive. I didn't like him at all. I sympathized with him, but it doesn't mean that I liked him. Let me tell you something. I once paid him a visit and found that his doors were tightly locked even in daytime. I asked him why. He said, "I need to be careful, for there are so many people plotting against us." I said that I never heard about that. He was just like that.   

**Q:**  Where was he from?   

**A:**  Jiangxi. And he said that Zhang Guohua was his uncle, which we didn't know and didn't care. Chen Mingyi and other leaders of the Military Region were close to him. Song Zhiyuan was his direct leader. The day when Zhang was about to be put to death, his last wish was to see Song Zhiyuan, but Song didn't go. So you see, the Communist Party... As a former leader of Zhang, was it a big deal for Song Zhiyuan to meet with Zhang before he was put to death? Even more cruelly, they caught Zhang's wife.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  I don't know. She didn't do anything wrong. They didn't set her free until they killed Zhang.   

**Q:**  Really? Were they afraid that Zhang's wife might commit suicide?   

**A:**  No. They were afraid that she might stir up trouble. They wouldn't care if she committed suicide. They caught her... Zhang was killed on November 28, 1977, and his wife was put in jail in July, 1977 and set free in 1978. As I said, I was set free on January 25th, 1979. Soon after I was freed, Zhang's wife came to see me. She said she had no way out but to seek help from me, and she didn't know whether I dared to help. I said I was not afraid and would like to help her. I knew she was asking me to help with the case of her husband I told her that the only thing I could do was to help her write materials, which I did and I also asked other people to help her. I once asked a person at the People's Court, "What exactly was the reason that they killed Zhang?" There were my men at the People's Court, and I did go to ask them about this.   

