# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0006.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Rinchen Könchog was a Dobdo monk in Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he discusses miser households and the planting of the estate's fields. He talks about being a geyog and dreba and also about the income and donation associated with various positions. Additionally, he talks about paying the shengo and how the younger geyog had to pay more fees to the shango shingnyer than the older geyog.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0006_03/M_0006_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  We get a good income from selling cow dung in Lhasa which was used for operating expenses of the shiga. We have two big cow dung store rooms with the size of two pillars where we store the dung we collected from the upper part of the valley. The shiga would not use cow dung for the fuel.   

**Q:**  What do you use for fuel in the shiga?   

**A:**  We use kind of fuel called nyabshag [Tib. ?] and horse dung. We get 1,000 dotse from selling cow dung and we didn't need to pay tax for that. We get no money for operating expenses from the nyertsang, this cow dung is what we use. The nyertsang also needs fuel and we also send cow dung to the nyertsang.   

**Q:**  Do you send firewood or cow dung?   

**A:**  We send the woods like alpine willow tree [Tib. གླང་མ] and the tree from which lacquer is produced [Tib. བསེ་བ] for frying cookies, khabse [Tib. ཁ་ཟས] for the New Year, Lösar [Tib. ལོ་གསར]. Each monk gets 13 khabse about the size of 3 feet long. The wood is for frying the khabse. For these khabse we use 333-334 khe of wheat flour. The miser eat a leisurely meal after dark, and then set out in dark to transport the wood (on donkeys) to the monastery. They go to a place on the bank of the river near Ramagang [Tib. ར་མ་སྒང] where there is a ferry with a carved horse head in the front. We load the wood along with the donkeys into the ferry and cross the river near Norbulinga. From there we transport the wood on donkeys and arrive in Drepung at about dawn. The nyertsang would then give us food and tea and they would fry the khabse.   

**Q:**  Was there a book with the names of each treba and how much land they have?   

**A:**  Yes we had.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the book?   

**A:**  It was called "the work book of the tratsang" [Tib. གྲྭ་ཚང་གི་ལས་དེབ]. The old shidü gives it to the new one when they change. No one actually reads this book and no one could take it away. Deyang Shiga was the most complicated one among the Deyang's shiga. There were 7 water mills in that area of the shiga. When we have to mill the wheat into flour for the khabse, we divide the wheat between the 7 water mills. We weigh it out when we give it to each of them and weigh it when we get back the flour. And there was no way of doing things carelessly [Tib. བ་རེ་བོ་རེ].   

**Q:**  You also mill barley into tsampa in those mills, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What do you plant mostly on the shiga's fields?   

**A:**  Mostly barley and also wheat and peas.   

**Q:**  Among the miser household, what was the largest amount of khe of land do they hold? And what was the smallest amount of khe of land?   

**A:**  One tregang had 50 khe of land which is the largest amount and they have to send one ula everyday. The households who send ula on every other days [Tib. གནངས་ཆག] have 25 khe of land.   

**Q:**  There was no household who had two tregang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. If they need more fields, they would expand a little by opening new fields or trying to plant some more fields that belonged to other households.   

**Q:**  What happens if a household gets exhausted [Tib. སྟོངས]? Do you divide the land among the miser?   

**A:**  No, we would tell another household from among the tratsang miser to take over the tregang.   

**Q:**  Where does such person come from?   

**A:**  If we get people from local area, we call them. If not, we summon one of our miser from wherever like Lungshö [Tib. ཀླུང་ཤོད] and put him there.   

**Q:**  Do you call somebody from among the mibo payers?   

**A:**  If there is one capable of doing the tregang among the mibo payers, then we would call them. If not, we wouldn't and would summon from one of our shiga.   

**Q:**  What about sending a person as an additional to work for the tax, trenön [Tib. ཁྲལ་སྣོན] to the treba who is shortage of work hand?   

**A:**  Yes, if a household needs a trenön, the tratsang would tell the person to go there. We, shidü was not allowed to say that.   

**Q:**  Who has the power to do that?   

**A:**  The chabu has the power. A treba has to explain the shidü why he needs a trenön and then the shidü would have to report the tratsang and the tratsang would say,"we will give him a trenön".   

**Q:**  Was the person who was sent as trenön allowed to say no?   

**A:**  He is not allowed to say no.   

**Q:**  Were they allowed to call the person for trenön from a tregang house hold who have extra people?   

**A:**  No. They call the people who were wandering around for the trenön.   

**Q:**  When a person was sent as trenön, he or she would be like a servant of that household, right?   

**A:**  Temporarily, would be a servant. But if he or she was capable and did well, they wouldn't call servant and they even would become the master of the household and would be called master [Tib. བདག་པོ].   

**Q:**  Tell us about the geyog. How long would it take from the time when you first become geyog until you become the senior geyog, drepa [Tib. བགྲེས་པ] ?   

**A:**  I can't tell the time. I did the geyog for 8 years and I became geyog dreba for 2 years.   

**Q:**  The drepa was the one who carry a thin long pole, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who cut the pole for you? Do the tobtsang dobdo cut it for you?   

**A:**  One's gidru would cut it which is to steal from the parks that belonged to the government.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay as geyog at first in the Jokhang?   

**A:**  I stayed in the west courtyard, Khamranub [Tib. འཁྱམས་ར་ནུབ] and I was called Bugtsang [Tib. སྦུག་ཚང] geyog.   

**Q:**  Where would you stay when you become dreba?   

**A:**  There is no set place for the dreba. As we get older we have to go through the back door relation and ask the shengo for the area from where I can get the income.   

**Q:**  The geyog gets 14 alms shares, right? How many times would you stretch your hands for asking extra alms in the time between?   

**A:**  There wasn't any fixed limit. If the alms giver [Tib. འགྱེད་གཏོང་བ] is good, we get quite a good amoumt, but if the alms giver is not so good, we wouldn't get much.   

**Q:**  If the alms giver is good, would he count the money and give you or would he just give you without counting?   

**A:**  If the alms giver is good, they don't even count and give alot like this much dayang.   

**Q:**  But you have to give alot to the shengo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I swear by the Buddha statue in the Jokhang [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ] that I just had to give up being geyog because the burden was too heavy which made the income and the expenditure become unbalanced. [laughter] But I don't blame the shengo. Loseling and Gomang shengo have big responsibility for the tonggo. Loseling had 7,700 monks and one of the main sources of the tonggo expenses was the donation collected from the geyog. Then he also gets some when they fine the robbers and thieves. So the 2 shengo say " we collect the income and give the tonggo" [Tib. ཡོང་སྒོ་བསྡུས་ནས་གཏོང་སྒོ]. So we can't say that the shengo is taking bribes because we had insisted and asked him for the position, so he couldn't refuse it when some of his friends requested him.   

**Q:**  What were the shengo's tonggo?   

**A:**  In Loseling, they had to use 53 skin bag/loads of rice [maybe 80-90 gyama in wieght] for the rice gruel thukpa [Tib. ཐུག་པ་མིང་བཏགས]. The meat was imposed on the Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག] butchers as a tax where they pay just a token of the price. For the two bigger tratsang, they use 35 quarters of a carcass [Tib. བཞི་གླིང] of beef for one rice gruel for each tratsang. It is the meat of 8 yaks. For the 2 smaller tratsang, they use about 25 quarters.   

**Q:**  Would they give the tonggo for each tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes. There were two shengo where sometimes, Loseling and Gomang comes to get together and sometimes Loseling and Deyang comes together. And sometimes, Ngagpa and Gomang comes together. The Gomang shengo gives the tonggo for Gomang, the Deyang shengo gives the tonggo for Deyang etc. They give the tonggo only for their own tratsang.   

**Q:**  If so, the Deyang shengo would get a good profit because Deyang have a small amount of monks, right?   

**A:**  The number of monks is small, but they couldn't do the shengo every year. For the 2 small tratsang, they become shengo only once every 3-4 years.   

**Q:**  But the individual shengo gets the profit, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What else the shengo have to give other than the thukpa?   

**A:**  They had to give traja and gye gye.   

**Q:**  Was there a fixed amount for the gye?   

**A:**  There is no fixed amount for the gye.   

**Q:**  When you were the shidü, how much gye did the shengo give?   

**A:**  About 10 tranka per monk. Not much.   

**Q:**  The main expense was for the thukpa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. For our tratsang, they use about 20 skin bag/loads of rice for the thukpa. There were about 500 monks. In the bigger tratsang, they use about 50 skin bag/loads of rice.   

**Q:**  When you were geyog, did you have any incidents with some callous people [Tib. རྫབ་ཅན] who didn't abide by the law?   

**A:**  No. After I ended, I heard that there were some bad people.   

**Q:**  I heard that when the geyog goes by the roads, they were allowed to punish people, was that right?   

**A:**  I heard that some did that when they provoked [Tib. བརྙས་བརྐོ] the geyog. When I was the geyog, there was no such things because it was early before the revolution. Later, I heard that when the revolution was about to rise, the situation probably became like disturbant [Tib. རོབ་ཆགས].   

**Q:**  Usually, would they put the braver geyog at the place called Dayabwog [Tib. མདའ་ཡབ་འོག] in the Jokhang?   

**A:**  No, they wouldn't. When I was the geyog, I stayed in the Khyamranub which was a poorer place where I can get little bit from the gye givers. The best area was the second floor, Barkhang [Tib. བར་ཁང] which is locatd under the Laja Office. The geyog who gets this, is called Laja geyog. For this area, we have to bribe quite a lot and if you get the Laja geyog, you can earn about 600 dotse for the 21 days of Mönlam. When I got this area, the shengo told me that he wants 70 dotse and I had to pay 70 dotse and I got back little over 600 dotse. When I became Laja geyog, at night I gave the chang made from 8 khe of barley to the Laja sweepers as the bribe and on the next they stole butter when there is a big donggo and gave it to me. This was the method we take. The Laja geyog can also ask the Laja Office for gifts of butter, dried fruit, rice and tea leaves. They serve meals [Tib. གསོལ་ཚིགས] in Laja Office and we could also eat the meals.   

**Q:**  You bribe the Laja sweepers because they tell the Laja Office to give you the stuffs, right?   

**A:**  No, they act smart by stealing and give the stuffs to us.   

**Q:**  You mean they steal and divide the stuffs with you?   

**A:**  Not really dividing, they give is the whole stuffs they stole like 5-6 khe of butter. That's how we accumulated the incomes. In addtion to 70 dotse, I also had to give the shengo 8 dotse which was meant for asking for the area, büdö [Tib. འབུལ་དོད].   

**Q:**  This, you had to pay every year, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We also had to give the tonggo donation every year. The amount we had to give kept going up every year.   

**Q:**  I heard that in the Mönlam, the dobdo would make a noise like jeering [Tib. འ་ཆ་རྒྱག]. What is the point of jeering?   

**A:**  It's for being sarcastic [Tib. མ་མཛེས་མཛེས] to the geyog. They were implying that the geyog is not doing the right thing on over seeing the discipline.   

**Q:**  If these dobdo do this what do you do?   

**A:**  If I know who did that I would beat them alot.   

**Q:**  Have you ever beat them?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you beat them on their backs?   

**A:**  Yes, a little bit. I beat them with my stick on their backs while they are seated. Right there I do it, and then it is finished.   

**Q:**  There is a dobdo called Wöser Tribsel [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་གྲིབ་སེལ] living in the Kalimpong who told me that in a fighting, he stabbed another dobdo on his knees and the other dobdo hit him with a stone which hurt his ears. I didn't know clearly whether he used the stone in a special way like a slingshot?   

**A:**  Yes, he is from Gomang and is about my age. The monks called Wöser were about my age. They would just pick up a stone and hit somebody with it. They didn't have any special way of hitting.   

**Q:**  What is the reason for hitting the pillars with their stick in Tsuglagang?   

**A:**  It was said that these pillars were so strong that it could hold the hitting with sticks. If the pillar is not that strong, the pillar might break and the house would fall. There were many pillars like this. But I don't know about this too well.   

**Q:**  Why would they hit it?   

**A:**  There were two reasons; to show off their great strength and to tell the monks to keep quiet and recite the prayers.   

**Q:**  What is the chagdamba [Tib. ཕྱག་དམ་པ]?   

**A:**  The chagdampma is the shengo's running dog [Tib. རྒྱུགས་ཁྱི] who punish people while the shengo would just stand there looking.   

**Q:**  Do the geyog yield under the chagdampa?   

**A:**  They would not yield under the chagdampa, but they act like stylish.   

**Q:**  I heard that when you become the geyog drepa, you have less work than the geyog, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The geyog dreba has much less work than the junior geyog. For example, if the shengo tells them to dry meat, the junior geyog would go to do that and not the dreba.   

**Q:**  If you are dreba, do you give more money to the shengo?   

**A:**  No it's the same. Altogether there were 19 geyog who were treated equally. But the younger geyog have to pay more fines to the shanggo shingnyer [Tib. ཞང་གོ་ཤིང་གཉེར] when something went wrong during the tsog. Each day there were 3 tsog with tea, löntsog [Tib. རློན་ཚོགས] and 3 tsog without tea, kamtsog [Tib. སྐམ་ཚོགས]. The four drepa pay less for this and they also didn't need to work much. Each geyog has to pay about 8 doste as the fines during Mönlam to the shanggo shingnyer which would be his income.   

**Q:**  The geyog dreba also don't have to go for patrolling at night, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The shanggo shingnyer gets this income from the fines, but he also had to give a lot to the shengo.   

**Q:**  How much would they have to give?   

**A:**  They had to give more to junior shengo.   

**Q:**  Why did he have to pay more to the junior shengo?   

**A:**  Because the junior shengo was the one who appoint the shanggo shingnyer. Then he give a little less to the senior shengo. The Barkhang geyog is appointed by the senior shengo.   

**Q:**  If you geyog have to pay 70 dotse to the shengo, how much would the shanggo shingnyer pay?   

**Q:**  The shanggo shingnyer probably have to give about 100 dotse to each shengo.   

**Q:**  How many geyog would come from Deyang?   

**A:**  There were only two geyog from the two smaller tratsang. There were more geyog from the two bigger tratsang. [Trindorla; not in the tape. Shanggo shingnyer was originally for the firewood and chagdampa was for carrying water from the well. Later the tratsang built a running water pie so this wasn't necessary]   

