# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0006.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Rinchen Könchog was a Dobdo monk in Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he discusses giving the tonggo ceremony which released him from having to do the "young monk tax" (shöndre), and how monks would take exams on the texts that they had committed to memory. He describes the various positions that monks could hold and how they would be beaten by the gegö (disciplinary officer) with switches when they needed to be punished. He also talks about the monk's salary in grain, including how much they received and where it came from. He then goes on to describe, in great detail, the workings of miser households, farming and the accounting done for the estate (shiga).   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0006_02/M_0006_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Did you have to give a tonggo for the shöndre?   

**A:**  No, I didn't have to.   

**Q:**  You have to give the tonggo to buy out [Tib. བླུ་ཡག] the shöndre, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I have to give the tonggo to buy out the shöndre.   

**Q:**  When did you give this?   

**A:**  I did the shöndre from the age 16 till in my thirties. Probably, when I was 36, I gave the tonggo to buy out the shöndre.   

**Q:**  At that time, you have to serve a traja, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the past, we would have to serve the rice gruel thukpa. Later, this was said to be too hard for the simple monks, [Tib. གྲྭ་པ་གྲྭ་རྐྱང] so they converted the thukpa into money called substitute of thukpa, thugthö [Tib. ཐུག་དོད]. And you can pay as much you want like 10 tranka, 2 sang.   

**Q:**  Did you pay the thugthö?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am 73 years of age.   

**Q:**  When you bought out the shöndre, they had already made the thugthö, right?   

**A:**  In the beginning, the thugthö was not made and some filed a kind of law case saying the simple monks were unable to give the tonggo to buy out [Tib. བླུ་ཡག] the shöndre which was called derampa [Tib. འབྲས་རམས་པ]. So it will be good to make the thugthö. If you didn't give this tonggo, then you have to do shöndre even if you are in your 70's.   

**Q:**  If you didn't give the tonggo for the derampa [Tib. འབྲས་རམས་པ], you can't become the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After buying out the shöndre, the turn for the gegö will come.   

**Q:**  You didn't get the turn to be the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If the revolt hadn't occured, you would have eventually got the turn, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This turn goes according the list of the time you gave the tonggo.   

**Q:**  Once in a year, regardlesss of the lagyüba or pechawa, you have to take a major exam in the dharma grove, chöra [Tib. ཆོར་ར] called gyugchen [Tib. རྒྱུགས་ཆེན], right?   

**A:**  Yes, we have to take it once in a year after the Tsongjö in the 4th lunar month.   

**Q:**  For the lagyüba, what kind of exam would you have to take?   

**A:**  We take the exam on whatever kind of texts that one had committed [Tib. ཁས་ལེན] to recite. It doesn't matter even if we couldn't take it completely. They wouldn't say anything because normally we do the works for the monastery like building some small houses. As for the big houses they call the miser and we do other works such as carrying skin bag/loads of butter and rice from here and there. Because we do all these works, when there is the exam, they don't enforce [Tib. བདའ་འདེད] it on us very much.   

**Q:**  Anyway, you have to take the exam and recite somthing in front of the abbot, right?   

**A:**  We wouldn't need to take it in front of the abbot. The exam is given by the gegö, umdze and lama shunglenba [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ]. The abbot comes, but he examines only the better pechawa and that is also strict where ours was not strict.   

**Q:**  Do you go individually to give the exam?   

**A:**  No, 3 of us go at once. We recite whatever we can and if we didn't have any more to recite, we just stay there and then the gegö and umdze go to the abbot and say they are finished with their exam and then we leave. The pechawa takes the exam one by one.   

**Q:**  Did you have to take the exam every year even you reach 50-60 years old?   

**A:**  This we do every year, even if we are old.   

**Q:**  Couldn't you buy out the exam?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  In Deyang, if you didn't give the tonggo for the derampa, you can't go up from the düchen grade, right?   

**A:**  Yes. You have to remain in the düchen. If you gave the derampa tonggo, you move up to tagrik, lurik, namdren [Tib. རྣམ་འདྲེན], pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན] etc .   

**Q:**  Do you get promoted every year?   

**A:**  Not every year, after some time, the abbot would tell us a time for the promotion.   

**Q:**  The Pechawa have the different grades, but as for the lagyüba, what difference does it make whether you are in tagrik or lurik?   

**A:**  If you couldn't give the derampa tonggo, you stay in düchen and do the shöndre. If you gave the derampa tonggo, then you move up from the greads like tagrik etc. As for the lagyüba, they call you seniors [tib rgan pa] when you become older. Then after you become gegö, you get the grease [Tib. ཞག] on the tea in the thsog. Otherwise you don't get any grease.   

**Q:**  As for the lagyüba, even if they are in the tagrik and lurik, I think they don't go to the chöra?   

**A:**  No, they do have to go, but the lagyüba are treated a little bit specially. But it's not okay if we just don't go. The gegö says "those below me in rank have to go to tshog/chöra, those above me don't have to come in tshog /chöra" [Tib. ང་མན་ཆད་ཚོགས་ཆོས་ར་འགྲིམ་དགོས་ཡོད། ང་ཡན་ཆད་ཚོགས་ཆོས་ར་འགྲིམ་དགོས་མ་རེད].   

**Q:**  There were three sessions of chöra; morning session, shogchö, [Tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས], miday session, nyinchö [Tib. ཉིན་ཆོས] etc, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were shogchö, nyinchö and ritual, kurim [Tib. སྐུ་རིམ].   

**Q:**  If you go to the nyinchö, mostly it is the tsenyi degate, right?   

**A:**  First they would recite the prayers called Dukar [Tib. གདུགས་དཀར] and the Shenying [Tib. ཤེས་སྙིང] and after reciting the prayers, they gather together in each grade [Tib. རུག་ཚོགས].   

**Q:**  As this time, do the lagyüba go back?   

**A:**  Then after this is over, the gegö would tell the elder lagyüba to leave. After we leave, then the gegö would tell the khatog garmar and düdra to leave. Then the pechawa would debate tsenyi for an hour or two.   

**Q:**  Is shogchö the same like this?   

**A:**  Its about the same. The gegö stands up watching over the discipline and the umdze starts the prayers.   

**Q:**  Does the undze come?   

**A:**  He comes all the time and is critical because we had to start the prayers.   

**Q:**  Does the lama shunglenba come everyday?   

**A:**  No, he dosn't come. The umdze leads the prayers and then he leaves first. Then we, the older lagyüba leave who have given the tonggo of derampa. Then those who haven't done derampa would be allowd to leave later. The gegö is the disciplinary official in the chöra, traja and kurim.   

**Q:**  When you go to the chöra, do you stay in the different grades or do you just stay like a tsog?   

**A:**  First we stay in the grades and after awhile, we gather together where we recite the prayers like Dukar etc.   

**Q:**  Were there cushions to sit on in the chöra?   

**A:**  No there weren't. We sit with our cloak draped over us. Shogchö is not long, only about 1 hour. kurim is the hardest. It is about 7 pm (when we start) and goes on till about 10 pm. We recite 21 Drölma [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ] prayers. There are many differnt rituals like chasum [Tib. ཆ་གསུམ] etc. If the dobdo and other lagyüba come to the kurim, then no one would say anything if you don't go to shogchö and nyinchö. If we go to the kurim, we recite the prayes we know loudly, so we were regarded highly. Otherwise, the dobdo have some exemptions because they have to do the shöndre which was like the ula. The old society's rules were very just and fair. They would never falsely accuse people. If you break the law, then you get punihsed.   

**Q:**  They make the judgement right away and people would not get imprisoned, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They would take them down and raise their lower garment up and beat them on their bottom with switches and then it is finished.   

**Q:**  You were one of those who held the gegö's legs while they were beaten, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was also shöndre. The high rankings would call us mentioning our names. If we didn't go, we would get beaten on our bottom.   

**Q:**  Was it at night when they called you?   

**A:**  I was called before it was dark.   

**Q:**  Did the chabu call you?   

**A:**  The abbot called us while they were holding the tsondu. They beat both of the gegö. After the beatings, the gegö were put in separate rooms. The new gegö was put in the room under the chabu rungkhang of which the door is faced to this side. The old gegö was put in a room on the Deyang roof. That night, I was told to guard the old gegö because they were afraid that he will flee.   

**Q:**  Did you hold the feet or hands?   

**A:**  I held the feet.   

**Q:**  Who were the ones who beat them with switches ?   

**A:**  The chabu beat them.   

**Q:**  Which chabu?   

**A:**  I mean not real chabu but were the tsondu members; Mönlamla [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་ལགས], lengdenla [Tib. ལེགས་ལྡན་ལགས], Shenyen Thuwangla [Tib. བཤེས་གཉེན་ཐུབ་དབང་ལགས]. It was about 4 people who did the beatings.   

**Q:**  Did they hit them with the switches or did they poke them with the switches?   

**A:**  They beat them with the switches called Tsarpa [Tib. ཚར་པ] and later the switches cracked which made them have severe sores and they were bleeding.   

**Q:**  I heard that broken pieces of switches even stuck in their bottom.   

**A:**  Yes, it stuck them and they were killed under the beating.   

**Q:**  Did they also beat them on the next day?   

**A:**  No they didn't. But they beat them again on the third day [Tib. གནངས] which was a kind of rule. They would not beat them continuously. They were quite old, so they died. At that time, if you steal and kill people, they beat them like this.   

**Q:**  Did they die in the room or in their shag?   

**A:**  They died in their shag. The friends of the gegö bailed them out and took them to their shag and guaranteed they wouldnt run away.   

**Q:**  At that time, didn't the tramang made a kind of commotion [Tib. འུར]?   

**A:**  No. They wouldn't do that because they didn't have the custom [Tib. ལུགས] of doing that.   

**Q:**  What was the main reason for beating the gegö?   

**A:**  We didn't really know because we were like servants. There must have been something with the high ranking where they didn't get along well with them.   

**Q:**  Did they count the strikes of the beating?   

**A:**  They did but there was no limit.   

**Q:**  If you guess, did they beat them like 100 times?   

**A:**  Yes, they definitely beat them about 100 strikes.   

**Q:**  Were the gegö talking back when they were beaten?   

**A:**  No. They couldn't because they were more powerful than the gegö.   

**Q:**  How did you get the post of shidü? Did you ask for that?   

**A:**  I didn't ask. As I told you last time, out of about 20 candidate the deity picked 9 and approved it by putting red mark on the names. Of these 9, 6 went to shiga as shidü and 3 stayed in the nyertsang to serve the daily traja   

**Q:**  What were the 3?   

**A:**  One of the 3 is the jama staying in the rungkhang checking on tea making, 2 stayed in the store room, nyertsang as nangnyer [Tib. ནང་གཉེར].   

**Q:**  Did the nyertsang appoint the nangnyer or the tsondu?   

**A:**  The deity appointed them.   

**Q:**  Did the tsondu make the list of 20 people?   

**A:**  Yes. The tsondu discussed and made the list of 20 odd candidates from those lagyüba who had done the derampa and then ask the deity Thambag Shanggo [Tib. དན་འབག་ཞང་གོ] for the approval and 9 would be approved. Then the 9 people go to the chabu who is in charge of administrative matters in the tratsang and they officially inform us that we had been approved as nyertsang. From now on you have to work. Then for about one year the new nyertsang takes over the principals of loans gradually from the old nyertsang and start to give out loans. During that one year, we didn't need to give tonggo. There were 6 shidü. Deyang Shiga had 2 shidü, Tagya [Tib. ?] Shiga had 2 shidü, the others had 1 each. In fall, when the threshing work is completed, then we go to over see the autumn plowing called tönmö [Tib. སྟོན་རྨོས]. Then I return to the shiga and give them the food that they need.   

**Q:**  One shidü is in charge of the giving loans and the other is the in charge of planting the fields, right?   

**A:**  No. The shiga itself wouldn't give loans. The two shidü had slightly divided the work. One did mostly the internal works staying in the house and one was mainly in charge of plowing, planting and these activities.   

**Q:**  Who give the loans?   

**A:**  The old nyertsang would hand over the loan principals and then the new nyertsang nangyer give the loans. Actually, 9 of us were doing the same working.   

**Q:**  So the shidü would not take over the grain loans, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When we first take over the shiga, we don't lend out, instead we take loans. Then in subsequent years if we get a good harvest, we would lend out grain loans. If the yield is not good, then we don't have grain to give loans.   

**Q:**  How long did you work as shidü?   

**A:**  Three years. The term was 6 years but the revolt took place.   

**Q:**  When you took over the shiga, the seed for the next planting was kept in the shiga, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The shiga was called Deyang Shiga, right? How many khe of seed did you get?   

**A:**  Yes. When I took over, there was 600 khe of seed. This was left by the old shidü. Deyang Shiga had to give 4 khe of grain salary for each Deyang monk. There were about 500 monks. We also get 600 khe of lease from Rema Shiga and 500 khe of lease from the shiga called Tagyar. We get little over 1,000 khe of grain from outside. The rest of the grain salary had to be provided by Deyang Shiga and we transport the grain to Lhasa three times. After the harvest, we put the grain to be used for monks salary in a separate section of the grain storeroom. When we do this, we fill a bo measure with tsamba, then we fill a pot with chang and we put butter shaving on the tsamba in the bo as a good luck ceremnoy [Tib. རྟེན་འབྲེལ]. We do this on the first bo of grain to be stored. Then we measure out the rest of the grain and store it.   

**Q:**  How much yield did you get from the shiga ?   

**A:**  About 2,000 of khe. The land is located in the upper part of valley, so we only get 4-5 khe from one khe of seed. The fields in the lower part of the valley got about 10 times yield the seed they planted.   

**Q:**  Do you irrigate the land?   

**A:**  Yes. We irrigate the land. Deyang Shiga was actually the owner of the stream flowing down from the upper part of the valley.   

**Q:**  How many dzo did you have to plant these 600 khe of land?   

**A:**  We used 6 sets of dzo for planting and we had little over 20 dzo. We would have to make two shifts to switch the 12 dzo off.   

**Q:**  How many days would it take for the spring plowing?   

**A:**  It takes about 2 months to plant this area. First we plow the land right after the harvest, this is to plow under the stalks which is called Thagog [Tib. མཐའ་གོག྄] and the 2nd plowing is called Logog [Tib. ལོ་གོག]. The 3rd is called Jingma [Tib. བྱིང་མ] where we plow the land and then use the harrow to level the land and then leave it. All these are done before planting. Then we plant when the moisture is ready [Tib. སེར་ལངས]. The seed sower would follow the plowmen sowing the seed in the furrow.   

**Q:**  How many miser household were there?   

**A:**  There were 17 tregang. The ones who had less lands would send ula on every other days.   

**Q:**  These were the miser who plant the fields, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Usually, the 17 tregang would send the weakest workers in their household for the ula to work for the shiga. They should do that because we didn't pay them wages and the land they got was for working as an ula.   

**Q:**  Do you give them food?   

**A:**  We give a little food and chang to the ula in Spring when they plow and in fall when they harvest.   

**Q:**  How many khe of land did one tregang have?   

**A:**  One tregang had about 50 khe of land . The magang had about 100 of land.   

**Q:**  What happens if a son of a tregang household get separated?   

**A:**  We don't divide up the tregang land. The kid would get a share like a few animals, clothes, and so forth but not in land depending on the wealth of the household. He then becomes a household called dunampa [Tib. དུ་གནམ་པ] who have to send one person to work when all the households who raise smoke in the sky, duwa namtong [Tib. དུ་བ་གནམ་གཏོང] have to send a person to work as a tax. These dunampa have to come to work for the shiga for about 5-6 days in Fall and Spring at harvest and planting time. And we give them tsampa and tea.   

**Q:**  Do they have to do the ula?   

**A:**  No. They have no land, so they don't have to do it.   

**Q:**  How do they earn their livelihood?   

**A:**  They take lands on lease from other families in that area who can't plant all their fields.   

**Q:**  Are they called düjung?   

**A:**  No they are called dunamba.   

**Q:**  Can this dunamba go to another areas?   

**A:**  No, they can't leave. But if the household takes the full responsibility for the tregang work, then the shiga won't say anything if the dunampa goes to other places. We are only concerned with the ula they have to send for the tregang. If a household send a son as magba, the shiga won't say anything about this as long as they do their ula.   

**Q:**  The shiga won't say whether its okay to go as magba or not, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The magpa's children would be also Deyang's miser, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do they pay mibo?   

**A:**  Yes they do.   

**Q:**  How much do they pay?   

**A:**  It is not much. It is just like one tranka.   

**Q:**  Do the magpa's children pay mibo?   

**A:**  No, they don't.   

**Q:**  Did you have nangsen in the shiga?   

**A:**  Yes. We also have in addition to the treba, 8 nangsen; there are 2 sheperds, 1 dzo herder [Tib. མཛོ་དཔོན], 1 donkey herder, 1 for taking care of cows, 1 cook. If we pay them in tsamba we pay 3 khe a month, if we pay in grain it is 2 khe a month. We also give tea and butter salary. Then we also give them 12 dompa [Tib. འདོམ་པ], a length measure defined as the span of the person's outstretched hands from fingertip to fingertip of nambu and also a pair of boots in a year.   

**Q:**  Are the nangsen all males?   

**A:**  No. Some are female.   

**Q:**  If the father is namgsen, would his children also become nangsen?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't such thing. If the nangsen served the former shiga well, they would keep them there. If they hadn't worked well, they would be expelled and keep the new ones.   

**Q:**  If they expel them, do the nangsen have fields?   

**A:**  They have no fields. They live off tsampa salary.   

**Q:**  They don't have money salary, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I swear by the Buddha statue in Jokang [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་ཤེས] that later all the nangsen became well off.   

**Q:**  If you have to find a new nangsen, how would you do it?   

**A:**  Well they would come to ask for a job and I would give the job.   

**Q:**  So, the nangsen was regarded as having better livelihood, right?   

**A:**  Not really better livelihood, but they didn't have land, so they ask for the job.   

**Q:**  Do they come from dunamba?   

**A:**  Yes. they would come and ask to be nangsen. We would give it to the ones who don't steal and lie and work well.   

**Q:**  There wasn't a fixed amount of yield that they have to give to the tratsang and you give more if the yield is good and less when the yield is not good, right?   

**A:**  No. We have to give each monk in Deyang 4 khe of grain whether we have a good year or bad one. We give just this much. Usually either in the 10th or 12th lunar month we send that. The threshing would not be finished even after the New Year because we had a large area of land. When we send the grain for monk's salary, the senior shidü comes to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Do you take back the left over grain?   

**A:**  No. If there is left over grain after the salary is paid, the surplus is kept by the nyertsang in their storehouse. The nyertsang would exchange this for butter to be used in the traja.   

**Q:**  So the nyertsang and the shiga was managed together, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Among the nine monks, the elder ones were chosen to work for the nyertsang and the younger ones with farming experience would be sent as shidü. The three monks in the nyertsang's office in monastery lend out grain loans and the 6 on the shiga mainly do the planting.   

**Q:**  How much grain did you send to the nyertsang in each year when you were the shidü ?   

**A:**  There are 500 monks and we must give 4 khe per monk so the total is 2,000 Khe. We get in about 1,000 from the lease, so the remaining 1,000 we give from Deyang shiga. Deyang shiga also makes all the nyertsang's tsamba for the year. And then also we set aside for the next year's seed. The exceess is used by the nyertsang. I stayed for only 3 years, but had I been there for 6 years, at the end of my term I would have sold eveything like the animals etc to the new shidü. The new shidü has to buy the things like dzo, donkeys and farming equipments etc. And if we had a good yield, we would serve a mangja and give alms to the monks and also leave endowments [Tib. སྤྱི་འཇོག]. There is no loss.   

**Q:**  Anyway, you have to do an accounting [Tib. རྩིས་རྒྱག] between the new and the old, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was an accounting in each year. The nyertsang had the endowments for giving the tonggo and they would give loans from that. The new shidü have to buy all the things in the shiga.   

**Q:**  You don't have money to pay right away, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we don't need to pay right away. After 6 years we also sell all the things to the new shidü. There is no way of doing things carelessly [Tib. བ་རེ་བོ་རེ]. At the end of the 6 years, all the six shidü and three people from the nyertsang would meet and do all the accounts on the income and the expenditures. The shidü at this time, would ask the nyertsang how many loans they had to take. The nyertsang definitely would have to take loans. The excess from the shiga would be used to repay the loans for the nyertsang.   

**Q:**  At your time how many things did you buy?   

**A:**  I bought alot.   

**Q:**  Did you pay like 100 dotse?   

**A:**  It is more than that. For example, a donkey cost like 100 dotse, so it was alot to pay because there were 10 donkeys and there were over 20 dzo which cost a lot.   

**Q:**  So it would have been several thousands of dotse, right?   

**A:**  When I bought everything from the old shidü, it was worth a little less than 10,000 dotse. It didn't matter about paying this out because if we have a good harvest, these things were all capitals. For example, if we had a donkey and it died, it was no loss since due to its work till it's death from which we had made the income.   

**Q:**  Supposing it cost about 9,000 for the things you bought, you didn't need to pay the money right away, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So how would you make the payment eventually?   

**A:**  Trindor: It looks like that they didn't pay in cash, they just count the cost of the things when they take over the shiga and when they hand over the shiga to the next shidü, for example, they would say,"when I took over the shiga, I bought the things that cost 7, 000 dotse and now I am selling you the things which cost 8, 000 dotse".   

**A:**  Yes. This is right. If we bought the things which cost 8,000 dotse, we won't suffer loss during 6 years. For example, All the things including chickens we bought during the 6 years are listed. When we hand over the shiga, we say, "the things we have, cost this much capital, so we won't sell it less than that amount to the new shidü". The new shidü has no choice but to buy it, since it is the time to do the autumn plowing and they have to use the dzo and donkeys. We had 8 milch cows. The butter from the 8 cows are used for shidü's food and for performing rituals.   

**Q:**  Do you keep the excess of the things?   

**A:**  No, we don't keep anything. It is used for the nyertsang for paying their loss.   

**Q:**  How would the nyertsang suffer loss?   

**A:**  During the 6 years, the nyertsang had to serve the regular traja. The nyertsang runs at a loss of its endowment due to the inflation. For example, if there is an endowment of 16 sang in the past which was then meant for serving a traja, now you can't serve a traja with 16 sang. This loss was made up from the profit from the shiga which was accumulated by the hard work of the shidü. After 6 years accounting of the shiga, we would ask the nyertsang how much loans they took and if the nyertysang tells an amount of the loans, we don't at first say we have a lot of proift. For example, if we have grain or money worth of 10,000 dotse, we say we only have 8,000 dotse.   

**Q:**  Was there any salary for the shidü?   

**A:**  No. None at all. Shidü was a tax for the smaller tratsang. The bigger tratsang's shidü have salary. While we are living on the shiga, there is free food as much as we wanted and we get the alms and the salary shares from the Mönlam and tratsang which they collect for us. But, it was not much, it might be like 30 dotse per year.   

**Q:**  Do you get any extra shares?   

**A:**  No. We get the same. We, the dobdo do this as a tax or obligation.   

**Q:**  If a son splits from the household, can the household let them plant some of their fields temporarily?   

**A:**  Yes, if they have a lot of fields they can do that. We don't get involved in this internal stuff at all. As long as they provide the ula, they could do whatever they like.   

**Q:**  But can they divide the tregang?   

**A:**  No, they weren't allowed to do this. If they have a fight and split family, they have to report the shidü. The shidü would say "you can't make the tregang to become scattered [Tib. ཐོར] and you have to take the responsibility. If the tregang get scattered, it will not be good for you." They would say this in an serious manner. For example, if the father is Deyang miser and mother is not Deyang miser, since they joined the tregang, there is no differnce whether she is Deyang miser or not.   

**Q:**  For example, if a family has a son and a wife living separately and the household internally lets them plant some land, would the shidü get involved?   

**A:**  No, we won't as long as the ula is sent.   

**Q:**  Can this become permanent for some later generations?   

**A:**  No. It's only for a few years where they let them plant it. They would not let them plant permanently because the land belonged to the shiga. When some land investigation comes this will cause trouble when they check the lands.   

**Q:**  Would they do the investigation yearly?   

**A:**  No. It is done ocassionally all of a sudden without warning.   

**Q:**  So the father of the household had a great power, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If the son didn't obey the father and get separated, would he get his land share?   

**A:**  No. He can't argue for the land, but he can argue for a share of things.   

**Q:**  Do they often therefore marry polyandrously?   

**A:**  There were some, but not usually since they won't get along well.   

**Q:**  So what do they do usually when they get married ?   

**A:**  The elder son get married and stays at home.   

**Q:**  What would the younger ones do?   

**Q:**  The younger sons find wives and leave the main household. Most were like this. Usually, the sons would not get along well in the family.   

**Q:**  So the sons living outside would not get the land, so would they take lands for lease?   

**A:**  If the family let them plant some of their fields for a few years, they plant it and they also can take 2-3 lands for lease from others. amd pay 2-3 of grain as the lease. There was also the way of leasing where the half of the yield goes to the planter and the half goes to the owner.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, would they take the land for the lease and instead of paying grain, they work for some days for the owner of the land?   

**A:**  Yes, there were.   

**Q:**  What if one of these boys and his wife says he wants to leave and go to Lhasa, could he do that? Do they have to report the shidü?   

**A:**  Probably the shiga would not let them go. But if his wife was from Lhasa and the son says he wants to go Lhasa, we let them go because his wife lives there. We are primarily interested in the tregang providing 1 ula.   

**Q:**  How many days do the dunamba work?   

**A:**  About 3-4 days.   

**Q:**  Would they make them work in spring?   

**A:**  We make them work in spring and autumn because these were the most critical season and we give them one dre and three phü [Tib. འཕུལ] of tsamba, tea and chang.   

**Q:**  Do you give food to the treba ula?   

**A:**  No. Because they have fields.   

**Q:**  If there is a dispute on the shiga, can you two shidü settle the case?   

**A:**  Yes. There are no big disputes. If the miser have an interal verbal fighting among the family members, the shidü would mediate and say don't do like this. And we would not fine them, they were our own miser.   

**Q:**  What would happen if there is a big fight?   

**A:**  If there is a big fight, the shidü would beat them a little bit. In my time, there wasn't such things happened.   

**Q:**  During your three years term, what kind of things happened?   

**A:**  I had one case in my 3 years. In the first year I was there there was a potter who set fire to the threshing ground when the grain was about to be threshed. We were working there when he did it. Fortunately, we had put thorns around the grain stocks. When the thorn caught fire it was night so we saw at once and put it off. We caught him right then and there. We tied him to a pillar and beat him up a little bit. Then we turned him over to Liu Dzong [Tib. སྣེའུ་རྫོང].   

**Q:**  What was the reason for him doing this?   

**A:**  He was the one who make the pots for the Dalai Lama and when he was made to transport the pots, he should have come earlier, but he came in the afternoon and the miser had to wait for him to get the pots to transport to the next station. So I told him."it is not good if you do like this because the miser have to wait for you and they have to work on the fields" But still he was kind of sassy. Later, he appealed to Shöl legung.   

**Q:**  To which lord [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] did he belong to?   

**A:**  He was the one who make the pots for the Dalai Lama. So he was showing off this position. Then Shöl legung sent an adrung messenger to tell the shidü to come. I didn't go at once. We were also a tratsang, so we didn't have to yield to them. This was the grudge he held and finally he suffered the loss. We told the chabu and the chabu sent a person to Shöl legung.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have to go to Shöl legung?   

**A:**  I also eventually had to go there.   

**Q:**  What did they say?   

**Q:**  They asked me what happened.   

**A:**  I said, "the pots were transported from Sanggu [Tib. གསང་ཕུ] to Deyang Shiga. And Deyang Shiga had to transport it to Sangda [Tib. གསང་མདའ]. From Sangda it is transported to Ramagang [Tib. ར་མ་སྒང]. And from Ramagang to Lhasa. That's how it worked. The potter should have transported the pots early in the morning to Deyang Shiga and our miser had to transport it to Sangda, but this potter transported the pots only in the afternoon and our miser had to wait there. The miser have to work for many other taxes and they have to plant the field and they couldn't do it because he didn't come on time. So I couldn't transport the pots". In the end, the potter was kind of lost. He was a miser of Loseling. So he became embarrased and set our threshing ground on fire. So I caught him and whipped him and took him to the Liu Dzong. The Liu dzong also whipped him and handed him over to Shangdrong Shiga under their custody.   

**Q:**  At that time, do the shiga have the power to beat people with switches?   

**A:**  We had the power, but we didn't do that. As a symbol for having this power, we had a big prayer pole given by the dewashung as the title. Not all the shiga had this. If the shiga had this prayer pole then you could settle the cases.   

**Q:**  If you arrest a thief what would you do?   

**A:**  We would not punish him and we would hand him over to the dzong.   

**Q:**  If he is your owen miser?   

**A:**  For our own miser, we could make the desision.   

**Q:**  So you handed over the potter to the dzong because he was Loseling's miser, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I didn't have to do work in the threshing ground but I had to stay there watching the miser until 10, 11. We set up watchmen at the threshing ground and I would tell them to watch carefully.   

**Q:**  What work did the ula do during the rest of the year after the threshing is over?   

**A:**  After harvesting there was a plowing.   

**Q:**  All the plowing equipments were supplied by the tratsang, right?   

**A:**  The shiga supplied these things. There were 6 plowmen, who come from the tregang. If they come to do the plowing, they need not come to work as ula.   

**Q:**  Do you have works to do everyday for these 17 peopel from the tregang?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Can a tregang send a boy of 10 or 11 years old?   

**A:**  No, we would say that this is not okay because there is an age limit. They must be 16 years old.   

**A:**  They also can't send an old man, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But they do send the weaker workers in the family. We don't say anyhting since they are our miser.   

**Q:**  Are there any other taxes for miser but ula?   

**A:**  No, just have to send the ula only.   

**Q:**  When you have to carry things, the miser had to do it, right?   

**A:**  Yes, these were done by the ula.   

**Q:**  How do you appoint the lepön?   

**A:**  This position is asked for. They oversee all the normal work. They are not our miser. Our lepön was from Lungshö [Tib. ཀླུང་ཤོད] and we had to pay him the wages called Gyabla [Tib. རྒྱབ་གླ ].   

**Q:**  What was the job of the lepön?   

**Q:**  The lepön makes the ula to work and makes the work assignments and he tells them to do this and then do that. We don't get involved with directly telling ula to work this or that.   

**Q:**  What does the gembo do?   

**A:**  The gembo is the one who goes to the meetings and the gembo is given a little bit field and the lepön also has about 4-5 fields and he gets the yield but the work is done by the ula together along with the shiga's field.   

**Q:**  From where did they get the seed?   

**A:**  The seed for the lepön's fields is provide by himself.   

**Q:**  Do the treba select the gembo or the tratsang appoints it?   

**A:**  The gembo comes from the treba, but they would ask for the position because he has some extra fields for his salary.   

**Q:**  The shidü probably would get some gift from this, right?   

**A:**  There is no real gifts for that. They may bring a tea.   

**Q:**  The term of the gembo is 6 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Usually, the new shidü leaves the old gembo in place but he can also change him, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When they appoint the gembo, they take back the field and give it to the new, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Usually, they keep the old gembo there because he knows all about the taxes on the shiga and he also goes to the meetings. He takes care of all of these things. Later, all the gembo were categorized as trerim. [laughter] Actually, the gembo has no power.   

**Q:**  What is his main work?   

**A:**  He goes to the meetings at Liu Dzong. He goes there in place of the shidü. That's his main work.   

**Q:**  What kind of meeting would they hold? Would they hold many meetings?   

**A:**  They hold many meetings concerning taxes such as recruiting soldiers, or transporting grain from Lhoka to Lhasa. We had a small branch shiga which was obliged to transport the grain. And also sending Simchung [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང] soldiers for the Mönlam Festival. There were many issues like this. Then the gembo tells the shidü all about the issues they discussed at the dzong.   

**Q:**  Usually, the gembo do not work on the fields, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tell me something about the magang?   

**A:**  We had 2 magang and each had 100 khe of land. These people had to send soldiers to either Trapchi or Gusung or Simjung. We weren't involved in that and we can't make them work for us. They had to send I think sometimes 1 soldier to Trapchi and 2 soldiers to Gusung, but we weren't involved.   

**Q:**  From where does the soldiers come? Did they send them from among the shiga miser?   

**A:**  The magang household itself would send the soldier. However, in Spring and Fall, they have to send 5-6 people to work for the shiga as the duwa namtong. Otherwise they don't do ulag.   

**Q:**  Where does the manure for the fields come from?   

**A:**  We accumulate it in the shiga. Mostly, it is sheep droppings and the manure from cesspools [Tib. རྫབ་དོང].   

**Q:**  Do you send ula to collect cow dung?   

**A:**  Yes, we do. The ula also go to cut incense just before the incense leaves are dropped. We collect about 3-4000 round bunches of incense on the roof of the shiga house and at the time of Mönlam we take it to Lhasa to sell them. As for the money we got from this, was used for buying grease [on the tea] at the Mönlam from the monks and this grease was used by the miser to put on their black tea when they work. We send ula to the mountain to collect cow dung.   

