# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0006.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Rinchen Könchog [Tib. rin chen dkon cog]  


**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, China (Tibet Autonomous Region)  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Könchog [Tib. rin chen dkon cog]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
---  
## Abstract  

Rinchen Könchog was a Dobdo monk in Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview, he discusses his time as the gengo (head of a Dobdo club)and how he trained people for the jump competitions. He also talks about the beginning and the disbanding of the tobtsang (dobdo's club). He also describes what happened once the revolt began and the Chinese came to Deyang, including how they kept the monks inside the monastery and had them go to struggle and study sessions. He then discusses how he left the monastery, only to return a few years later, and the various work he did after his return, like breaking rocks. Finally, he talks about the fighting and beatings that occurred at the monastery. 
  
---
### Tape 4  
**Q:**  When Deyang started a new tobtsang, you were the head, gengo [Tib. rgan 'go]. What work did you have to do and were you alone?   

**A:**  I was the only gengo. My main job was teaching the new dobdo the games and showing them what the rules are etc. They couldn't just do whatever they wanted. For example the dobdo in the tobtsang couldn't drink chang or smoke cigarettes. And we try to make them go to tsog and chöra. And I tell them to be decent and humble [Tib. snom chung thsul ldan]. Otherewise, if the lamas and the monastic officials, lene [Tib. las sne] knew that the dobdo did something wrong, they would say that they will eliminate the tobtsang. If the dobdo in the tobtsang usually behave humble, even if the lene knew that they did something wrong, they would pretend as if they didn't know that.   

**Q:**  When you were the gengo, did you have to work everyday?   

**A:**  There is no work for the Gengo all the time. When the dobdo go for practice, then I have to go and when they practice the 12 events, I would tell them what they are doing wrong and how to correct it.   

**Q:**  Did you keep the money box?   

**A:**  Yes, I did, but there wasn't that much money at first. We had to go to find patrons and after this, the tobtsang would become okay. When we disolved the tobtsang, I gave each monk the alms of 2 sang. I also left 80 dotse as a salary endowment [Tib. phogs thebs] so that each year each monk would get salary of 5 sho. Every year, on the day we left the money endowment, this salary would be paid to the monks by using the interest of the endowment. I did very well.   

**Q:**  You also have to give the tratsang all the things of the tobtsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And I gave 4 brand new copper pots [Tib. zangs bug] called sangbu with the lid to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  They were the big ones used for water container, right?   

**A:**  Yes. One was very big for holding water and gave it to the Deyang Jog [Tib. lcogs] located upstairs of Deyang [where the protective deities were kept], but I didn't see it at all, I don't know what happened. The other three were for cooking and I saw they were in Loseling when the revolution arose. We had hired a copper smith who live in Muru [Tib. rme ru] to make this for us, it wasn't brought from India. We also gave all the other equipments we had like ladles, pic axes, shovels etc to the tratsang. The tratsang would not give us any rewards for the accomplishment When we gave alms I had to go around the tsog holding an incense, pökor [Tib. spos skor]. The Abbot was very happy because we dissolved the tobtsang, so on that day he himself put a khata on me. Normally he doesn't do this. The Khembo had said in the tsog that the tobtsang should be eliminated. Actually, we accepted what the abbot said because we challeneged Sera Ngagpa and they said we can't do the competition where the main event was jump, chogyag [Tib. phyogs rgyag]. This coincidented with our abbot's statement. So the abbot was very happy and gave the khata to me to imply that we accepted his statement.   

**Q:**  How many people were in the tobtsang at this time?   

**A:**  Sixteen.   

**Q:**  Did you challenge the Sera Ngagpa?   

**A:**  Yes. In the beginning, they implied that they were going to do the jump competition, but later they said they can't do it when we insisted that we want to do the jump competition. The gengo of the Sera Ngagpa had already died.   

**Q:**  So you had the jump competition called Lhagyal Chogyag [Tib. lha rgyal phyogs rgyag] because they refused the jump competition, right?   

**A:**  Yes and we yelled "may the god be victorious" [Tib. lha rgyal 'then].   

**Q:**  After that, did you start the tobtsang again?   

**A:**  We did not start it again. Then the revoltution started.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the higher ups told you not to start it or you didn't have the time to start it?   

**A:**  We couldn't start it because the revolution started.   

**Q:**  How long did you serve as gengo?   

**A:**  About 3-4 years.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for their refusal? Did they receive the order to stop the tobtsang or they didn't have enough players?   

**A:**  They thought that since I was the gengo, I carefully trained the dobdo and then challenged them, so they couldn't match us, therefore they refused. We thought we would win and we had the confidence, so we challeneged them. If we had challenged and the Ngagba won, they would have boasted that they had revenged the earlier defeat.   

**Q:**  Actually they should have challeneged you, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They should have but they couldn't because they were afraid. They might have thought that person [me] is so great in the game, so it would be better to yield down [Tib. ku rum zhus]. And they came to my shag and said we can't do the jump competition.   

**Q:**  Did their gengo come to you?   

**A:**  The two gengo of the Ngagpa came; one was the late nicknamed "assembly bowl" tsogphor [Tib. tshogs phor] and one nicknamed "round ear, "Amril" [Tib. am ril].   

**Q:**  When they came wouldn't they put a khata on you?   

**A:**  No, they wouldn't do that. They stayed overnight in my shag and we served them food. I said, "okay, we will do the Lhagyal Chogyag by yelling , "may the god be victorious". Living above me at the time was an ex-shengo and I asked him to go to the chabu and tell him we were dissolving the tobtsang and will give alms and leave the endowment etc. So the chabu told the abbot and that's why the abbot was so pleased.   

**Q:**  When did the abbot say that you should dismantle the tobtsang?   

**A:**  It was just before this. It had passed little more than a year.   

**Q :**  Would the abbot or the gegö say that on the tsog that you should dissove the toptsang?   

**A:**  Yes, the abbot would say that. The gegö wouldn't meddle into this except overseeing the tsog and chöra.   

**Q:**  What did you do between the time when you stopped the jump competition at the age 27 and became the shidü when you were 35 years old?   

**A:**  I did the gengo for 3-4 years and then I stayed without work.   

**Q:**  When you were the gengo, did they pay you some wages?   

**A:**  No. In the beginning, when they requested me to be the gengo, they would give me a leg [Tib. rkang gdung] of meat and they would insist me to be the gengo no matter I refused. In the park called Jarag [Tib. sbyar rag], the tobtsang had a deity who comes into trance with the oracle and they would ask the deity for the approval and I was approved.   

**Q:**  What was the deity's name?   

**A:**  Tsengö Yumar Gyalchen [Tib. btsan rgod g.yu dmar rgyal chen]   

**Q:**  Would they ask the deity for the prophecy or would they do the senriy?   

**A:**  The tobtsang members asked the deity for the prophecy by writing 3-4 names of monks in the tobtsang as to who would be better to be the gengo of the new tobtsang and the deity approved me.   

**Q:**  After you became the gengo, there weren't any other leaders among the 16 tobtsang members, rioght?   

**A:**  Yes. Then under me, there were 4 dobdo called nyobcha dagyag [Tib. nyo cha brda rgyag] who buy things and deliver the messages. These 4 couldn't beat other dobdo , but did have some power to ask the members why they did this or that.   

**Q:**  When you do the jump competition and when you picked up the chief called magen [Tib. ma rgan] and the vise chief, mawog [Tib. ma 'og] and the one who jump first, ngöngyugpa [Tib. sngon rgyug pa], would you ask the deity for the prophecy, or you just appoint them?   

**A:**  We ask the deity for the prophecy. I was the ngöngyuba. The margenba was Phüntse la [Tib. phun tshe lags] who is in India and served the Dalai Lama till 1986 and then he retired and now he is 70 years old. The mawog was Tengye [Tib. bstan rgyas] who plays the Gyaling [Tib. rgya gling] instrument. At first my old tobtsang had 29 members, then it dropped to 21 and then from these the best 9 were chosen to compete in the jump jump competition.   

**Q:**  If the Ngagba had fielded 13 jumpers, would you have 4 more people?   

**A:**  They couldnt have fielded that many as they were short from the start, but if there was a difference and one party was short of a few members, then they could do the one called, madrigyug [Tib. ma sgril rgyugs ?] which meant that one person would compete with two people from the other side. When we discussed about this, the Sera monks said that they will not do the madrigyug. When they do the madrigyug, the margenba and the ngöngyuba wouln't do it. But any of the other members under them would do that to make up the difference of the number of players.   

**Q:**  Why didn't the margenba and the ngöngyuba do the madrigyug?   

**A:**  It was because these two were top two great ones and if they did the madrigyug, they [the other side] will suffer the loss. So there was no custom of doing that.   

**Q:**  What did you do before became the gengo?   

**A:**  Nothing. I just stayed around. No work.   

**Q:**  Then how did you subsist?   

**A:**  No matter, it is in the old society or in the new society, if there are no masses, people couldn't subsist. My home was on the other side of the Trisam [Tib. khri zam] Bridge and my mother was alive then, so they provided my fuel and tsamba. And if I got a good alms or salary I would buy some things from Lhasa and send to them.   

**Q:**  Would you do other works like tailoring out of getting the alms and salary in the monastery?   

**A:**  I wouldn't do that at all. I would go home for harvesting to help my mother and my mother would bring me food. Some monks go to do fieldwork for villagers and when they returned, the villagers would mill barley and wheat into tsamba and flour and bring it to the monastery. In short, they were exploiting them.   

**Q:**  When you did the jump jump competition, did Gomang and Sera Mey do their jump jump competition?   

**A:**  Gomang and Sera Mey's jump competition was done some years before ours [which was in 1945].   

**Q:**  How many years gap was there in between the two jump competitions?   

**A:**  Probably, there were ten some years. After Gomang and Sera Mey did the jump competition in the place called Lemthang [Tib. ?] then Loseling and Sera Je had their jump competition in Bontö [Tib. 'brom stod] and there were 5-6 years in between this.   

**Q:**  Loseling and Sera je had their jump competition in Bontö and Sera Je lost and after this you did your jump competition, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we did ours right after them. Then after us, Gomang and Sera Mey did another jump competition near the bridge called Barey Samba [Tib.? zam pa] in Phembo. But before they could actualy start, the laji came there and stopped them from competing and summoned them back to the monastery. They said you aren't allowed to have the jump competition.   

**Q:**  Were there some dobdo still alive who joined this jump competition?   

**A:**  There aren't.   

**Q:**  Were you in the monastery when the revolt took place?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tell me about what happened to you in Drepung at this time in detail since the revolt took place.   

**A:**  When I was in Deyang at the tshog having thukba, we were told to finish the tsog and come to the stone floor to bring the weapons. When we went there, we were shut in Deyang right away and kept there for about 5 nights.   

**Q:**  Did the soldiers come on the next day after the revolt started?   

**A:**  Yes. They were very suspicious of the monks and the soldiers came in and shut in the monks and they didn't let is go to our shag.   

**Q:**  Did they call you to the tsogchen stone floor?   

**A:**  They called all the monks to the Drepung stone floor and told us to bring all the weapons including the cleavers and I didn't have any weapons and took my cleaver and handed it in. I swear by the Buddha statue in the Jokhang [Tib. jo bo rin po] and we had a very hard time not having cleaver to cut meat.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese come to Drepung on the day the revolt took place?   

**A:**  Probably not. They came on the next day or on the third day. Then I was kept in Deyang for 5 days with all the Deyang monks. I had a young gidru and later they also took the key of the shag. Before they took the key, I gave the key to my gidru and told him to bring me thukpa and my bedding. The older monks were almost getting killed if they go out, but the young monks were allowed to go back and forth from shag.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were shut in Deyang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We were not allowed to go out except going to urinate and we had to sleep in the assembly hall, dukhang [Tib. 'du khang].   

**Q:**  For how many days did they shut you in the dukhang?   

**A:**  For 5 days. After 5 days, they let us leave and I went to my shag. While we were in dukhang, the Chinese took the keys to our shag, so when they let me out I didnt have the key. I thought that they must have taken everying from the shag, but when I got there, nothing had been taken. I have been in the monastery from 1959 till today. At this time, they took us for "study session" [Tib. slob sbyong]   

**Q:**  What kind of education did they give you?   

**A:**  There wasn't much study. It was mostly singing songs like "the East is Red" [Ch. dong fang hong] and "Socialism is Good" [Tib. spyi tshogs ring lugs bzang]." I didn't know songs and I also didn't sing. But they didn't bother us much. They took the younger monks some where, but they didn't interrogate us. Then after this, they were talking about the struggle session. At first, the struggle session had no beating, but later they mobilized the monks and they beat them a lot. I have never beaten anybody   

**Q:**  Who suffered the struggle session in the monstery?   

**A:**  The high ranking [Tib. mtho rim] ones.   

**Q:**  Did they hold the struggle session to all the high ranking ones?   

**A:**  Yes. They didn't beat our abbot. They beat the Deyang Chabu a lot. There were very bad people. After 6-7 months, there was an activist [Tib. hur brtson can] monk who came to me and said "Don't stay here, go to the exhibition to give explanations." I said I don't know how to explain, but he insisted and told me to go and I went. Later, I came to know that if I hadn't gone I was almost going to be arrested. He knew they were going to arrest me so that's why he told me to go to the exhibition, although he couldn't say it clearly. This exhibition was held at Tshomönling [Tib. tshe smon gling]. There was a Chinese called Ye Phuwang who knew Tbetan. I told him, "I don't know anything about giving explanation eloquently and I don't know writing. He said "it doesnt matter, just give an short explanation". Later I couldn't give explanations, so they told me to be the cook for them. I was happy there though I was paid only 5 yuan per month for buying soap and towel. The Chinese man was really nice and said "it is not good for the monks to drink and smoke". He asked me if there were among us who drink and smoke and I said no.  Then when this was finished, he said I should go to work in a work unit in Kongpo where there was a timber cutting work unit . He said this would be a good step for my future. He said if I don't want to go to the work unit, I could go home or to the monastery. I said I want to return to the monastery. Now in retrospect I regret greatly that I didnt go to the work unit.   

**Q:**  What would happen if you had gone there? Maybe, you won't be alive at this time.   

**A:**  One can't avoid the death.   

**Q:**  Many died from starvation in Kongpo.   

**A:**  I was very fit at that time. The Chinese said "if you go to the work unit, you will have the future and whatever crimes you had committed earlier, will not be investigated". If I had gone, I probably wouldnt have become trerim. But I returned to the monastery and I was made a trerim ngatsab since I was shidü.   

**Q:**  When did they categorized you as trerim?   

**A:**  It was in winter in 10-11th lunar month. I was categorrized as ngatsab because I went to the shiga.   

**Q:**  Did you get the struggle session?   

**A:**  No. But I was afraid that I would be brought to Sangu [Tib. gsang phu] for struggle session. The Chinese at the exhibition asked me to tell him honestly everything I did. Don't have to be afraid. So I told him about managing the shiga and beating the miser. Then later probably the people came from Sangu Deyang shiga to call me for the struggle session. But the Chineese official said "no, he has already confessed everything honestly, so we don't have to do the struggle session. At that time, I thought I don't care whether they come to call me for the struggle session because I would say yes if they say something that I did and say no when they say somethinmg that I didn't. They were taking about people 100-200 monks to every where for the struggle session to all kinds of countrysides.   

**Q:**  Who they were holding the struggle session against?   

**A:**  The chabu of Loseling called Phuja la [Tib. phu phyag lags] was taken to a Loseling shiga. An old woman said to Phucha, "your food was born from your assembly bowl and we have been feeding you." [Tib. khyod rang gi lto tsogs phor nang nas skyes pa red/ nga tshos khyod tsho gsos yod]. At that time, the monks were uneducated and bad, so when they go out in the villagers fields, they trample their crops and made it flat. But they [villagers] couldn't do anything. The cadres were anxious and told the monks not to go into the fields and don't be so malicious, but the monks said "we have our food grown from our assembly bowls. So we don't need this crop" We went down to the villages and returned individually, but when we arrive there, we had to go in line and adhere to the discipline in the place where the struggle session was held.   

**Q:**  Was there tsog in the monastery? What work did you do then?   

**A:**  No there was no tsog.   

**Q:**  How did you subsist then?   

**A:**  I lived by selling the things in my shag little by little. At that time, there were lay people in the monastery like Khampas who fix the sole of the boots who were living in the stable. So I made connections with them and send the things to be sold through them. Nobody told them anything because they were the masses.   

**Q:**  Later, when did they start the tsog?   

**A:**  They started the tsog long after the Cultural Revolution was over.   

**Q:**  I heard that just before the Panchen Lama came they held the Mönlam twice.   

**A:**  I think that there were 3 Mönlam in the years 1962-63-64 before the Cultural Revolution. At that time, I was among the Tibetan opera performers in Drepung.   

**Q:**  I heard that after they set up the cooperatative, nyamle [Tib. mnyam las] they set up the rock-breaking group and planting apple etc at Drepung. Where did you work?   

**A:**  At this time, I was in the rock-breaking group at Drepung where I made the chisels [Tib. gzong] for the rock breakers.   

**Q:**  At that time, how did you get the grain quota?   

**A:**  We had our residence permit, [Tib. them tho] the grain we got when breaking rocks was 45 gyama 45 per month [this was the highest ration as this was the hardest work]. But this was hardly enough because we were breaking stones.   

**Q:**  How much were you paid then?   

**A:**  At this time, we get 5 fen for one work point.   

**Q:**  How many work points would you get?   

**A:**  I was getting 10 work points a day [the highest] which is 5 maoste. Now we came to know that on the work points the monastery had tricked us. The others were getting 6-7 maotse per work point. [Note: not in the tape. The work unit sold the rocks for 12 yuan for a cubic meter and paid regular workers 6 maotse per work point or 10 work points per day (cubic meter) so 6 yuan, so 100% profit. The monks were paid only 5 maotse per day so it is a big loss]. At this time there was a Tibetan soldier called Thöndrup [Tib. don grub] who reduced the work points for the trerim and made us to work without pay and we, the trerim were made to built the house down there. Later, the late zhuren of Drepung was a very nice person called Gyurmey Rinzing, [Tib. 'gyur med rig 'dzin]. Later the cadres came to investigate who made the rule that monk trerim got less work points and reduced the wages. And then the zhuren went to the Religious Association [Tib. chos tshogs] and told the Tibetan soldier called Thöndrub" "weren't you the one who reduced the work points. I have made all the list of days when you reduced the work points". Later, they gave us back all the lost work points. This zhuren would say on the meetings, "you people are talking about the trerim, but I found that there are some people worse than the trerim. You people should behave yourself. They are trerim but not feudal lords and they had been working for the monk's taxes in the monastery" I heard that this zhuren didn't have any bad viewpoints towards the trerim and was saying that they are also citizens. I swear by the Buddha statue in the Jokhang [Tib. jo sku shes] that he had never scolded the trerim. He would tell us, "you should work hard, study and think about the policy well. The whole country has been flooded, so it is useless to behave show offish. As long as you don't pratcice the reactionary religion, you can read your pecha the whole night. You can tell them I told you to do this. I will give the answer" He was okay because this is the thing [reading pecha] where the monks rest their minds.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in the rock breaking group making chisels?   

**A:**  I stayed at least 15-16 years. The revolt took place when I was 40 years old. I joined the nyamle when I was 41-42 years old in the years 1960 or 61 and from then till the year 1980 when I was 64 old years I had been making the chisels. .   

**Q:**  When did the first tsog start after the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  The first tsog started after the Cultural Revolution in Pompora [Tib. spom po ra] Khamtsen. I don't think there were 100 monks at this time. Then they had some tsog in the tsogchen on the holy days [Tib. tshes bzang dus bzang] [8th, 10th, 15th, 25th , 30th days of the month]. I did the cook for the carpenters and painters for 4 years.   

**Q:**  This was after the policy became better, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When I reached age 64, I asked to stop working and joined the Nursing Home, Gensokhang [Tib. rgas gso khang] [this was 1982].   

**Q:**  In Drepung is there a separate house called Nursing Home?   

**A:**  Yes, there is the Nursing Home in Drepung and we would go to get the tea from there. I make my own tea and get the boiled water, tea leaves and salt from the Nursing Home and we get 1 tea brick, bagchung [Tib. sbag chung] per month.   

**Q:**  Could you display statues during the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  No way. At that time, all the statues were thrown. I had three statues of Tsongkhapa and his two disciples [Tib. rje yab sras gsum] and I threw them away along the dresses. At the place where they throw the statues, there was an old monk made to work there. He told me "keep the statue's dresses, this will be useful for you" but I told him "what shall I do with the dresses without the statues? And I threw them although the dresses were made from very good quality brocades. Now I feel that I was little bit foolish then.   

**Q:**  At that time, if we could hide them, it would have been benficial, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Some could hide the statues, but I wasn't able to hide them because they searched my shag. They might have been thinking that I had some weapons.   

**Q:**  Who searched your shag? Did the Democratic Management Committee [Tib. dmangs gtso bdag gnyer u yon lhan khang] serch the shag?   

**A:**  Yes. The committee send the activists and searched very thorougly. They didn't find anything bad in my shag. So they didn't take me around the street. If they did find something bad, they woud take you to Lhasa around the the street.   

**Q:**  Did they take some people to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, they took monks to Lhasa around the Barkor Street.   

**Q:**  If you were a poor monk, it would be better, right? Like the monk called Khedrub Gyatso [Tib. mkhas grub rgya mtsho] had hidden quite alot of statues.   

**A:**  Yes, he hid a lot. These people were not that good, they have been always been talkative [Tib. kha kho rang bshad] [not much working]. But among the poor monks, there were some very good ones who didn't even criticize the trerim a single word. But they [Chinese] couldn't do anything to them. Some were taken around the street because of the keeping old things saying that they had the thought the revival [of the old society]. When they searched my shag, they asked me whether I had another shag? I said "no, these are all the things I have." Then they asked me whether I had some things used by the geyog. I said, "it has been about 6 years since I didn't do the geyog and before that I sold the things and gave alms and the money replacement for thukpa, thugthö [Tib. thug dod] to the tratsang" I told one of monks who came to search,"you know about me, right?" Thyey told me, "if you have any you should take it out". [Note; not in the tape. In front, one person play the cymbals and one person beat a drum at behind and take the person around the Barkor. If they found any old clothes in the search they would say you are like zombie coming back. Some Drepung monks were taken around the Lhasa City. One oracle was taken around wearing his oracles dress. If they found a pecha or statue in the house, you had to walk around the street holding the pecha and the statue in your hands].   

**Q:**  Was there pushing etc when they serve the rice gruel thukpa in the tsogchen like they do in Gomang?   

**A:**  Yes. The thukpa servers of the 4 tratsang are there and there is pushing etc.   

**Q:**  Have you ever been there to do this?   

**A:**  Yes. When there is thukpa in the tshogchen, the 2 smaller tratsang were obliged to send 10 thukpa servers each and the two bigger tratsang were obliged to send 40 monks thukpa servers.   

**Q:**  This was for the rice gruel thukpa, [Tib. thug pa dam bca'] right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Who gave the thukba in the tshogchen?   

**A:**  One year there was an additional [Tib. 'phar ma] Mönlam and then the tsogchen umdze chemmo also gave a thukpa. At the time of Dalai Lama's geshe exam there was a thukpa. There were lot of pushing because there were monks from 4 tratsang.   

**Q:**  Did they do the pushing between Amdo and böba or between the tratsang?   

**A:**  The pushing wasn't specially between Amdo and böba or between the tratsang, there were Amdo, Khampas, böba and Hor. All were pushing eachother indiscriminately [Tib. chag rdung nyag rdung]. We had to bring our own thukpa container, sola [Tib. zo lag] from our tratsang and the tratsang would give us ladles. After the second tea there was like disturbance and pushing etc.   

**Q:**  Did they compete for the first and second places?   

**A:**  Yes. I got the first place once in the tsogchen. After the first tea, we would steal the thukpa from the cauldron.   

**Q:**  Would they let you in?   

**A:**  Yes, we would be in cahoot with the thabyog and I hid in the stove because there was not much fire in it. We would even hate very much [Tib. zhe sdang] each other in the jump competition.   

**Q:**  Normally, when the 2nd tea was served the rest of the thukpa servers would come towards the rungkhang toget the thukpa, but you people went to the rungkhang before that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we steal the thukpa before that and come out when the other servers were coming in the rungkhang and they would hit us with the stick repeatedly but we don't care. There was a saying, "the monks get their food from under the stick" [Tib. grwa pa'i lto rgyug pa 'og nas zas]  One day when I was rushing in front of the stove to scoop out the first thukpa the jama hit me on my head and knocked me right down there. I was so anxious and aggrressive [Tib. nga rgyal] that I didn't even feel the pain and got right up again and continued to get the thukpa and I got the second place.   

**Q:**  You did this in the tsogchen, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. In Deyang we didn't do this because the tratsang is small, but the two big tratsang did it.   

**Q:**  I heard that Gomang was worse doing this between Amdo and böba.   

**A:**  Yes and they would fight alot.   

**Q:**  Now, do you go to recieve the dharma teaching everyday?   

**A:**  Yes I do.   

**Q:**  From which grade do you become lagyüba?   

**A:**  In Deyang, since you paid the thugthö, then you become lagyüba.   

**Q:**  This means when you give the tonggo of derampa [Tib. 'bras rams pa], right?   

**A:**  Yes. Until you gave that tonggo, you were called shöndera [Tib. gzhong khral ba] for doing the shöndre.   

**Q:**  In general, for the monks, which livelihood is better comparing the old society with now?   

**A:**  It was better for the monks in the old society. In general, the livelihood of the most people in Tibet might have become better.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, do the gidru have to find a pechai gegen?   

**A:**  Yes. Now in Drepung they have instituted a school. I don't know whether it was instituted by the government or the monastery.   

**Q:**  In this school, would they teach hand writing or prayers?   

**A:**  In this school, first they teach prayers. Now they are building a class rooom for this. When this is finished all the gidru who don't know hand writing will be taught hand writing.   

**Q:**  Do they teach hand writing now?   

**A:**  I heard they teach some of the monks. My younger guidru knows the printing script ujen [Tib. dbu can] but not the hand writing form, umey [Tib. dbu med]. I told him to learn the hand writing.   

**Q:**  Were the teachers the monks of the monastery ?   

**A:**  Yes. There are two teachers in this school now. Both are young and knowledgeable. One teacher from Lhoka knows poems and the grammar.   

**Q:**  Do your gidru have to pay money to pechai gegen?   

**A:**  No, because nowadays the Culture [Department] [Tib. rig gzhung] pays them the work points and the people have paid the money to the Cultural Department.   

**Q:**  How many pechai gegen were there in Drepung?   

**A:**  There are about 11 or 12 gegen.   

**Q:**  How many students are there with the pechai gegen where your gidru is studying   

**A:**  Probably, there are more than 15-20.   

**Q:**  They have classes, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we find our teacher by ourselves through friendly relations [Tib. mthun sbyor] and we don't need to pay them, but we can give him some potatoes and radish and it is okay if we do not give anything.   

**A:**  My gidru's pechai gegen have not yet joined the monastery organization.   

**Q:**  Who is he?   

**A:**  He is called Tendzin la [Tib. bstan 'dzin lags].   

**Q:**  Oh I see! He is Mongolian, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He is very good in pecha.   

**Q:**  All of your three gidru were not admitted in the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How do your three gidru make their living?   

**A:**  Like in the old society. They sent tsamba from their homes and usually I spend my gye and phog for their daily necesseties [Tib. lag sne]. The oldest gidru works on the construction in the monastery and he gets the work points. They are not doing fair on paying the work points. My gidru gets only 3 yuan and the 5 maotse because he is not admitted in the monastery. Normally, the monks who are admitted in the monastery get slightly higher wages and they get as lowest wage 5 maotse per work points. So 10 work points is 5 yuan. I am not sure whether this is according to the party's policy. I feel like telling my opinion because they were saying that the policy is fair. So they should pay the wages fairly because they work hard in the same way.   

**Q:**  Do you have hope of getting him admitted?   

**A:**  Now I have found a back door relation down there.   

**Q:**  This was the decided by the Democratic Management Committee, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But mainly it is decided in Lhasa. I told the zhuren about this and he went through the motions of saying that he will get admitted later on. After the revolution, I had two gidru while I went to India one became spoiled and he wanted to stay separate and I let him stay separate. He later stole a silver butter lamp cup from Tsha [Tib. tsha ba] Khamtsen which was exploded and he was expelled. He should be expelled because he violated the four root vows [Tib. rtsa ba bzhi] of a monk. One gidru didn't get along with the zhuren and always fought with him and we even had to appeal the Religious Department [Tib. chos don]. Later, in a desparate situation he ran away to India in 1985 when the Dalai Lama gave the former Kala Chakra Initiation [Tib. dus 'khor dbang chen]. I met him when I went to India in 1987 and gave him some money and told him to study pecha well.   

**Q:**  Among the three gidru, do you have relatives?   

**A:**  Of the three gidru, the eldest is my relative. The youngest is good at pecha but he also makes me get angry a little bit. Once when I went to Ganden for pilgrimage, I met the young gidru's father. Though I didn't know him, he insisted me to take his son as my gidru, but I didnt agree. The next day when we returned, we were in the same car, so he asked me again to take his son. So then I agreed. I found a back door relation for both of my gidru [to get admitted]. The youngest one was the son of the woman there inside my shag.   

**Q:**  When you were young, you were a famous dobdo. Did you ever fight?   

**A:**  I fought a little bit.   

**Q:**  How many times did you fight?   

**A:**  Maybe 10 some times.   

**Q:**  Did you fight with knife or key?   

**A:**  In most of the fights, I use key except once I used my sword.   

**Q:**  When you fought with sword, what was the reason or cause of it?   

**A:**  At Mönlam, I stayed in a lodging inn. That mother had only one son who was a Loseling monk in the beginning. That kid and another monk went to Tölung to fool around. The mother was crying because her only son lost his celibacy. Therefore, I was agitated.   

**Q:**  Who did you fight with?   

**Q:**  I used my sword and fought in Lhasa at Mönlam with the monk who spoiled the young monk. Later, the young monk was shot dead by a gusung soldier near the bridge in the sandy area before the revolt when he went to get some earth for making stove.   

**Q:**  The gusung soldier shot him from the orchard when they fought on grabbing a woman. The soldier ran away.   

**Q:**  In general, how many fightings would take place in the monastery?   

**A:**  Oh yes, there was a little bit fighting.   

**Q:**  Did the böba fought internally or was it between the Amdo and böba?   

**A:**  Mainly, Amdo and böba fought and the Amdo also fought internally. Once I saw a fight between an Amdo in Lumbum [Tib. klu 'bum] Khamtsen and Amdo Tsütrim [Tib. tshul khrims]. I heard that the Amdo in Lumbum was famous in Amdo for fighting ans when he was boasting, Tsütrim stabbed him and killed him at once. Tsütrim's sponsor was the oracle Tenmai Simkhang [Tib. bstan ma'i gzim khang] who did the good office to the shengo. So He was expelled from the monastery but was not punished.   

**Q:**  He was not beaten with switches, right?   

**A:**  Yes, though he killed a monk.   

**Q:**  I heard that Gomang dobdo and Amdo dobdo planned to fight a lot some where outside ?   

**A:**  Yes. They did it over the pushing when serving thukpa.   

**Q:**  How many times did they fight?   

**A:**  They fought many times. The chief, magen [Tib. ma rgan] of the Gomang Jump Competiton in Lemthang was Thusö [Tib. thub bzod] and the Amdo fought with a long sword with the Amdo over the thukpa. And they weren't able to handle Thusö, but they beat Demchog [Tib. bde mchog] and those in the shag.   

**Q:**  I heard Thusö fled to Phembo?   

**A:**  No he was there. But the Amdo beat him up the one called Demchog [Tib. bde mchog] badly in his shag.   

**A:**  Did Thusö flee?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Is Thusö still alive?   

**A:**  Now he is dead.   

**Q:**  Demchog was a khamba but was standing on the böba side, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Demchog and Tashi Sonam [Tib. bkra shis bsod nams] were from same place in Kham.   

**Q:**  How old were you when they beat Demchog?   

**A:**  I don't remember.   

**Q:**  In Gomang, who were famous ones in the Lemthang Tobtsang?   

**A:**  Thusö was one and there were many of them. I don't remember.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there one nicknamed "yak calf" Yagtrug [Tib. g.yag phrug]?   

**A:**  He was not in that Tobtsang. He was in the Genpa Tobtsang. Gomang had many dobdo.   

**Q:**  I heard that when you were the shidü, they did the accounting and you handed over the shiga in three years though the term was 6 years, right?   

**A:**  This was because we didn't get along well on sending tsampa and the cow dung etc from the shiga.   

**Q:**  Did you have quarrel with the nyertsang?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was your partner's name?   

**A:**  He is called Samten [Tib. bsam gtan].   

**Q:**  I thought because Samten lost his celebacy, you handed over the shiga.   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Would he be allowed to be the shidü after losing his celibacy?   

**A:**  Not allowed to. And they would send a new shidü.   

**A:**  Then two of you said that you are not going to be the shidü, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't the monastery say something if you say that you are not going to be the shidü?   

**A:**  Then the revolt took place. When two of us were shidü, we did very well and we even wove 5 pairs and one single rug for shiga, so we don't need to bring the rugs from the tratsang on the festivals. All of these were taken away in the reforms.   

