# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0006.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:**   
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Rinchen Könchog was a Dobdo monk in Drepung's Deyang College. In this interview he talks about how he became a monk and later became a geyog. He describes the Dobdo's jumping competitions that he participated in, including the training they did, the various events and also what would happen if they won. He then discusses fighting and the beating of monks. Finally, he talks about his work as a estate manager (shidü) for three years before the Chinese came.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0006_01/M_0006_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How old were you when you first became a monk?   

**A:**  I was 6.   

**Q:**  Where is your homeland?   

**A:**  I am from Gang Deleg [Tib. སྒང་བདེ་ལེགས] located on the other side of the bridge Trisam Phari [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟམ་ཕ་རི].   

**Q:**  This was located near the moutain range just before we reach Nyethang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was your gegen?   

**A:**  My gegen was Rinchen Kündröl [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་ཀུན་གྲོལ] who was my relative from the same family.`   

**Q:**  What did you do from age 6 until you joined the dobdo's eating commune, tobtsang [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང]?   

**A:**  I did tratsang shöndre after I was 16, from age 16 to little over 30. Before that, I didn't do anything.   

**Q:**  What kind of shöndre did you have to work?   

**A:**  If you are a pechawa you don't have to do shöndre. Most of shöndre was carrying skin bag/loads of butter [Tib. མར་ལྟང] and skin bag/loads of rice [Tib. འབྲས་ལྟང] for the tratsang to be used for the tonggo. If you are not pechawa, you have to do some kind of work. This was the system in the old society. There was no kind if wages but they give us daily food and salary [Tib. ལྟོ་ཕོགས] like tsampa.   

**Q:**  What was your khamtsen in Deyang Tratsang?   

**A:**  It was Hamdong. The two small tratsang didn't have khamtsen, so we have to pick our own khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Were you in the Deyang or Gomang tobtsang?   

**A:**  In Deyang tobtsang.   

**Q:**  Did you memorize pecha when you were small?   

**A:**  I memorize pecha a little bit. Then I became spoiled [Tib. ཧྲང་ཏོ].   

**Q:**  Did you get separated from your gegen?   

**A:**  I got separated and worked for the shöndre till the age 30.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you got separated?   

**A:**  I left my gegen at age 16.   

**Q:**  When you were separate, how did you earn your living?   

**A:**  My family send me food.   

**Q:**  Was your family a farmer?   

**A:**  Yes. And on top of that there was alms and salary. I stayed like that till age 30. I voluntarily joined the tobtsang at the age 16. Nobody was imposing tax on doing that. We were the opponent [Tib. ཁ་གཏད] of Sera Ngagba [Tib. སྔགས་པ].   

**Q:**  How many tobtsang were there in Deyang?   

**A:**  There was only one tobtsang in Deyang.   

**Q:**  What did you have to do mainly in the tobtsang?   

**A:**  Our main work in the tobtsang was to practice games [Tib. རྩེད་མོ] in the gorge [Tib. གྲོག་ཁུལ] located in the east of Drepung. Nowadays they call it excercise [Tib. ལུས་རྩལ], right?. In the early morning at dawn we take a cold bath during the coldest period of winter.   

**Q:**  How did you take bath?   

**A:**  We take bath under the water flowing through the drain in the gorge when the "big dawn star" [Tib. ཐོ་རངས་སྐར་ཆེན] shows up. Then we practice running in the sand.   

**Q:**  Is the sand still there now?   

**A:**  Yes. When our bodies get warmed up we get dressed and return to our shag.   

**Q:**  How did you join the tobtsang?   

**A:**  We would put our names there.   

**Q:**  To whom did you have to report?   

**A:**  We don't need to report. At first, there were only 5 of us. We talked and said "let's set up a tobtsang". And then we just write our names and do not need to pay any money. Then we looked for one's sponsors. They would support the livelihood of the tobtsang. Otherwise, we didn't have any source of income. The competition where the main item is jump, chogyyag [Tib. ཕྱོགས་རྒྱག] was done when I was 27 years old.   

**Q:**  Was it before the Chinese arrival or after that?   

**A:**  No it was before that.   

**Q:**  Was it before the Sera War?   

**A:**  It was before the Sera War. Our competition was done in the place where there is a narrow passage along the river called Digthang Phang [Tib. སྡིག་ཐང་འཕྲང] located at the lower part of Bongtö [Tib. འབྲོམ་སྟོད].   

**Q:**  Was this the place where Sera Je and Loseling did the jump competition?   

**A:**  It was above that place which is opposite to the place called Gyasakhang [Tib. རྒྱ་བཟའ་སྒང] [the road towards Ganden] on the other side of the river.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the competition?   

**A:**  There were 9 from on each side who got naked. There were 18 altogether. We were carefree and happy at this time. Nobody was saying anything to us. After the jump competition, when we returned to the monastery the lama and the monastic officials, lene [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] would corner [Tib. བཀར] us a lillle bit saying "you guys did something that is not allowed". They would just go through the motions of saying "dobdo's activities are not allowed". But later they wouldn't bother us [Tib. ཡ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མ་རེད]. I didn't do any other works in the tratsang. From age 18, I became geyog.   

**Q:**  When you became the geyog, you were in the tobtsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I did this for 8 years. There is some income [Tib. ཟ་སྒོ] and the work was also hard. At this time, we got 14 alms shares in Mönlam and Tshongjö Prayer Festivals. But the shengo had to give a donggo to the monks and the shengo would tell us to give him alot of donations for the donggo". The shengo also didn't have any choice but to collect donations because they had to do like the saying "collect the income and give the donggo" [Tib. ཡོང་སྒོ་བླངས་ནས་གཏོང་སྒོ]. There was no exploitation on us and this system was kind of done on one's own wish according to this system. If you want to study pecha, you can do that. If not, you could do whatever work you feel like for making a living or according to your one's your interest [Tib. དབྱིངས] on the work.   

**Q:**  Dobdo system is famous in the forign countries, we don't know in detail but we know some. What were the different events [Tib. སྣ་ཁ] in the competition?   

**A:**  There were 12 events; 4 different jumps; and 8 different types of stone throwing [Tib. རྡོ་སྣ་བརྒྱད]. The stones were thrwon in different ways like this and that and some are thrown upwards.   

**Q:**  How big was the stone? Was it like this size of my Sony tape recorder?   

**A:**  No, it was square with the size of half this tape recorder.   

**A:**  What is the weight of the stone?   

**A:**  Probably, it weighs about 2 gyama.   

**Q:**  What are the names of the ways of throwing the stones?   

**A:**  One pair is called kyangdo [Tib. བརྐྱངས་རྡོ] [the event where they throw the stone by stretching their alms and turning around their head] and one pair is called mendo [Tib. མས་རྡོ] and one was called gyabdo [the event where they throw the stone backwards over their head] [Tib. རྒྱབ་རྡོ] and one is called kubdo [Tib. རྐུབ་རྡོ] [the event where they bend down and throw the stone backwards from in between their legs] .   

**Q:**  What were the names of the different jumps?   

**A:**  There were 4 rounds of jumps called chomkorshi [Tib. མཆོངས་སྐོར་བཞི] which was the same way of jumping.   

**Q:**  Was there a leader in the tobtsang?   

**A:**  Yes. We look for a leader from among the tobtsang dobdo who had experienced the jump competition in the past. He has to know and teach us how to play the 12 different events of games. And has to maintain discipline and tells us how to go to the tshog chöra and he would give the advises saying it is not okay to stay without going to the tsog and chöra. We all obey him.   

**Q:**  What is the name for your leader?   

**A:**  His name is Abtru Genba [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག་རྒན་པ] who was the senior in our tobtsang.   

**Q:**  What is the name of the position?   

**A:**  We just call it senior of the tobtsang, tobtsang gengo [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང་རྒན་འགོ].   

**Q:**  Was there only 1 gengo?   

**A:**  There were two gengo; one was called Shenyen Jigmey [Tib. བཤེས་གཉེན་འཇིགས་མེད] .   

**Q:**  What about other dobdo who look after money etc?   

**A:**  We had 4 appointees; 2 messangers, dagyag [Tib. བརྡ་རྒྱག] and 2 purchasers, nyobcha [Tib. ཉོ་ཆ་བ]. These 2 held the funds. There was a small box in which the money was kept and the key would be taken by one of the nyobcha. And the box was kept in the gengo's shag. When they want to open it to get money, both of the nyobcha go to gengo's shag and take out the money and then lock it and do the shopping. When we go for a picnic, every person has to pool in 10 tranka which is equal to 1 maotse and 5 fen. We saved up this money for many years with the common accumulation fund [Tib. སྤྱི་གསོག་མ་དངུལ]. Normally, the tobtsang would have many sponsors because they liked the dobdo's jump competition. Then after the jump competition was over, the tobtsang would offer all the things we had bought like copper pot, hoes and shovels etc to the tratsang. The money left over would be given alms to the monks.   

**Q:**  How did you practice? You have to practice it for many years, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I stayed in the tobtsang for 6 and half years. During that period, in winter we do a lot of practice. In summer, we don't practice much. In winter, very, very early morning, at dawn during the coldest period of the year, we take bath in the gorge and then we run a little bit in the sand and then returned and stay there in the shag.   

**Q:**  Was there a gegen when you practice in the sand?   

**A:**  The gegen would be there sitting on a big boulder and watch us with a flashlight when we were taking bath. First, the gegen would make us to wash our body in the water, then we do some exercises by stretching our arms [Tib. རྐྱོང་ཤད] and shaking our legs on the boulder. Then we run in the sand. We do this every year during the three coldest period each of nine days [Tib. དགུ་འགྲིམ].   

**Q:**  Where would you take the bath?   

**A:**  It is the place called Tagtsang [Tib. སྟག་ཚང] where we have set up a small drain of sort to draw the water and we would wash under the drain. The reason for the cold water treatment is to cut off the small nerves [Tib. རྩ་ཕྲན] which makes one better in the game. We do it once a day in the morning during 27 days; the three coldest period each of nine days.   

**Q:**  Do you have to practice in the evening?   

**A:**  In the evening we practice running.   

**Q:**  You don't have to take bath in the evening, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You have to practice throwing the stones, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We had to learn all the games. When you first join the tobtsang, you joined it voluntarily. No one forced you to do this.   

**Q:**  What is the discipline like?   

**A:**  Yes. If you didn't go to the tshog and chöra the gengo would scold you. We practice the games as a side activity [Tib. ཞོར] and we adhere to the discipline.   

**Q:**  Later, how many people were there in your tobtsang just before the jump competition?   

**A:**  There were 21 at the time of jump comtetition. At one time there were 29, but some withdrew and some died.   

**Q:**  Can you withdraw?   

**A:**  Yes. It's your own choice.   

**Q:**  How would you discuss to arrange the jump competition?   

**A:**  The discussion to set up our competition would take place at Parikhug [Tib. བྲག་རི་ཁུག].   

**Q:**  Do all of you have to go there?   

**A:**  We don't go to the discussion. The ones chosen to attend the competition would never show their faces since there is a risk the partner might try to do something bad [Tib. ངན་སྤྱོད]. The gengo goes to discuss and the 2 gengo would make the arrangements on the place and the time of the competition.   

**Q:**  Did you challenge [Tib. ཕོད་རྒྱག] them or did they challenge you?   

**A:**  Yes we did. Later, we made the arrangements and the jump competition took place in Digthang Phang. After the jump competition, the money given by the sponsor and the money we have pooled and saved for 6 and half years was given to the monks as alms and gave the things of tobtsang to the tratsang. That's all what the dobdo did. It was done for one's own pleasure, happiness and for being carefree. I became geyog at the age 18 [1936]. I did it for 8 years until I was 26 years old. At age 27, I did the jump competition. In the first year, when I became the geyog, each monk got 100 sang for the alms and we geyog got 14 shares, so I got 1400 sang. But I had to give a lot to the shengo for the donggo donation.   

**Q:**  How much did you have to give the shengo? This was for asking for the position of geyog, right?   

**A:**  This wasn't for getting the post, it was after I became the geyog. The shengo would tell me to bring this amount of donggo donation.   

**Q:**  Did you have to give this yearly?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was it like 10-15 dotse?   

**A:**  It was more than that. At the time of the revolt, I was not geyog. Around the period before the revolt [1958], the geyog had to give about 200 dotse to the shengo and at that time, the prices of the things also went up.   

**Q:**  How much did you pay when you were geyog?   

**A:**  When I was geyog, we have to give 10-12 dotse to the shengo. Later I decided not to do the geyog.   

**Q:**  Did you still become dobdo?   

**A:**  I remained as a dobdo.   

**Q:**  Did you still wear soots [Tib. སྲེ་ནག] on your face, have the dobdo's hair style where strip of hair extending to your cheeks [Tib. རྒྱ] and the red ribbon tied around your arms [Tib. རྩ་སྡེམ]?   

**A:**  Yes, I did all of those things.   

**Q:**  What kind of underpant do you wear when you jump?   

**A:**  It was a good looking cloth knitted in a square design [Tib. པ་ཏྲ].   

**Q:**  What kind of jumping style did you use? Did you have like doing different things while jumping up in the space?   

**A:**  I did the Kangbug, [Tib. rkang sbug ?] doing some thing with legs.   

**Q:**  What else?   

**A:**  There wasn't other different styles.   

**Q:**  I heard that there was called Nyakyor [Tib. ཉྭ་སྐྱོར྄] ?   

**A:**  Do you mean the style where we lift up the calf?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Some would go through the motions of doing this and some would not.   

**Q:**  How would you do the trerug [Tib. ?]?   

**A:**  Trerug means to step your feet hard on the ground with the sound "deg" when jumping.   

**Q:**  Where is Deyang tobtsang's park when you go for the picnic?   

**A:**  The place is called Barsi [Tib. ?], located on the other side of the Trisam [Tib. ཀྲི་ཟམ ] Bridge.   

**Q:**  This was under the Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར] Dzong, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you throw the stone called gyabdo, how do you step your foot on the ground? How do you practice this?   

**A:**  You put your big toes on the edge and then take a breath and hold it and throw the stone and turn our body upside down. Some land on their feet and some fall on landing face down.   

**Q:**  How do you practice this in the beginning?   

**A:**  The jumping place is made higher than the landing zone. They make a landing zone at the lower place and for the starters, soft earth is piled up, so when they land and miss their feet, they won't hurt themselves. The ones who are skilled would land just outside this soft area on the normal ground and they land on their feet and the ones who are not skilled would land on the soft earth face down. If you don't practice well, the gengo would scold you and even beat you up.   

**Q:**  Was there also a practice where you jump in the water?   

**A:**  Yes, we do it in the running water too. If the earth is high enough over the water, then you can practice in this way.   

**Q:**  It was in the early times when Deyang and Ngagpa did the competititon, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:** ' Who won at that time?   

**A:**  We won.   

**Q:**  What did you win then?   

**A:**  There were 12 events where 6 events were belonged to them and the 6 events were belonged to us and we won 10 events and they won only 2 events.   

**Q:**  Do you have names for the winning like some called "putting deer skin on them" shabagyog [Tib. shwa lpags gy.ogs]?   

**A:**  At that time, the way we won was called "putting garment on them" gogtseyog [Ch. gua zi; Tib. gy.ogs].   

**Q:**  What is shabagyog?   

**A:**  Shabagyog means to win all the 12 events. If we won 7 events it is called "made them carry one bundle, dogtre jigkur [Tib. རྡོག་ཁྲེས་གཅིག་བསྐུར]. If we won 8 events, it is called "made them carry two bundles " dogtre nyikur" [Tib. རྡོག་ཁྲེས་གཉིས་བསྐུར]. If we won 9 events, it is called "made them carry three bundles, dogtre sumkur [Tib. རྡོག་ཁྲེས་གསུམ་བསྐུར]. If we won 10 events, it is called gogtseyog. If we 11 won events, it is called "neck rope" kethag [Tib. སྐེ་ཐག].   

**Q:**  After the competition, was there fighting?   

**A:**  There was a little bit fighting, but there was not much hitting each other. We just hit each other with stones a little bit. After the competition, the dobdo's work is finished. And then we didn't need to do anything.   

**Q:**  If someone gets hurt like breaking a leg in the competition, can you send a subsittute?   

**A:**  Yes, you can because there were other jumpers in line for the subsittute. But this didn't happen since they all practice for many years before this.   

**Q:**  Were you among the jumpers?   

**A:**  Yes. In Dharamsala, there was one [tsidrung] called Gedar La, [Tib. དགེ་དར་ལགས] who was also called Phüntse la [Tib. ཕུན་རྩེ་ལགས]. He was one of the attendants to the Dalai Lama. He was the greatest one among us and next to him was me.   

**Q:**  What was that greatest position called?   

**A:**  It is called Margenba [Tib. མ་རྒན་པ] and I was the ngöngyugba [Tib. སྔོན་རྒྱུག་པ] who run at the first.   

**Q:**  The one who was called nöngyugba would have to be very show offish and stylish [Tib. ཀྲོག་ཀྲོག་བྱེད་བཟོ], right?   

**A:**  Yes. The ngöngyuba holds a handful of tsamba in each hand and while throwing the tsampa, he recites a prayer called "sangye tensum [Tib. སངས་རྒྱས་རྟེན་གསུམ]" which is in the pecha of the burning incense. And he would show a very imposing manner. Just after the prayers was finished, he start jumping. Since we had been practicing it for many years, we would not hesitate when jumping.   

**Q:**  Did the monastic officials like the gegö of Deyang say things to you like you must win in the competition?   

**A:**  Some deyang officials were saying that looking at the situation this time, this tobtsang will win in the competition. They were saying that because they could guess. Only our generation could win the competition. Otherwise we have lost all the competitions when we did the competition called thabshor chongya, [Tib. ཐོབ་ཤོར་མཆོང་རྒྱག] where there are the winner and the loser. Some do the competition called Tashi Chogya [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱག] where there is no winner and we just play the games and be freindly and there is no fighting.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there another called Lhagyal Chogya [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱལ་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱག]?   

**A:**  Yes, there is also a kind of event called Lhagyal Chogya. This occurs when for example we challenge Ngagba and they refuse. Then since we have no opponent, we have a party among ourseleves in a park and yell "may the god be victorious" [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱལ་འཐེན] and then disband our tobtsang. Most fights start at the thabshor chogya [Tib. ཐོབ་ཤོར་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱག] where they lose or win. When we won they at once started to throw stones at us.   

**Q:**  What did you do then?   

**A:**  We accept the loss [Tib. ཕམ་ཁྱེར] and returned to Deyang.   

**Q:**  Dobdo like to fight, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Just a few bad ones like to fight, but most don't fight. If they fight, the Deyang officials would fine them and also beat them with switches, so there weren't that many who fight.   

**Q:**  Do you remember the gegö incident in Deyang?   

**A:**  This was after I became a monk. The abbot and the old and new gegö didn't get long well.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  When the abbot told something to the gegö, the new gegö didn't accept that. Then the abbot beat the old and new gegö with switches. We were called there to hold their hands and legs when they beat them and both gegö were killed.   

**Q:**  Did the abbot beat them?   

**A:**  Not really the abbot himself, but the people in their clique [Tib. ཕྱོགས་ཁག] beat them.   

**Q:**  What do you mean their clique?   

**A:**  The tsondu members beat them up.   

**Q:**  They were tratsang tsondu, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were the ones standing on abbot's side. In the end, the abbot was dressed in white chuba and expelled from the monastery. He was handed over to the Damba shungyupa and then the shungyupa left him in a loose manner [Tib. ལྷུ་ཡང་པོ] and he fled to India. He was good in religion and later he became the abbot in a monastery in Darjeeling.   

**Q:**  How did they beat them with switches?   

**A:**  There were switches kept in the room under this and some were kept in the rungkhang.   

**Q:**  Did they beat them with thin branches, jangjug [Tib. ལྕང་ལྕུག] or the switches called Tshargyug [Tib. ཚར་རྒྱུག]?   

**A:**  It was tsargyug. The ones who did the beating also were expelled for murder. The yigtsang decided this.   

**Q:**  What is tsargyug?   

**A:**  Trindor: It is a kind of tree grown in Lhoka, not here. It was a very hard kind of switches which hurts [Tib. ཟུག].   

**Q:**  How many times did they beat them?   

**A:**  Probably, they were beaten 100 times on that night and the gegö were old. They died after a few days.   

**Q:**  Did the laji make the decisionto to expel the abbot, or the Yigtsang did it?   

**A:**  Probably, it was decided by the Yigtsang and the order for arresting them was given to the shengo. Later the abbot and also the ones who did the beating were also expelled because they killed people.   

**Q:**  Did the thabyog beat them or the tsondu members themselves beat them?   

**A:**  The tsondu members themselves beat them.   

**Q:**  So the monks beat the monks, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The old society was like this. [laughter]   

**Q:**  What was the reason for starting the dispute?   

**A:**  I'm not sure but they [lords] were on the side of the pechawa and the high ranking [Tib. མཐོ་རིམ་པ] or the lords [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] were holding kind of meetings. And at below down there, the common monks, tramang [Tib. གྲྭ་དམངས] held a meeting. Later, there was no indepth investigation of this.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were among the tramang, right?   

**A:**  The tramang had no power, it was the officials who held all the power.   

**Q:**  When was it? How old were you then?   

**A:**  It was during Taktra's time. I was about 18-19 years of age.   

**A:**  I saw in the books the term called phurchom [Tib. 'phur mchong ?] which is one of the jumping events. Have you ever heard this ?   

**A:**  No, I never heard it. We just call it 4 rounds of jumping [Tib. མཆོང་སྐོར་བཞི].   

**Q:**  Were there prohibiitons on the jumpers before the competition? Do they eat special foods? Did you get the salary from the tobtsang for buying the butter and meat?   

**A:**  The tobtsang would buy those stuffs. We pool 10 tranka which is equal to 1 maotse and 5 fen. There were 4 people called nyobcha dagyag [Tib. ཉོ་ཆ་བརྡའ་རྒྱག] who would buy the foodstuffs. They would tell us that they bought these food stuffs and there is such and such amount of money left.   

**Q:**  Did you 9 people who join the jump competition have special food and extra salaries?   

**A:**  No. We didn't.   

**Q:**  When you practice jumps, if you fall backwards and touch your bottom on the ground which was called kubjeshag [Tib. རྐུབ་རྗེས་བཞག], would the other monks slap you?   

**A:**  Yes. They would scold a lot. Everyone would slap you on your hip, thanjag [Tib. ཐལ་ལྕག]". You get sores from this slaping on the hip. They all slap hard.   

**Q:**  The worse ones who lose in the competition would have to wash the big tea boiling pot. And the next worst would have to clean the ladles, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It's to insult and make them feel embarrass among so many people and make them do better in the games. Later, they would become very good in the games. If there is a dobdo who breaks tobtsang's rules and did all sorts of bad things, he get beaten with switches at a place called Rumteg [Tib. ?].   

**Q:**  Did the tobtsang beat them?   

**A:**  Yes. Otherwise, nobody would even flick him with their fingers.   

**Q:**  Was there a fine if a monk who didn't ask for leave and didn't show up in the jump practice?   

**A:**  Yes. He would be fined like 10 tranka.   

**Q:**  At this time, you are carefree, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We think only of the games. The monastic officials would see and know what's going on but they act as if they haven't seen it and wouldn't say anything.   

**Q:**  I heard there was an order for eliminating the tobtsang, right?   

**A:**  The dewashung eliminated it at the time of the Reting War.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, do you still have the jumping ground?   

**A:**  No. After eliminating the jumping competition, this caused the Chinese to come and situation became chaos [Tib. ཟི་ལིང་སྦི་ལིང]. If we did the competition, it has the effect of counter attacking the war [Tib. དམག་ལྡོག]. After our time, there was no more jump competition.   

**Q:**  Did Deyang have the custom where the dobdo compete when serving thukpa in the tratsang?   

**A:**  We didn't have that because it was a small tratsang and had only about 500 monks. Only Gomang and Loseling had that. Gomang is worse where they fight alot.   

**Q:**  Did you ask for work in the monastery after you finished the jump competition?   

**A:**  We didn't need to ask for it. A long time after I competed, the tratsang sent me as shidü in Deyang Shiga.   

**Q:**  This is located in Sangu [Tib. གསང་ཕུ], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many years did you work?   

**A:**  I did it for 3 years.   

**Q:**  What is the work of shidü?   

**A:**  You can eat as much as you want. You have to provide your own clothes and horse tack, but the food is free. We don't ask for this, this is an obligation or tax. From about 20 candiates, 9 would be selected and one can't say no, if you say no, you would be expelled from the monastery.   

**Q:**  Who appoints these?   

**A:**  The chabu would appoint them. They pick 20 candidates and ask the diety Thamba Shanggo [Tib. དན་འབག་ཞང་གོ] for the approval while the deity is in trance. Then they would call the person the deity have choosed to office, chabu khang and give you some droma dresi and a khata and they would say your name came out to be the shidü.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any way to buy out [Tib. བླུ་བྱེད] this position, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Normally, how many years did you have to be the shidü?   

**Q:**  It is 6 years. After three years I became the the shidü, the Chinese came.   

**Q:**  So you became the trerim, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was.   

**Q:**  If you weren't shidü, you wouldn't have become trerim, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  By doing shidü, would you get some profit or you suffer loss?   

**A:**  No profit. It's a tax. In other tratsang, the shidü have salary in grain called gyabla [Tib. རྒྱབ་གླ]. We had none. We got alms/salary in the tratsang.   

**Q:**  How large was the shiga?   

**A:**  It has about 600 khe of land?   

**Q:**  How many miser households?   

**A:**  There were about 17 tregang. They were Deyang miser. I don't remember how many miser households were there. But there were ula for everyday, gang [Tib. རྐང] and ula for every other day, nangja [Tib. གནངས་ཆག]. It goes by how much land they hold.   

**Q:**  What is the authority of shidü? Did they have the authority to make the daily work assignments?   

**A:**  The main job was to have the fields of the shiga planted.   

**Q:**  You don't have to work, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I had to mobilize the miser to work. The work supervisor, lepön [Tib. ལས་དཔོན] would make the people work in detail.   

**Q:**  The lepön would come from the miser, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many shidü were there when you were the shudü?   

**A:**  There were 2 shidü, but my partner lost his celibacy and is still there. Deyang Shiga have to give 4 khe of grain for each monk to 500 monks per year regardless of yield.   

**Q:**  Do you mean from only one shiga's income?   

**A:**  No, there were also leases to be collected. From Rema shiga we collect 600 khe of grain, and there was another shiga up there from which we collect 500 khe of grain. We have to give 4 khe of grain to all the monks in the tratsang. When the grain salary is distributed I have to come in person. The gegö gives a speech in the assembly, tshogtam [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ] saying the grain should be clean, etc. I have to pull down my monk's shawl as a respecct and bend down to listen to the speech. The old system was good and clean.   

**Q:**  Who transport the grain to the monastery?   

**A:**  The Deyang miser would transport the grain to the ferry on the other side of the river at Tagtse [Tib. སྟག་རྩེ]. From there, Deyang miser and the thabyog would carry it to the steward, nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང].   

**Q:**  Whom did they have to delibver the grain to?   

**A:**  They would deliver it to the three nyertsang who were in the monastery and there were three nyertsang in the shiga.   

**Q:**  Nobody would say anything whether the yield is good or bad, right?   

**A:**  Yes. If the cannons weren't fired, I would have to stay in the shiga for 3 more years. [laughter]   

