# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0012.04  
##  : with Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** 2002  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] was a Litang (Khamba) monk who became a monastic manager/trader (Tib. Jiso) and then became one of the top military commanders in Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses in detail how Chushigandru was organized in Drigutang, and how they appointed their leaders and supplied food to the 1,000-2,000 Chushigandru soldiers. He then explains the mission led by Gombo Tashi to get weapons from Shang Ganden Chöngor, and how he ended up getting separated from the main regiment and ended up in Phembo and Lhasa. He also explains how he discussed the Dalai Lama's situation with Phala's people in Lhasa, and how he offered to take him out of Lhasa. Finally, he discusses how and why he returned to Lhoka in December 1958, and how, on the way, he organized the famous ambush of a convoy of 39 Chinese trucks at Gongkar. He also alks about the conflicts within Chushigandru at this time and the conflict between Chushigandru and Namseling.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0012_04/H_0012_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In the beginning, when you went to Drigutang, you made an organization [Tib. སྒྲིག་སྟངས] for the regiments. You said that there were 13 tsondzin and there were the Military Headquarters (Tib. མགཇིགང). Were the tsondzin above the Military Headquarters?   

**A:**  They were above them.   

**Q:**  Was Andrutsang a tsondzin or was he above the tsondzin?   

**A:**  Andru Gombo Tashi was a magji and also a tsondzin. He was the main or the highest leader. Under him, there were the tsondzin who did not need to go to fight battles. They were the elderly and better off people in the country. They would just give orders and make arrangements with the misers, and make friendly relations with them. The ones who fought battles were named magji. Among the magji there wasn't any difference in the position and the salary. The names like tsondzin, magji, gyagpön and jupön were given.   

**Q:**  Were there gyagpön and jupön?   

**A:**  Yes, there was even the ngapön, the head of five. This was just called this, but they didn't have a salary or any insignia. When we first made the association [Tib. ཚོགས་པ] of the Chushigandru, there were big traders from many regions [Tib. ལུང་ཚན]. All of the traders gathered and discussed and they had many friends who were also gathered together. We requested that the Dalai Lama give the Kalachakra Initiation, and that we and the Lamrim Chenmo also perform the longevity ritual or tenshug for the Dalai Lama. About this, everyone got together and set up the association called the Chushigandru. When this was started in the beginning, Andru Gombo Tashi was the main one. Since we were from the same homeland, he told me that I would not be allowed to go anywhere and that I have to work with him. I was supposed to go with the people who were sent to be trained in the U.S. to Kalimpong. Gyalo Thondup was sending many of us for the military secret training and they did not know where we were sent. I was also among them, but Gombo Tashi told me to stay and told me that we have to do this and that work. Then all of the traders got together and this was what the Chinese called wearing the religious mask, and this is a not good work. At that time, we were not allowed to set up the association because in the past there was a People's Association led by Alo Chöndze and those people and this were disbanded [Tib. གཏོར] by the Chinese and they were imprisoned. Since we were not allowed to set up an association, from the religious side we made the preparation and set up the association called the Chushigandru. After we finished the religious activities, when we went to Drigutang, Gombo Tashi was the main tsondzin. Under him, there were people from many groups [Tib. ཤོག་ཀ]. The main ones among the traders were the older ones who were the tsondzin and the magji.   

**Q:**  So these [tsondzin and the magji] were selected from each region, right? Like from Ba, did they appoint one elderly person as the tsondzin and another as the magji?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  And under them, there were the gyagpön and the jupön and ngapön, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were also [appointed] in the same way.   

**Q:**  How many magji were there altogether?   

**A:**  There were 18 magji in Drigutang.   

**Q:**  How many groups were there altogether?   

**A:**  When we first reached Drigutang, there were about 27 groups.   

**Q:**  Some were small and some were big, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In some groups there were 2 tsondzin and in some there were 2 magji, and in some there was just a tsondzin and no magji. Among the 27 groups there were only 18 magji. If a group had 200 cavalry, they could have 2-3 magji. Some groups had only 20-30 cavalry, so they had only a gyagpön and no magji. From Litang there were probably 4 tsondzin and 2 magji.   

**Q:**  Who were the 2 magji?   

**A:**  One was Gyadotsang Thöndrub and the other was me. Then from Chantreng, they had many cavalry so they had 3 tsondzin and 2 magji.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, how many cavalry were there from Litang?   

**A:**  There were 183 and Chantreng had about 150.   

**Q:**  Then which were the bigger groups?   

**A:**  Gyeltang, Chantreng and Litang were the ones who had many cavalry.   

**Q:**  Didn't Ganzi and Derge have many?   

**A:**  They didn't have many, but their homeland was large. Derge and Gaba [Tib. སྒ་པ] had many misers. When we went to Drigutang, there was only one magji and one tsondzin [for Derge] although they had many people. From Gaba, also, there was only one magji and one tsondzin.   

**Q:**  The Gaba were from Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were they regarded as Khambas or Amdowas?   

**A:**  They were regarded as Khambas. The Amdowas were saying that they were Amdowas, but Khambas said that they were Khambas, so they were regarded as Khambas.   

**Q:**  When you reached Drigutang, there were many people, like 1,000-2,000. How did you manage the food and the rules? Did you take tsamba from Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, we didn't need to. The Lhoka area had an abundance of grain, barley, tsamba, and flour. So they [dzongpön] collected these from the misers and gave it to us. We didn't have money to pay, so we gave the dzongpön a receipt. Lhoka was the biggest area for producing grain, So the food for the people and the fodder for the horses were all collected from the misers.   

**Q:**  How about the fuel?   

**A:**  We could buy it and collect it, and they also gave it to us. If 100 riders came to a village, they [misers] would bring food, fuel and everything.   

**Q:**  Did the government give grain from their grain storages places?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there was internal talk that the government told Andru Jinda that he can use the government grain in Lhoka, but we didn't take it right away because the misers were rich, and they were giving us the grain. Later, the order was given saying that you can use the government grain as we are all are same.   

**Q:**  This was after the uprising?   

**A:**  Yes, it was along after.   

**Q:**  Andru, Phala and Namseling had some internal talks, but although they didn't give it from the government storage, did they tell the miser secretly to give grain [to the Khambas]?   

**A:**  There were internal talks, but if they didn't keep the secret well and the Chinese learned a little bit, then there would be severe danger towards the Dalai Lama. So we didn't take the government grain and we got it from the misers. We got the government arms from Ganden Chöngor. We got about 500 303 English Carbines, and also cannons and mortars. We knew about this from Lhasa internally.   

**Q:**  Did Phala and Namseling say that?   

**A:**  Yes, Phala, Namseling and many other government kudrak said that. Among the kudrak, some were pro-Chinese and there were many kudrak who only thought of the Dalai Lama. They all had solidarity with us. If we didn't have that, we would not have been able to plan such a movement because we only had a little more than 2,000 cavalry from Khamba and Amdo in Lhasa. We would not be able to do big things with this amount. There were also the abbots and the chandzö of the three great monasteries, and Gyütö and Gyüme. And there were the many Ling monasteries in Lhasa, like Kündeling and Tsecholing [Tib. ཚེ་མཆོག་གླིང] and all of their chandzö. And among the kudrak, the depön of three regiments in Lhasa also took the oath with us. In the case of when the Chinese arrested Andru Gombo Tashi, all of these would rise up. It was so strong like this. That is why we could plan the movement. Otherwise, we would not have been able to plan the movement because there were hundreds of thousands of Chinese soldiers and we had to go with 10-20-100 riders separately among these Chinese. But the Chinese were not saying anything at that time even when they saw us going. Actually, if they had destroyed us as soon as we left, we would not be able to set up the regiment. We set up [Chushigandru] very well with internal solidarity and then we were very lucky when we fought the battles so Lhoka became clean [with no Chinese].   

**Q:**  In the beginning, were there Amdowas?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. Jimpa Gyatso was the same rank with Andru Jinda and he was the leader of the Amdowas and there were many Amdowas.   

**Q:**  You people went to Drigutang and you needed guns and you knew that there were guns in Shang Ganden Chöngor from Lhasa. So you made the plan to get those guns, right? Did 700-800 cavalry leave to get the guns?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You also needed pack animals for carrying the guns. How many pack animals were there?   

**A:**  There were Tashilhunpo aristocrat's (estates) around Ganden Chöngor because the areas belonged to Tashilhunpo monastery. They were the misers of the Panchen Lama and those aristocrats had many horses and mules. Each household had over 20-30-40-50 horses and mules. So we sent about 100-200 riders to get those horses and mules.   

**Q:**  You went there ahead, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was like being bandits.   

**Q:**  Before going there, did you know that they had many pack animals?   

**A:**  Yes. We knew because Andru used to do his trading in the Shigatse area and he was familiar with this. Since we were traders, we also had many horses and mules but they were sent to graze and Andru Jinda said, "Don't worry about horses and mules, we can get them when we get the guns." These were all part of his plan.   

**Q:**  When you made the plan, how many days would it take from Drigutang to Shang Ganden Chöngor?   

**A:**  It took 18 days and nights from Drigutang to Ganden Chöngor.   

**Q:**  I am confused about what route you took and the battles you fought on the way. Last time, you said that you fought a battle in Yangpajen?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I have been there and Yangpajen is in the north and when you come down you will reach Takdruka. And Yangpajen was far north from Drigutang.   

**A:**  Yes, Yangpajen is in the north and Drigutang is in the south. We had to cross the Chushul river and then when we crossed a pass in a remote place and we reached the mountain pass of Yangpajen.   

**Q:**  This is not the Yangpajen near Shugola, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was near the airport. The Yangpajen that I am talking about is on the motorable road to Shigatse. This is a big station [Tib. རྒྱ་ཚུགས] now. When we crossed the pass from Chushul we reached Karkhang and between Karkhang and Yangpajen the Chinese shot at us a little bit, we didn't fight a big battle and there weren't any casualties. From Karkhang, we went to Nyemo Dokarsumdo and then we went to Tsang Tanag [Tib. རྟ་ནག]. From Tanag, we went to Shang Ganden Chöngor.   

**Q:**  There were three routes, one is from Chushul, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and one is from Nyemo Dokarsumdo and the third was to cross the Shugola Pass and go to Tanag. After crossing the Tanag river, we would reach Ganden Chöngor.   

**Q:**  After crossing the Chushul river, you reach Karkhang and then did you go west and come to Nyemo Dokarsumdo?   

**A:**  Yes. Then from Dokarsumdo, you reach Wuyug Dzomtang. But when we went up, the Chinese didn't let us go through Wuyug Dzomtang. We fought a big battle in Dokarsumdo and there were many casualties on both sides.   

**Q:**  This was after getting the guns, right?   

**A:**  No, this was when we were going to get the guns.   

**Q:**  You fought a big battle here, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Chinese were waiting at 9 ambush spots [Tib. སྒུག་ར] because they knew that we were coming. We had to go through a long valley and they had made plan to destroy us completely in these 9 ambush spots.   

**Q:**  Did all of your cavalry go there or just the advanced troops?   

**A:**  There were two advanced regiments [Tib. སྔོན་འགྲོ] in Dokarsumdo and Andru Jinda took 400 cavalry and stayed behind. Altogether there were about 900 cavalry and 500 were sent as the advanced troop. When the advanced troop reached the 3rd ambush spot, they knew the Chinese were waiting for them in ambush and as they retreated, the Chinese attacked and shot them. We were behind and going through this side of the valley. On that day, there were about 132 casualties from our side and we killed about 1,500 Chinese in three ambush spots. We took over many weapons and we also lost many weapons.   

**Q:**  When you got so many weapons [from Shang], how could you return back?   

**A:**  We had pack animals. Each 2 people had a mule so we could load them and we also gave the weapons to those who didn't have guns. We gained about 500 weapons and we also lost about 100 weapons.   

**Q:**  One group was with Andrutsang, and who was leading the other 500 soldiers?   

**A:**  There were magji from each group or region and among the magji, the best was Chantreng's Lobsang Tsültrim.   

**Q:**  Why did you make two groups?   

**A:**  This was because if about 1,000 cavalry have to travel together, even if the first batch left before dawn, the later ones couldn't even leave at this time [noon] because we had to go in alphabetical order and would not be allowed to go as we wished. There were 500 cavalry and 500 mules. When we stopped the journey for the day, if the former ones stop at noon, the later ones would reach only when it becomes dark. This was because we had to travel according the alphabetical order of the groups [Note: each regiment had been given a letter of the alphabet as with the Tibetan army] and we would not be allowed to go in the wrong order.   

**Q:**  What was the alphabetical letter of Litang?   

**A:**  We were the Jadang Regiment. This letter was obtained via a lottery. If the Jadang regiment was the advanced troop today, then tomorrow the Nyadang regiment would be the advanced troop. Whoever would meet the Chinese, they would have to fight.   

**Q:**  When we, the foreigners make war, there should be a main leader having the power. Did you have something like that?   

**A:**  Yes, we had the magji and all of the magji would hold meetings with Gombo Tashi, and they would make the military assignments when they had to make war. Andru Jinda would give the order and we would do according to the order, and there was not much to talk about. He would give orders saying you take 10 riders and you take 9 riders, etc.   

**Q:**  Did you do the same when you fought a battle on the way?   

**A:**  Yes. But when all of sudden we encountered the Chinese, then the advanced troop would fight because we didn't have time to hold meetings.   

**Q:**  When you fought a battle, did you also send advanced troops?   

**A:**  Yes. We would send about 100 advanced riders and 100 would stay in the back. The advanced troops would go to investigate [Tib. ས་བཤེར] whether or not there were Chinese ahead, and the rear unit was to investigate whether the Chinese were following us or not.   

**Q:**  And the main troops went in the middle, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You fought a big battle in Dokarsumdo and Andrutsang was behind with 400 cavalry. So he didn't go to Dokarsumdo, right?   

**A:**  There was the river in the middle and we were on this side fighting the battle and Andru Jinda crossed the shallow part of the river and was on the other side. We could hear them shooting and Jinda was also at the battlefield.   

**Q:**  Where did he go?   

**A:**  He was in Dokarsumdo and I was with the regiment where Andru Jinda was.   

**Q:**  When the fighting started at the 3rd ambush spot, where were your people?   

**A:**  We hadn't reached that place. The two nomad women said that you shouldn't go in this valley because it has been many days since the Chinese had come and were waiting. Then all of the regiments held a meeting and discussed this. Some went upwards on the mountain and they met three nomad old men and when they asked them they said that they don't know [of any Chinese being there]. These three happened to be paid Chinese spies. So when we discussed this, some said that the women told lies thinking that if we came, we would harm the nomads and it is impossible that the three old nomads would not know. Then elder ones like Lonphel Tsültrim said that we should discuss this with the main regiment. Then some youngsters said, "We, the crack riders, were sent ahead. If there are Chinese, we came to fight the battles. So we should just fight and there is no need to discuss this and it would be shameful to do so." At that moment, Lonphel Tsültrim and those people were kind of agitated and said, "We think we should be careful. [But] Okay, let's go." Then all of them went forward. The Chinese were waiting there. In the meanwhile, they could not keep the three old men and they ran away and disappeared. The three old men had been sent by the Chinese while the two women had told the truth. At that time, we suffered a great loss. They held a meeting on this side of the river and they were yelling that the Chinese are going on the mountain pass. Actually, it was just some sheep and goats passing by on the mountain and they thought it was the Chinese. On this side of the river, all of our soldiers went up the hill. Andru and I were with about 15 riders on this side of the river and when they said that they are going ahead, Jinda was yelling to them [on the other side] saying that you should be careful, but they didn't hear it because of the sound of the river. So they just went ahead and fell into the ambush. The Gaba Magji, Gelek Phüntso, and Andrutsang's servant, Tamdrin Wangchuk, were with me and we reached the top of the Chinese 2nd ambush site. The Chinese were in the fenced corral and we were on the hill. So we shot at each other and they were shooting a lot upwards at us. When we went down, Gelek Phüntso was with me hiding behind a rock. The Chinese were below us holding their guns. Gelek Phüntso was shot right here and the bullet came out from the other side and he said, "Ngawang, I am useless now." Then we fired against their machine-gun shooter and he couldn't fire the machine-gun. Then they [those at the ambush site] had hand-to-hand combat which was like wolves running among the sheep. They were stabbing the Chinese and killing them. So we didn't get the chance to shoot and just watched them. At that time, Chamdo Tsepag Shara [Tib. ཚེ་དཔག་ཞ་ར] fought with the Chinese who had pinned him down. When his partner fired, the Chinese person didn't get hit, but Tsepag was hit and wounded. But he still stabbed and killed the Chinese soldier. That's why Tsepag was famous then. On that day, we fought the battle amazingly. There were 132 casualties from our side and we killed 1,400-1,500 Chinese. We fought the whole day and night. At dawn, all of our people were scattered so Andru Jinda sent messengers everywhere saying that we have to go around the hill. He told them to go come down on such and such a time. On the next day, at around 6-7 p.m. all came down and gathered together, and we went around the Shugola mountain pass. From Dokarsumdo, we were going to Wuyug Dzomtang and then to Ganden Chöngor, but we couldn't get through.   

**Q:**  Shugola is far away, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Is Wuyug south of Shugola?   

**A:**  Yes. Shugola is in the north.   

**Q:**  When you went to Ganden Chöngor, did you have to go to Takdruka?   

**A:**  Actually, we had to go via the side of Takdruka, but we couldn't go, so we fought the battle in Dokarsumdo and then we withdrew and went around this place and went to Shugola, and then we crossed the Tanag River and went to Shang Ganden Chöngor. Actually, we were to go through Dokarsumdo and then Wuyug Dzomtang. From Wuyug Dzomtang, Ganden Chöngor is near, but we couldn't go through that way. But when we came back, we came through that route.   

**Q:**  So you had to go around and you didn't actually reach Shugola, right?   

**A:**  We didn't need to go on to the Shugola pass. We just crossed the stream near Shugola and also crossed the motorable road at Shugola and then crossed a pass and the went to Tanag.   

**Q:**  From Tanag where did you come down?   

**A:**  From Tanag, we went to Ganden Chöngor. There is a big river in Tanag with a chain bridge which swayed like this, so the horses and mules could not pass and we had to make them swim in the river.   

**Q:**  How many days did it take on horseback from Dokarsumdo to Tanag?   

**A:**  It was 4 days and nights. Like this we had to go around [detour].   

**Q:**  When you travel, what time did you depart in the morning and what time you reach the destination?   

**A:**  We would depart in early morning at 5-6 a.m., and the advanced troop would stop at 12 at noon. The later ones would reach at about 5-6 p.m. when it had almost become dark. We had to go in alphabetical order [regiment by regiment] and we were not be allowed to mix together and travel. That's why we had to divide up into two regiments.   

**Q:**  When you stopped for the day, did you graze the horses on the hills and or did you tie their legs and keep them near by?   

**A:**  We would graze them on the hills in the pastures and we would leave 5-6 soldiers as guards when we had tea. The advanced troop who arrived at noon would stay on guard.   

**Q:**  Then on the next day you had to send a person to get the horses, right?   

**A:**  After having tea, 5-10-15 people would go to graze the horses and they would catch the horses and at night keep them near by because before dawn we had to saddle the horses and leave.   

**Q:**  From Ganden Chöngor what route did you take after getting the guns?   

**A:**  Then we returned to Wuyug Dzomtang.   

**Q:**  When you went down, where did you reach?   

**A:**  We wanted to reach Nyemo Thil. There is a ferry site in Nyemo for going to Lhoka, and we came to go through that.   

**Q:**  Where would you reach after crossing the ferry site?   

**A:**  Then we would have reached the Nangkartse area and from there we then down to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  That was where Lake Yamdro [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག] is located, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We would go down along the lake to Lhoka. When we arrived at Wuyug Dzomtang, there were Chinese vehicles coming from Lhasa and coming from Shigatse and we attacked them and destroyed about 7-8 Chinese vehicles and many cadres and soldiers and military horses.   

**Q:**  Did the vehicles come from Lhasa?   

**A:**  Some were from Lhasa and some were from Shigatse. We ambushed them very well and we didn't have any casualties. The chandzö of the Yadong Rimpoche was also killed accidentally along with the Chinese. We didn't know who he was and just shot him. When we reached Nyemo, there were 100 advanced riders who were supposed to hold the ferry site, but when they went to the ferry site, the Chinese had already come up from Chushul and the ferry was held by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  So you couldn't go, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The advanced riders fought with the Chinese there and we went to Nyemo Thil which was a big place with abundant food and beverages. When we reached there, about 1,000 Chinese were send down to Nyemo Thil from Takdruka because they knew that we were going to Nyemo.   

**Q:**  And they were also coming from the north, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they came to chase us from the north.   

**Q:**  From your back side, the Chinese were also coming from Takdruka, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In the front, the ferry site was captured by the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They had sent many soldiers from Chushul to the ferry site. So we had to stay there overnight and eat food. The misers informed us that from this side there were several thousand soldiers coming. So we sent about 10-15 riders [to check]. Many Chinese were coming down following us and the battle was going on down there [at the ferry site]. So we stayed to make an ambush in three spots.   

**Q:**  One group was at Takdruka, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were fighting a battle and they had 100 riders and they were trying to drive away the Chinese from there, but they were unable to because it was a very bad, rocky place. We were also fighting here where the main regiment had arrived in Nyemo Thil and [Chinese] were coming down from Takdruka. So we sent 300-400 riders to wait for an ambush in this place. And from down here, we sent about 100-200 soldiers and the ambush site was near by.   

**Q:**  The reason for sending them was to fight when the Chinese came, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we were waiting to ambush them when the Chinese were coming down. At around 12 at night, we fought each other, and we fought at 1 a.m in this place. We were fighting three battles at the same time in Nyemo Thil. In Nyemo Thil all of the three regiments fought with the Chinese and killed a lot of Chinese, and many were wounded.   

**Q:**  When you fought at night, how did you see them?   

**A:**  The place where we were waiting for the ambush was just like this, and at around midnight we were waiting and the Chinese were unable to come. Then at dawn they charged forward and many of us were killed and wounded. We were able to stop one group coming from this side. We fought for two days and nights. Then that night, we left via Nyemo Karkhang. Since it was guerrilla warfare, it was like that [not staying and holding one place]. We had a small number of people -- like 800-900 riders. So we came out again from Karkhang. We could not hold the place in Nyemo Thil. So we withdrew and exited from Karkhang.   

**Q:**  Was this in the south or the north?   

**A:**  This was near to the north. Near Chang Yangpajen.   

**Q:**  So you went to the north again from Nyemo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And the Chinese were coming from 2-3 directions. So you went to the north?   

**A:**  Yes. We could not go to Chushul because the Chinese had blocked the roads everywhere. We also couldn't go through Tölung to Tsurphu, and there were also many Chinese in Karkhang. All of the soldiers in Karkhang fled from Tsurphu. Then we exited from the lower part of Yangpajen and crossed a pass and went to the north to Chang Namtso. Then we crossed the Dam Jogtsela pass where the Chinese motor road from Xining crosses and we went to Reting. Then we went to Drigung Phowa Dzangkar and Drigung Marshung where Andru [Gombo Tashi) was wounded. There we fought many battles and we fought everywhere, but we couldn't break through to reach Lhoka. So we went to Lharigo and the Shotalhosum area [Tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ༔་ཤོ་པ་མདོ, དཔལ་འབར, and ལྷོ་རྫོང].   

**Q:**  Are there any people still alive who went with Andrutsang to Shotalhosum?   

**A:**  Yes, there are. They are in Delhi and Dharamsala.   

**Q:**  Who is in Dharamsala?   

**A:**  Probably, there are some, but I don't know this in detail because I didn't go to Shotalhosum. I got scattered [separated] in Marshung and then I went to Lhasa. Then I went to Phembo and then to the Jagsam Ferry site in Chushul, and then to Gongkar where we destroyed 29 Chinese trucks. We had only 62 riders.   

**Q:**  From Gongkar you went to Drigutang, right?   

**A:**  There were 105 Chinese trucks coming from Chushul. The Chinese were holding a place [an administrative/military center] in Tsetang and they were transporting ammunition and weapons for making war in Lhoka. We were doing guerrilla warfare and had to flee as we could not hold places [after the ambush]. Therefore, we went to Yamdro Lake, but we didn't know where the Chushigandru were located in Lhoka. Then we heard that soldiers of the Chushigandru were in Chongye Riwodechen, so we crossed the pass and went to Chongye. At Chongye, we met some soldiers of the Chushigandru and held a meeting.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in the Chushigandru?   

**A:**  About 400-500 had been sent to Gongkar and Drachima [Tib. གྲ་ཕྱི་མ] to guard the place. Some people like Kunga Samden [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་བསམ་གཏན] and the Chantrengpa Gowo Tempa Gyentsen [Tib. གོ་བོ་བསྟན་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] came there. The Chinese were sending reinforcements against us from Tsetang. They waited for them in ambush and they fought each other and fought very well. I think we fought in Gongkar on the 8th of the 11th Tibetan month and on the 9th they fought this battle. We didn't know how to count using the Western calendar dates [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚེས]. On the 9th, they waited for an ambush in Drachi [Tib. གྲ་ཕྱི] and made the Chinese suffer a great loss.   

**Q:**  You people fought with the Chinese when you met them, but I think this attack was the first where the Chushigandru specifically went out and fought with the Chinese rather than just fighting on the road?   

**A:**  When we went to the north, we [also] waited at ambush sites and attacked them. But this was the first time in Lhoka. When we were in Phembo, we knew that 105 trucks were coming from Chushul because Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi [told us in a letter]. For the sake of the religion and politics, Gyagpön Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi, the government kudrak and the army regiments, the abbots of the three great monasteries and the monastic officials took an oath. Kelsang Dramdrü wrote in a letter that 105 trucks had gone to Tsetang and have come back and now they are going back again [to Tsetang]. He also said that they [Chushigandru] are making great preparations in Lhoka so you should not stay in Phembo. It is very important for you to go back to the main regiment. They did spying in Lhasa about this and told us to leave as soon as possible. We then consulted Panglung Gyalchen Shungden through the medium and he prophesied to me saying, "You must go to the main regiment as soon as possible. The route should be through Chushul." We didn't have wireless equipment and telegrams, so we just had to ask the deity for a prophecy. We left Phembo at 12 at night and the people in Phembo didn't know that we had left. We stopped travelling at dawn and came to Chushul. There were neither Chinese nor Chushigandru fighters in Chushul. After we crossed the ferry site at Jagsam, there was a big estate behind it called Jagsam Chuwori that belonged to Drepung. It had an abundant amount of the Chushigandru's meat, barley and tsamba, so we were enjoying eating that stuff. Then my brother Sonam Tsering went upstairs and looked through his binoculars and he saw that there were many vehicles coming. We said that what Kelsang Dramdrü had told us was correct. When we counted the vehicles, we reached 70-80 and then couldn't count any more because of the dust. The convoy stopped in Chushul and didn't come further. We had stayed in Chushul for a night in the village so they [Chinese] gathered all the misers and differentiated the children, the men and women, and held a meeting and were pointing their cannons towards us. We could see that from the hill of Jagsam Chuwori [across the river].   

**Q:**  Why did they hold the meeting?   

**A:**  It was because we had stayed in Chushul for a night in the village. So they [Chinese] gathered the people and asked them about us. In the afternoon, at about 3-4 p.m. the Chinese drove their vehicles and [he convoy] crossed the ferry site. We were holding a meeting and some of us said that we should kill them when they came out [of the ferry]. But I said it is useless to kill them then. We need to get their arms and ammunition. If we used a lot of ammunition, we don't have anybody to support us [and replenish it], so I said let them cross the river and then we should destroy the vehicles and get the ammunition. I was the Commander (magji) and 90% obeyed my order, but since all of them were volunteers, my order did not work out as I wished. But then finally they said, "Now, it's up to you." There was a motorable road to Jagsam Chuwori and a rocky mountain where we decided it would be a good place for an ambush. It was winter and extremely cold. However, at first the Chinese didn't come. And then when the day broke, they still hadn't come so then we told the people in the house to saddle the horses and get ready as we were waiting for the ambush. Then when it was daylight, I sent messengers and told all the people to gather together. We ate food and then went on to Gongkar because the ambush in Jagsam had become useless. When we arrived in Gongkar, it was evening and all of the Chinese vehicles had come there and were parked on the plain, which was filled with vehicles. Here the motorable road was in the sandy area and the Chushigandru had cut off the motorable road, but they had taken beams and were able to pass by this obstacle. We didn't get a chance to sleep that night. So the dzongpön of Gongkar and I discussed this and I told him to please send the miser as a security guard for tonight and have them call us if the Chinese [vehicles] come. He let us sleep in the dzong because we didn't get a chance to sleep the previous night. The monks and the misers in Gongkar were very nice and the dzongpön made a notice, and we sent letters everywhere through about 10 messengers. We sealed the messengers' sashes [placed a seal on their belt] so that they would not be able to sleep [undo their sash]. The letter said, "We, the soldiers of Andru and Radrü Ngawang are fighting a battle here. So wherever you may be, come over here as reinforcements." The letter was sent to Dowa Dzong, Chongye Dzong and everywhere. We slept that night and at dawn I heard the misers saying that the vehicles were coming. At that time, we held all of the better places in the dzong and everyone got up and was drinking tea. I sent my brother to watch, and he reported that many vehicles were coming near by so you should hurry up. [I sent] 2-3 people to the ambush spots and made the assignments as to who will fire on the first vehicle, and then the second, etc. They were not allowed to fire disorderly. I gave strict orders. I was at the 3rd ambush spot, where there was a road along the middle part of the hill. I kept 4 people with me. At the 1st ambush spot there were 7 people. They [Chinese] had mounted bren-guns on their vehicles.   

**Q:**  How many bren-guns did you have?   

**A:**  We didn't have a single bren-gun. There were Chinese bren-guns mounted on their vehicles. When I looked through the binoculars, some of the vehicle were loaded only with sand, so I was wondering what it would be for. Then 29 vehicles entered our ambush sites. Then one Chinese yelled something and they stopped the vehicles and they were coming towards the place where I was waiting. We thought that they might have learned that we were waiting there so I told my partners that I will fire my sten-gun and you don't need to fire. Then the Chinese spoke in Chinese when I watched from behind a heap of thorns. Then I saw that the Chinese were returning back. We were praying to our the protective deities and saying, "Please bring the Chinese over here today [to the ambush site]." Then they drove their vehicles along the river side and then our people in the first ambush spot started shooting. The [Chinese] couldn't hear this because of the sound of the many vehicles. In the 2nd ambush spot, Shalotsang Tsenphel and a lama called Gusho Sersang [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས་གསེར་ཟངས] [who died in Switzerland] were waiting on the rocks, so when the vehicles reached our ambush spot, we started shooting at around 8 in the morning. We continued for 2-3 hours. The Chinese were unable to shoot and the blood flowed out from the vehicles making the river reddish. Then the Chinese were coming out and all of them were shot dead. Then the Chinese who were coming behind, fired cannons and I left the former people at that place to wait and I took 11 people and told the people who didn't have guns to prepare to get guns, and we went down [to the trucks]. One of the vehicles from among the three had driven into the river and the Chinese who were in the other two vehicles were not killed completely. Then we fought for 1-2 hours and killed all of them. There was a Chinese military officer in the corner of the hill who didn't let us get the [Chinese] guns as he was shooting at us with 2-3 pistols and rifles placed near him. When I went there, the Chinese guy was still firing. Among the Chinese corpses, one of them got up and threw a grenade which went over my head with the sound, "su su su." [laughter]. I knew it was a bomb, and I laid down and it didn't harm me. The Chinese guy had already been shot and he couldn't move. Then we were anxious to get the guns but the others told me not to go. But it was not okay if I didn't go and when I went up a Chinese man was coming out and I shot him with my rifle. He got hit and his gun fell down. Then I called all of our people to get the guns. I was behind the vehicle and was waiting for them and they went to get the guns. However, some Chinese in the vehicles were not dead and they shot at us from the vehicles and also threw a bomb. I went down below the vehicle and they thought I was dead and a Chinese still didn't die and then one of our men shot him and he was dead. We then took over all the arms and ammunition in the two vehicles. There were 8 Chinese bren-guns, each of which had 8 cartridges with 50 bullets per cartridge. This battle was fought very nicely and only one of us was wounded. If we had many soldiers we could have taken all of the ammunition, but we only had 62 soldiers and there were still about 70 vehicles coming and they were firing cannons and coming around the hill. Then we had to run away. We withdrew and went to Yamdro Lake. In that battle, Shalotsang Tsenphel was killed. Then we went to Yamdro Lake and came to Chongye. The main regiment was in Lhagyari and we went there and held a meeting and made preparations for guarding the different places, and we made a plan to fight a big battle. There are a lot of things to tell you.   

**Q:**  When you reached Lhagyari, who was there? This was in the 12th month, right?   

**A:**  It was the 16-17th of the 11 month [26-27 December 1958], I arrived in Lhagyari where the main regiment was. Jangtsa Chöndze was the main one staying in the office and there were people like Jama Sampel [Tib. བྱ་མ་བསམ་འཕེལ], Ganzi Kyamgön [Tib. སྐྱབས་མགོན] and many other chandzö [in the main office]. Those were the people called tsondzin. Baba Gen Yeshe had just came from Kalimpong and Sandu Lo Nyendra just came from Bhutan so they were newcomers. Then we held meetings and discussed preparation for war. Most of the soldiers were in Dakpo under the leadership of the famous Derge leader Jagö Namgyal Dorje. They had many soldiers who had come from their homeland. They probably had 700-800 Chushigandru fighters in Dakpo.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in Lhagyari?   

**A:**  There were not many soldiers in Lhagyari. There were just 100-200 who were there as security guards. More were not needed because they had send 490 soldiers to Drachi and Dranang and about 100 to Chongye Riwodechen. They had left guards everywhere. We held the meeting and decided to gather [recall] all the soldiers from Dakpo and divide them among the places [along the river in Lhoka]. However, when we told the Dakpo soldiers to come up, they wouldn't come. Instead, they said, "We are going as volunteers to bring back Andru Gombo Tashi." At that time, Andru Jinda was in the Shotalhosum area. I was told to go to talk with them [to Jagö Namgyal Dorje, etc.] [by the leaders in Lhagyari]. They said that if they went, they [the Derge people] wouldn't listen. At this meeting all the famous and better people like Alo Dawa, Chandzö Tashi and Bachungpön etc. were there. All of them told me, "If you go and tell them the story of Andru Jinda, they will listen to you. Otherwise, if we go, they will not listen." At that time, they didn't get along with the main regiment, and they were saying that that one [the Derge regiment] is something else. Actually, all of us were volunteers and nobody was paid any salary. If people didn't think in a proper way, then orders would not work out very well. Only the orders from Andru Jinda would work out for everyone. I had been working very hard in the north and had become famous, and they might have heard about this, so they said that they will listen to me. So I went to Dakpo, but when I got there they had gone to Wölga Chöling, so I came back and I crossed the ferry site in Rong Lukhang and went to Wölga Chöling with 4 riders. There I talked with him [Jagö Namgyal Dorje]. [I] said that "It is useless for you to go on traveling like this. You don't have any wireless and telegraphic communication links with Andru, so how could you know where he is? If you guys go up from this side and if Gombo Tashi comes down from that side, then [you would miss each other and then he would have to go to find you] he would have to go to receive you people. So please listen to me. It is not okay to go like this. You must just send messages through 10-15 riders everywhere [to find out where he was]. Our work is not [for all[ to go like this]." At that time, Namgyal Dorje was the most powerful one [in Derge], so I made him take an oath saying that he would never leak out the secret [of what I was going to tell him]. Then I told him [that] "I had a talk with Phala Drönyerchemmo [who said] that 'The Dalai Lama can no longer stay in Lhasa. They [Phala and his people] will be careful from inside [in Lhasa] and you must do your best and get prepared outside [in Lhoka].' If I tell this indiscriminately to others and if the Chinese came to know of this, they [Chinese] will do something immediately [to prevent this]. So I will not tell this indiscriminately [to others]." So Namgyal Dorje took an oath that he will not tell this to even his relatives. I told him, "The Dalai Lama can no longer stay in Lhasa. So is Andru Gombo Tashi more important or is the Dalai Lama more important? So we have to do this work very carefully." Then he said, "Oh! If this is the case, you can tell me whatever I must do and make a plan at the meeting tomorrow and I will agree to it." Then at the meeting, I told about the situation and said that if we don't get prepared, the Chinese are getting prepared. So they listened to me and then we held the big meeting of the chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] of Lhagyari and the chiefs of Dakpo and all the other chiefs everywhere. The fighters in Dakpo didn't want to go to Lhagyari to hold that meeting because they didn't get along well with them in the past. So we arranged for the meeting to meet at the Lukhang Ferry site which was a new [neutral] place. All of the military officers [Tib. དམག་དཔོན] were called to that place and we held a meeting and made plans about fighting. We also consulted a deity about this. I didn't have any plans to fight in Tsetang, but was planning rather to conduct guerrilla warfare everywhere, as I thought that this would be very beneficial. But all of the chiefs at the meeting said that we must consult the deity through the oracle's medium. The deity gave the prophecy that Commander Radrü Ngawang should be the one to fight in Tsetang because he has the ability and power to do that. Then all of them said you must fight in Tsetang. If I had to go to Tsetang and if this order didn't work out, then I would not be able to give orders [because I would have failed]. I didn't have confidence that I could take over Tsetang, because the Chinese had prepared a lot by digging trenches/tunnels, and they were doing their work underground [in tunnels] so there was nothing to do above ground. They had arranged for their food and water and everything to be underground.   

**Q:**  Did Phala himself tell you the secret [about the Dalai Lama leaving] in Lhasa or how did you hear that?   

**A:**  I couldn't meet Phala in person, but there was a person in between, and it was through him that I heard that.   

**Q:**  Who was that person?   

**A:**  It was Gyagpön Kelsang Dramdrü. In the past, when Andru Jinda was there, we also heard things through him. They [in Lhasa] knew clearly that the Dalai Lama could no longer stay in Lhasa. The Chinese had insulted the Dalai Lama many times. The Chinese had found a Jigje Mahe protective talisman on the Khambas who were killed and this talisman was made from the time of the 13th Dalai Lama. So the Chinese were saying that because of this Jigje Mahe talisman, many of our people were killed. [The Dalai Lama responded that] "I didn't give this specially to the Khamba reactionaries. You are wrong. This was made from the 13th Dalai Lama's time for the purpose of religious faith. I give this to whoever has religious faith. If you have faith in it, I can also give it to you." This was the truth. But the Chinese were saying, "What the Khambas and Amdowas are doing is not religion. They are just wearing a religious mask." We told the Kashag about this. [We told them] That they were talking about organizing a Kalachakra teaching, but that this was actually for planning war. The Chinese only had plans for the peaceful liberation in the areas belonging to the Tibetan government. But that if this turned into a military liberation, they were responsible for this happening. They said that to the Dalai Lama and the Kashag. So [they asked] "will you destroy the Khamba reactionaries in Drigu, or should we destroy them?" That's why it was definite that the Dalai Lama could no longer stay in Lhasa. So they [in Lhasa] asked me what preparations should be made. I didn't have many plans and said, "The Dalai Lama is the only one we think about. If he, the precious stone, would be destroyed, there is no need for us to work hard outside because he is the precious stone of all Tibetan tsamba eaters. In order not to have this precious stone damaged, we have to work hard and sacrifice all of our wealth. We are big traders and had over 200-300-400 boxes of dayan as capital. The reason why we sacrificed this was because of this precious stone." So I said, "If the Dalai Lama is in danger, you just hand him over to me and I will bring him out wherever it would be."   

**Q:**  This happened when you were in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who did you tell this to?   

**A:**  I told this to Phala Drönyerchemmo.   

**Q:**  Did you tell this through the intermediary people?   

**A:**  He [Kelsang Dramdrü] said it is difficult for the Dalai Lama to stay. So what do you think and what is your plan? Then I could only tell him in the short form and I said, "If this is the case, it is not okay at all for the Dalai Lama to fall in the Chinese hand. Please hand him over to me secretly and I will take him." Since this was not going to be okay, they might have been laughing.   

**Q:**  Was the Dalai Lama in Ganden or Lhasa?   

**A:**  He was in Lhasa and Phala was asking me different questions. We were thinking in a short term way and told the things mentioned above. So he said that this is not going to be okay. You have to have a good plan [for the Dalai Lama to leave]. So we discussed a plan in which I was to go out of Lhasa and prepare for war in Lhoka and make sure that the Lhoka area was clean [of Chinese]. If we couldn't make the Lhoka area clean, the Dalai Lama could not come via there.   

**Q:**  Did Phala say that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did he tell you to make Lhoka clean?   

**A:**  Yes, he said that it will not be okay if the Lhoka area is not clean. This was what we discussed. But if I had to go to Lhoka, I couldn't go right away because the Chinese had blocked the routes, so I went to Phembo and gathered all of my soldiers who had been scattered, and set up a regiment and stayed there for a month. Then I received the letter from my elder brother, and the deity also gave a prophecy and I went to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  In Tsetang you fought a battle. Did the others also fight in other places?   

**A:**  When we held the meeting in Lukhang, I was the one designate to fight in Tsetang while in Kongpo Giamda, Kongpo Barla, Tölung Tsurphu, Dechen [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན] and Nyetang, there were many groups of soldiers divided under Commanders (magji). We discussed and planned to hold the places in Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང]. All of them worked and fought in Kongpo and those places.   

**Q:**  At that time, had Namseling and two of them arrived at Lhoka?   

**A:**  Yes, they were in Lhoka. Their plan was to request the United States to support us with airdrops, and if we could get that, they were going to recruit 5,000-6,000 militia from [Tibetan villagers in] Lhoka. If they didn't get arms, it would be useless. So they were preparing for this. Athar and Lotse were sending wireless messages to the US. The US had a long-term view and first wanted to train the people, but we were thinking in a short-term way and they didn't know that. At first, they dropped guns called Tashi Kharing which held 5 bullets. This was just to be for training and they dropped about 20 sten-guns and some cannons. This was only meant for training, but we were fighting battles and needed the ]real] arms right away.   

**Q:**  So when Namseling was saying that he will recruit the local militia, what were you people going to do? Was Namseling thinking that the militia and your people would fight together?   

**A:**  If we could have arms, we were to fight together. Namseling couldn't give orders to us because we didn't all know about him. We only knew that he was a friend of Andru Jinda [Gombo Tashi], but we didn't know about his plans. In the Chushigandru, we had our own chiefs who led 5-10-50 soldiers and so on, and all of our volunteers bought their own guns and horses. So there was no basis for Namseling to give orders and ask us to follow his ideas. We were separate. Namseling was going to tell the misers that the Chushigandru was defending the religion and that they had to be patient towards them. They would issue receipts for the things that have been taken and in the future the government would take care of it. He was to prepare the militia. If the arms came, they would be given the arms and trained.   

**Q:**  Did the Khambas agree to that or not?   

**A:**  Since the arms support couldn't come, the plan was empty and there were also the disturbances in Lhasa. Since there wasn't any arms support, a militia would be useless. So the arms didn't come and the militia was also unable to be recruited. And by then, it was the time for the Dalai Lama to leave. So the two of them couldn't do anything with respect to their plan.   

**Q:**  Before you came to Drigutang, did you [already] talk about getting the arms from Ganden Chöngor and then just leaving Lhasa, and going to your homeland and fighting the battle there?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. This was impossible, because the Chinese made rumours in Lhasa saying that the Khambas and the Amdowas must go back home. The Khambas and the Amdowas were buying guns and horses. We were saying that we would not be allowed to stay in Lhasa, so we are going back home. At this time, the Chinese were making war in Kham and Amdo. So we were saying that we were going to buy guns and horses and were going back home. This was what we verbally said, but in reality, we didn't have any thought of going back home because we knew that it would be useless to go back.   

**Q:**  When you were in Drigu, did you send a message through Athar telling the U.S. to support you with many arms?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  What did the U.S. say?   

**A:**  We didn't know whether Athar delivered the message or not. Namseling and those people were also telling us that we have to send messages soon. We also said that we need the arms soon. If we didn't have the arms, it was not okay. We were telling them [Athar and Lotse] that we need the arms, but they were taking 15-20 bodyguards and going in the mountains when we were fighting the battles. So we did not meet them at all. They were secretly sending wireless messages and they were suspicious. Actually, they didn't need to suspect us, because we were fighting against the Chinese. There were many mistakes like this where they spoiled things various times. Actually, we needed the arms in an urgent manner. So if they had sent the wireless messages in an urgent manner saying that we had so many people making war but that there weren't any arms, they could have gotten the arms support. They [Athar rand Lotse] didn't do their job well. So we also had severe verbal fights on this matter.   

**Q:**  Later, I heard that there was kind of a contradiction between Namseling and the Khambas. What was the problem?   

**A:**  The contradiction was that Namgyal Dorje, Sandu Lo Nyendra, Jangtsa Chöndze and Namseling had a discussion and decided that the three of them would be sent to India [Namgyal Dorje, Sandu Lo Nyendra, Jangtsa Chöndze]. We were fighting the battles in Tsetang and everywhere.   

**Q:**  This was after Andrutsang went to Shang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was after I came back from the north and I was fighting in Tsetang. After they discussed this, they sent me a letter saying that these three people have to be sent to India and Namseling will be the leader in Lhagyari. Namgyal Dorje was going to make connections with the Guomindang and Jangtsa Chöndze would give propaganda about the plans of Chushigandru to the Tibetans living in India. Sandu Lo Nyendra was close to Gyalo Thondup so he would tell the entire situation to Gyalo Thondup in order to get support as soon as possible. However, Jangtsa Chöndze was supposed to be the tsondzin staying in charge in the main office as he had been appointed by Andru Jinda. Namgyal Dorje, Sandu Lo Nyendra and Baba Gen Yeshe didn't need to come to fight the battles but they were to send the reinforcements to the commanders. Jinda had told them, "Please don't sleep at night and send the reinforcements wherever they are needed and make the assignments for the troops." They were the best ones in our main regiment. But the three of them were going to be sent to India while the battles were being fought. They were in a hurry to go out.   

**Q:**  You said that they sent two messengers to you regarding the plan. What did the messengers say?   

**A:**  The messengers brought the letter in which it was written that the three of them would go to India and Baba Gen Yeshe and Namseling would stay in the main base and Namseling would be the leader. At that time, at the Tsetang battlefield, I called the 6 commanders and the gyagpön and told them about the letter and asked them their opinions. They said, "At this time, when we are fighting the battles, they are going to go away and flee to India because of being afraid for their lives. If they have lives, we also have lives. It is not at all okay if they go. We don't agree to this." So I sent a letter to them saying that we don't agree. After 10-15-20 days, the three of them just left for India. When they were about to reach India, the revolt took place in Lhasa. So I sent messengers to Lhasa and Kelsang Dramdrü sent a letter saying that the Dalai Lama said that it would be good if Radrü Ngawang can come to Norbulinga. However, I couldn't just leave. so we held a meeting at Headquarters and I told them that I have to go like this. So you people should work carefully. They said, "It is not okay at all if you go because we can't give orders here. You can send whichever one of us you want and give instructions regarding what we should do, but you can't go." Among them, there was a person called Aku Tsültrim who said, "Since you have collected their opinions, now you have to adhere to them. So you send whomever you want to send." Then I sent two magji right away and they went to get the horses from the estates. I wrote the letter and sent 2-3 messengers right away. The message said that "Lhoka is clean. No matter whatever direction the Dalai Lama would come, there is not a single Chinese there. You don't need to worry about this. They won't let me go because I have to give the orders here, but I am sending two magji." By that time, the Dalai Lama had already reached the Rama ferry site and met my messenger there. They delivered the letter to Kelsang Dramdrü, and the Dalai Lama said what is that for? Then they reported that it was the messenger sent by Radrü Ngawang. The Dalai Lama told them to bring the letter to him and he read it and said, "Now, it is very good." And he let my servant lead the Dalai Lama's horse. They sent the other messenger in a coracle with a message that the Dalai Lama was coming. As soon as the messenger arrived in Tsetang, I left with 3 commanders (magji) and about ten cavalry. Just after I crossed the river at Drachi and Dranang, I met the Dalai Lama there. The two magji that I sent for preparing the war were also there. That night, the Dalai Lama stayed overnight in the monastery in Drachi and Dranang. Then I took him [Dalai Lama] to Chongye Riwodechen and I led his horse. I have the photos of that. The reason why we were agitated was because we were saying that the Kudrak Namseling had done poorly sending Namgyal Dorje, etc. It made all of the people become discouraged and disappointed when they were fighting the battles. Like this, we rebelled against Namseling saying he is pro-Chinese. Then Phala said, "Namseling is my relative and I guarantee that he is not pro-Chinese." But he scolded Namseling saying, "Brother! You were wrong."   

**Q:**  This history is just like watching a movie. It is excellent. Thank you.   

