# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0012.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** November 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 66  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] was a Litang (Khamba) monk who became a monastic manager/trader (Tib. ཇིསོ) and then became one of the top military commanders in Chushigandru. In this interview, he first talks about the conversation between Phala and Andrutsang where Phala told Andrutsang to take care of Athar and Lotse, and that he hoped the Third World War would start. He also talks about how they hoped to recruit 10,000 militia from Lhoka if they got weapons. He details how the Chinese Tempa Dargye fled from Chushul, and Gombo TAsshi's expedition to Ganden Chöngor, the Dokarsumdo and Wuyug Dzomtang battles, and about how the military orders were passed down. He also explains his main duties as the Yeru Magji, and further describes the battle in Drigung Mashung where Andrutsang was wounded. Then he explains how he got separated from Andrutsang and the main force. Finally, he describes meeting Tsendrön Kelsang Ngawang in Lhasa and being sent to Lhoka with ammunition.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0012_06/H_0012_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Were you waiting for U.S. aid or what? Or were you hoping to get thousands of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> peasants to join the Tanglang Magar?   

**A:**  We had been hoping very much to receive the U.S. aid. Though the [Tibetan] government didn't clearly accept [Tib. ཁས་ལེན] Athar and Lotse, in the end, Phala told Andru Jinda that he should take good care of the two of them and make them do whatever work he wanted them to do. After that, Andru Jinda told the two them, "Now the Tibetan Government cannot tell you to do this and that. Phala told me that I could not speak on behalf of the Tibetan Government, I can only speak for myself." At that time, the CIA was telling the two of them for a year that they needed to got an answer from the Tibetan Government about making relations [between the U.S. and the Tibetan Government]. So Andru Jinda told Phala that they need an answer from the Tibetan Government. Phala said, "I can not tell you that the government has given an answer, but according to my own personal opinion, I am hoping for the Third World War to break out. Otherwise, I can't tell you anything about how the Tibetan government would be able to do this and that against the Chinese." Andru Jinda delivered this message to Athar and Lotse.   

**Q:**  Did two of them send the telegraph saying that?   

**A:**  Yes, they had to send the telegraph, but they didn't send that telegraph and instead they asked Andru, "What does that mean, what would the U.S. think if we sent that kind of a telegraph?" Jinda, however, told them, "You should send whatever the answer was through the telegraph. I didn't tell any lies in between."   

**Q:**  Were you hoping that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of Ü [Tib. དབུས] would join the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>?   

**A:**  The militia in Lhoka didn't have weapons except for a few people, so if they didn't have weapons, it would be useless to tell them that they should rise up. If we got U.S. weapons support through Athar and Lotse, we were hoping that the militia would be able to rise up.   

**Q:**  Were you hoping for a thousand person militia?   

**A:**  We were hoping for 10,000 militia fighters.   

**Q:**  When Andru Jinda went to the north, three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> were appointed, right? So for example, if the Derge regiment wanted to ambush a truck, could they decide to do this on their own? Or did they need approval from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>?   

**A:**  They had to get approval from the magji.   

**Q:**  What were your main duties at this time, as a Yeru Magji?   

**A:**  The main duty was to make war.   

**Q:**  Was that giving orders?   

**A:**  Before making war, we would discuss and divide the battlefields, and make the assignments for each magji. And we would discuss how many soldiers we should send.   

**Q:**  That was the order from the top commander to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After you left for Shang, what were the orders from the main regiment?   

**A:**  We were not able to make any contact with them. At that time, we didn't have telegraphs, wireless or telephones, and when we sent messengers they couldn't get through.   

**Q:**  Before you left Drigu, were there any orders?   

**A:**  There weren't orders to pass, because Andru Jinda was with us.   

**Q:**  What were they ordered to do in Lhoka after Andrutsang left?   

**A:**  There were a little more than a thousand soldiers in Lhoka, and there were new soldiers coming from Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, and some monks and soldiers were also coming from Lhasa. They had to make the arrangement for them regarding in which group they should join. Whatever plans that should be made was the duty of the three tsondzin.   

**Q:**  When you left for Shang, you said that there were about 4,000 pack animals and 900 cavalry. But were there really 4,000 pack animals?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have a single pack animal.   

**Q:**  Weren't there 500 mules?   

**A:**  Yes, every 10 soldiers had 5 mules for loading. 1,000 people had 500 mules.   

**Q:**  What was the route you took when you went to Shang? Did you go around Lake Yamdrotso [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག་མཚོ]? Where did you cross the river?   

**A:**  We went along Yamdrotso, and then we crossed the Gampa La Pass and then crossed the Chushul Tsangpo through the Nyabso [Tib. ཉ་སྲབ] ferry site.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there Chinese at the Nyabso ferry site?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How did you try to avoid having the Chinese find out about such a large force was moving? Did the Chinese know that you were going to Ganden Chöngor?   

**A:**  There was the Chinese defector, Lobsang Tashi, and another Chinese defector named Tempa Dargye [Tib. བཏན་པ་དར་རྒྱ] with us. Tempa Dargye fled from Chushul to Lhasa. He was not really a spy of the Chinese, as he was planning to go to India through Lhoka. He was a boyfriend of the woman nicknamed, Khata scarf brand [Tib. ཁ་བཏགས་ལན་པར]. He gave the woman several loads of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> coins. He was planning to go to India and enjoy himself. For that purpose, he surrendered to the Chushigandru. But he couldn't go through Bhutan, so he came in with Andru Jinda. After that, he had a negative thought and fled to the Chinese and informed the Chinese that Andru Jinda was going to Shang with 1,000 cavalry. He roughly knew that we were going to Shang.   

**Q:**  Did you carry your own food and animal fodder?   

**A:**  We carried food and fodder for 2-3 days. After that we had to buy them from the nomads and the farmers.   

**Q:**  When you went to Shang, did your main regiment go through Yangpajen and Shugola?   

**A:**  When we came back from Ganden Chöngor, we went through Yangpajen. When we went up to Shang, after the battle in Dokarsumdo, we were not able to go further so we came back and went through Shugola to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> Tanag. Then from there we went to Ganden Chöngor. When we came back, we had a battle at Wuyug Dzomtang and destroyed many Chinese trucks and killed many Chinese. We didn't have any casualties. After that we made war in Nyemo Thil. When we could not get out from Nyemo [to Lhoka], we crossed the small Karkhang mountain pass and went to Yangpajen. From Yangpajen, we went along the other side of the river where there wasn't any road, and crossed a mountain pass and went to Namtso [Tib. གནམ་མཚོ].   

**Q:**  In Yangpajen, you were with the main regiment, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Before that you had split up into two groups from Dokarsumdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese Tempa Dargye fled, what did you think?   

**A:**  We knew that he fled only after we arrived at Chushul so we sent 10-20 riders to chase him, but they didn't get him.   

**Q:**  In the life story of the Lobsang Tashi, he wrote that after the other Chinese fled, some people were also suspicious of him. Is that correct? When you knew that he deceived you, were you suspicious of Lobsang Tashi?   

**A:**  We were not suspicious of Lobsang Tashi, because we knew about him from Lhasa. But we thought that the other Chinese deceived us.   

**Q:**  When you arrived at Dokarsumdo were the Chinese waiting for you?   

**A:**  The Chinese were waiting at 9 places to ambush us. They had been waiting for 2-3 days. They sent soldiers after getting the information from that Chinese Tempa Dargye.   

**Q:**  Where is Dokarsumdo located?   

**A:**  It is located in Nyemo in this place on the map.   

**Q:**  How many days was it after you crossed the river to the Chinese ambush?   

**A:**  [Note: Misunderstands question]. We were not able to cross the river. So we went to the north to Namtso. After that we went to Reting.   

**Q:**  What exactly happened at the battle in Dokarsumdo. Was the main force attacked or just a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> patrol?   

**A:**  Two women came and delivered a message to Lonphel Tsültrim. Also there were three old men who had been spies of the Chinese who said that they didn't know of any Chinese around there. At that moment, some of our show-offish people said, "We came to fight with the Chinese, there is nothing to be afraid if there are Chinese." The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཡོན་རུ་དམག་སྤྱི] Commander of the Left Horn/Wing (in Chushigandru).">Yönru Magji</a> Lonphel Tsültrim was saying that according to the order of Andru Jinda, until our duty is accomplished, we shouldn't make war with the Chinese, we should try to avoid fighting and go around. Their duty was to get guns from Ganden Chöngor.   

**Q:**  When there were 9 places where the Chinese were waiting in ambush, did you fight at each of the nine places?   

**A:**  We just heard that in one area there were 9 places where the Chinese were waiting in ambush, but we didn't see that. We made war at the first, the second, and the third ambush place. Lonphel Tsültrim and 24 cavalries came up to the third place. When they came to the second place, we just fought with the Chinese. All of us were fighting together. When we came to the third waiting place, the Chinese attacked us.   

**Q:**  You couldn't see the Chinese because they were waiting for you in ambush, right?   

**A:**  We could see the Chinese, they were in bunkers.   

**Q:**  At first the Chinese started fighting, and then you started fighting back, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you in the group who was going ahead, when Lonphel Tsültrim and you were going separately?   

**A:**  I was with Andru Jinda in the main regiment.   

**Q:**  So, Lonphel Tsültrim was the first to fight with the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the Yönru Magji.   

**Q:**  How long did the battle take place?   

**A:**  They started fighting at about 8 in the morning, and then they fought the whole day. That night we were fighting and capturing the place. The next day we withdrew. The battle took place for a day and a night.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese ambushed, they didn't ambush the main regiment, right?   

**A:**  They ambushed the group that was going ahead.   

**Q:**  Were you surprised when you saw that the Chinese were waiting for you in ambush?   

**A:**  When the two women delivered the message to us that there were many Chinese there, Lonphel Tsültrim and his group were going along the other side of the river. As soon as the women delivered the message, Lonphel Tsültrim and his people climbed up the mountain, and went to seize the place. Lonphel Tsültrim and his people were shouting towards us, saying "The Chinese are going on the upper part of the valley above you."   

**Q:**  At that moment, they saw the Chinese going, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but actually that was not the Chinese, but was just sheep and goats of the nomads. When the women told them that there were Chinese, they thought that the sheep flock was the Chinese. After that, we climbed up the mountain where there were supposed to be Chinese. At that time, Andru Jinda told the Gaba Magji and us to go ahead and be careful and wait at a place. We were going on this side of the river and Lonphel Tsültrim and his men were going on the other side. I had a pair of binoculars, and I saw there were about 15-20 riders going ahead. They were Amdowas. They had swords and spears to carry, but most of them didn't have guns. Then I told my partners that they were Amdowas. After that about 25 riders went to Dokarsumdo.   

**Q:**  Were those your people?   

**A:**  No, those were under Lonphel Tsültrim.   

**Q:**  You saw that his soldiers were going, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I saw through the binoculars. The three old men said that they hadn't seen any Chinese and the people under Lonphel Tsültrim were boasting and saying that even if there are Chinese, we should fight, there is nothing to ask Andru Jinda about. When people told him that we have made up our mind to fight with the Chinese, he said "If we are afraid of the Chinese, we would not be here, so go ahead." Therefore, Lonphel Tsültrim himself went forward. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> people went up there and dismounted their horses, and sent 1-2 people to be scouts. At that point, Lonphel Tsültrim had arrived there and he was turning his horse around. The Amdo people told him that they had sent people to scout the area, so he should wait until they came back. At that point, Lonphel Tsültrim told them, "When I told you that you should be careful, you guys were the people saying that we should fight and charge forward. Why are you now holding back like the proverb,"Holding back the horses when you get on the river bank" [Tib. ཆུ་ཁ་སླེབས་དུས་རྟ་ཁ་འཐེན]? Now we should go." When they went up they didn't encounter Chinese in the first and the second waiting places. When they came to the third place, [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  Your people didn't see Chinese in the first and the second place, right?   

**A:**  The group going ahead didn't see the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese let them go?   

**A:**  Actually, the Chinese were supposed to let us go up to the 9th ambush site and then attack us. They planned to wipe out all of our people. The Chinese had set up artillery on the edge of a mountain, and as soon as the artillery sounded, they were to start shooting. Otherwise, they were not allowed to shoot.   

**Q:**  How did they fight at the third ambush site?   

**A:**  At that point, the Chinese were lying down in the corral, but our soldiers could see their wires for the telephone.   

**Q:**  Did you see that through the binoculars?   

**A:**  No. The soldiers under Lonphel Tsültrim saw that. As soon as the fighter saw the Chinese, he shouted "There are Chinese here."   

**Q:**  At that point, they had come near to the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that moment, Lonphel Tsültrim told them not to shoot, they were not supposed to shoot. But at that point, the Chinese soldiers who were on watch on the mountain pass fired artillery. That was the signal for attacking.   

**Q:**  That was at the third waiting place, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Actually, the Chinese were supposed to wait up to the 9th place, but when they knew that the Khambas saw them, they fired the artillery. In fact, Lonphel Tsültrim's soldiers didn't shoot the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  They didn't shoot.   

**Q:**  After the artillery was fired, they started shooting Lonphel Tsültrim's soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were 16 cavalries from Chantreng with the soldiers under Lonphel Tsültrim, and there were also 8 cavalries from Litang. Altogether, there were 24 cavalries. Except for 4 soldiers, all of them were killed in that battle.   

**Q:**  You were on the other side of the river and could see them fighting, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Chinese shoot at you also?   

**A:**  They were also shooting machine guns at us. They [Lonphel Tsültrim's men] were fighting the whole day from about 8 in the morning until it was almost dark. 24 of our soldiers killed 96 Chinese soldiers. We heard that from the nomads, the nomads were told to take care of the Chinese corpses. 4 [of 24] of them came back to the regiment.   

**Q:**  You could see them fighting from the other side of the river, but you were not able to go there, right? You guys were also fighting, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we were shooting at each other.   

**Q:**  How many were there on your side?   

**A:**  There were only 6 of us. The Gaba Magji Gelek Phüntso [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་ཕུན་ཚོགས] was with me. He was shot dead just near to me. The bullet hit here and came out from here. He was really a great hero. He had very deep faith in his protective talisman. He told me there would be no problem for him. I told him, "Now you get down and I will shoot; let's shoot by turns." But he was always saying "no problem." After that, his talisman was not able to protect him and he was shot dead.   

**Q:**  That was because he was too brave and he had too much faith in his talisman, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you saw that his talisman didn't work, were you afraid that yours also would not protect you?   

**A:**  I didn't know what kind of talisman he had. I had confidence in my own talisman.   

**Q:**  Did you still think that the talisman could protect you?   

**A:**  Yes, I was shot at many times by machine guns, but the bullets didn't hit my body.   

**Q:**  Did you see any Chinese get hit by your own gun?   

**A:**  When we fought at the first and second waiting places, there was a plain between the first and the second place. The Chinese were fleeing upwards on that plain. All of us were shooting together and we killed about 100-200 Chinese soldiers.   

**Q:**  Did you fire a bren-gun?   

**A:**  We didn't have bren-guns. All of us were shooting rifles.   

**Q:**  You shot the Chinese one by one, right?   

**A:**  Many people were shooting together. So one Chinese would be shot by 2-3 people. We couldn't tell who killed how many Chinese.   

**Q:**  You weren't hit by the bullets?   

**A:**  They were shooting me, but I didn't get hit.   

**Q:**  How long did your group fight?   

**A:**  We were also fighting from 8 in the morning until it became dark. At night we were not able to fight, we were just holding the captured place. Out of the 6 people [with me], only one was killed. On the other side of the river there were about 500-600 fighters under Lonphel Tsültrim. At that moment, Andru Jinda had also crossed the river.   

**Q:**  That was the main regiment, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where did the main regiment arrive?   

**A:**  They had arrived at Dokarsumdo where the soldiers of Lonphel Tsültrim were.   

**Q:**  Did the main regiment fight?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda and all of the people were fighting. There were 200-300 soldiers protecting the mountain pass on this side of the mountain. They were just capturing the place, and not making war.   

**Q:**  When you first saw the Chinese waiting for the ambush, did you think that you should change your plan?   

**A:**  I didn't see the Chinese, Lonphel Tsültrim saw the Chinese. They didn't have any time to think.   

**Q:**  Later, when the Chinese fought with your main regiment, did more Chinese come over?   

**A:**  There were six ambush sites to go beyond that. The Chinese were coming from the six ambush sites and they were fighting at the third site. After it became dark, they were not able to come down, and we were not able to go up the valley.   

**Q:**  After it became dark, naturally, the battle came to an end, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a river in Dokarsumdo, and when the Chinese got shot dead, their corpses were floating down the river. When we looked at the river from the other side, the river had become reddish with blood all along it for about one day's journey on horseback. In Dokarsumdo, 49 of our soldiers were killed, and there were about 60 were injured. About 200-300 Chinese were killed. We lost about 40-50 pistols and rifles but we got 200-300 pistols and rifles from the Chinese side.   

**Q:**  After that battle, did the Chinese withdraw?   

**A:**  The next day, we withdrew and passed the Shugola mountain pass. At the bottom of Shugola, we encountered some Chinese trucks again, so we withdrew from that place and crossed a mountain pass to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> Tanag [Tib. རྟ་ནག].   

**Q:**  Did you go to Tanag after the battle in Dokarsumdo?   

**A:**  Yes, we could not go directly.   

**Q:**  Actually, wasn't Shugola far away from Nyemo?   

**A:**  Yes, Shugola was a little bit far away from Nyemo. It was a two day journey on horseback. After crossing the Shugola Pass one will reach Yangpajen.   

**Q:**  So, you guys withdrew towards the north through Shugola, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After getting the guns from Ganden Chöngor, when you were going back to Lhoka, is it correct that you fought a battle at a ferry site in Lhoka?  

**A:**  That was the Nyemo ferry site battle.   

**Q:**  In that place, your route towards Lhoka was blocked, right?   

**A:**  We withdrew from that ferry site and crossed the mountain pass in Nyemo Karkhang and went to Yangpajen.   

**Q:**  After you were blocked, how did you change your plans?   

**A:**  We were not able to go to Lhoka, so we went back through Chang Namtso. And we made a plan to make war with the Chinese in the north.   

**Q:**  When you went to Yangpajen from the Nyemo ferry site, didn't you have to cross a mountain pass?   

**A:**  That was Karkhang Mountain Pass. From Karkhang, we came to Yangpajen. After that there were mountain passes and nomad places, but we didn't know the names of those places. There were no Chinese in those places, except for some Chinese planes that came.   

**Q:**  After the battle in Nyemo, you and Andrutsang were injured in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>, is that correct?   

**A:**  Yes. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Mashung both of us were wounded.   

**Q:**  Please tell us in detail how the two of you were wounded? When Andru Jinda was wounded? He was saying Ngawang Yeshe, was your full name Ngawang Yeshe?   

**A:**  My name is Ngawang Gungyen [Tib. ཀུན་མཁྱེན]. We went down through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Phowa Zangkhar [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་འཕོ་བ་ཛང་མཁར] and arrived at Drigung Thil. After that we came to the place called Drigung Lungshö [Tib. ཀླུང་ཤོད].   

**Q:**  You had come from Lask Namtso, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we came from Reting but we didn't pass the Khyungpo Jagsam bridge [Tib. ཁྱོང་པོ་ལྕགས་ཟམ]. We crossed the river in the upper part of Reting. Then we came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Lungshö. When we crossed a pass from Lungshö, we came to Mashung. That was the place where Andru Jinda got wounded. There were about a hundred Chinese cavalry waiting at Lungshö. Our advanced troop encountered the Chinese and they fought with them and killed many Chinese. And they got 30-40 horses from the Chinese cavalry. We stayed in Lungshö over night.   

**Q:**  Who were the advanced troops [Tib. སྔོན་འགྲོ]?   

**A:**  They were Litangba and Baba, and it included Litang Rarag and famous people like that. The Baba Magji was Gen Namgyal.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the advanced troop?   

**A:**  There were about a hundred riders.   

**Q:**  They fought with the Chinese in Lungshö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. One of our soldier was killed, and three of them were wounded. But they killed many Chinese soldiers and took 30-40 horses. They fought a very good battle. I was not there. I was behind them. Andru Jinda was going in between with the headquarters.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  When we arrived at the mountain pass of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Lungshö, there were many nomads. The nomad household heads delivered a message to us saying that from 5-6 days ago, there were Chinese going to the lower part of Mashung and making preparations.   

**Q:**  Was that a real message or what?   

**A:**  Yes, they gave the message to the advanced troop. At that moment, the advanced troop consisted of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>was and fighters from Targye Gomba. Then they and Andru Jinda held a meeting and Andru Jinda sent about ten Amdo riders to be on watch on this side of the mountain pass, and he sent Litang Aku Gyau and about ten riders to be on watch on the other side of the mountain pass. When we arrived there, they were holding a meeting. At that time, there was an old man among us who was from Ganzi. He was going into trance with Shungden [Tib. ཤུགས་ལྡན]. There was a trader of Andrutsang called Sonam Phüntso [Tib. བསོད་ནམས] who is now in Derhadun and he knew how to do the prayers for inviting the deity Shungden.   

**Q:**  Who was the medium?   

**A:**  He was an old man from Ganzi, I forgot his name. He was just saying that he was going into a trance with Shungden. When we were making war, he was going into a trance and doing something else. The medium went into a trance and said that today is the time for us to go down there. I, the ghost, will guarantee [Tib. འདྲེ་ངན་གྱི་ཁས་ལེན].   

**Q:**  Where did he mean down there?   

**A:**  He meant in Marshung where it was said that there were Chinese. The deity gave that prophecy. When I got there, I saw that a hundred advanced troops of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and Targye Gomba were going down according to the prophecy. Andru Jinda and all of the cavalry had stopped there. When they went down, the people who were on watch on the mountains saw the Chinese. They were shouting, "Don't go down, the Chinese are waiting there." So we had to send people to deliver the message telling them not to go. At that time, I looked through my binoculars and saw that the Chinese were shooting artillery and that they were standing up. Just after they said that there were Chinese there, they fired many artillery shells with the sound "Wong Wong Wong". They had set up about a hundred artillery pieces on both sides of the mountain. They were attacking us with artillery and we could shoot at them with the rifles.   

**Q:**  It was the Shungden, who told you guys to go forward, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Shungden was possessed with a Chinese ghost . At that time, the Chinese were not able to shoot accurately, and they were firing their artilleries a hundred yards beyond the target.   

**Q:**  Were they firing from thetop of the mountain?   

**A:**  Yes, they were firing from both sides of the mountain [below the pass]. So we had to flee upwards.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese attacked, had most of your troops gone down there?   

**A:**  Except for a hundred troops who went down, the other ones were on the upper part of the mountain.   

**Q:**  How many people had gone down when the Chinese started to fire?   

**A:**  About 100 cavalry had already gone down.   

**Q:**  The Chinese attacked them, right?   

**A:**  Not only that, they were firing towards us where Andru Jinda was.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese artilleries reach your headquarters?   

**A:**  Yes, they could reach it, but they were not able to take accurate aim. They were shooting a hundred yards beyond the target. Then all of us were running away upwards towards the mountain from Mashung. After that they were firing their artillery higher and higher. The whole area was filled with the dust of the artillery barrage. We were not able to see the Chinese to shoot at them. When I was going up there leading a horse, the saddle slipping down from the horse's back when I was putting on the saddle. After the smoke of the artillery barrage disappeared, I saw that the horses and the mules of Andru Jinda were hopping around. So I thought, Oh! Now Jinda might have been hit with the artillery shell, I felt extremely sad. When I went there, Rarag had also gotten hit with shrapnel. His face was bleeding. He said, "Now it is useless , Andru Jinda was hit with an artillery shell, now we have to die in a proper way."   

**Q:**  Was Rarag a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>?   

**A:**  No, he was a gyagpön. Then I told him that he should try to find a horse, and that I would go to have a look. When I got there, Jinda had fallen down. Just next to Jinda, there was an old man called Andru from Markham. He had gotten hit with the main artillery shell and his leg was blown off, but he was not dead. Also Andru Jinda and many others had gotten hit with by shrapnel. The old man was saying don't touch me, don't leave my gun here and he was pushing his gun forward. When I held up Andru Jinda, his eyes were covered with blood. I wiped Jinda's face with a woolen cap. He was looking at me and said, " You are Ngawang, right? [Ngawang Yeshe] The talisman protected me. I am okay. Go ahead and try to find some water." When the artillery shells were still coming forward with the sound "Sherr," there was a very good servant of Jinda called Tamdrin Wangyal [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན]. He was showing his thumb and pinky [a gesture made by the oracle when going into trance], and he was saying "Oh! The great deity Shungden has saved me" [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཤུགས་ལྡན་མཁྱེན]. After that, this servant brought some water and Jinda drank the water with the sound Gu, Gu, Gu. I asked Jinda, "Are you able to go up there to a corner of the mountain?" He said that he was able to go there. I picked up and held Jinda, and saw that all of his body had been hit with shrapnel. I tied him with a scarf where he was bleeding and the blood stopped. After we got to the corner of the mountain, we made a fire with some kind of plant [Tib. སུལུ]. My servant had a very good horse and he had butter in a container in his saddle bag, so we melted butter to stop the bleeding. In that corner there were a hundred riders. The artillery shells could not reach that place. At that moment, there was Kharchen Chandzö, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> of Gyeltang, and Kelsang Chömpel, the magji of Chantreng. The Baba magji Gen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> was injured. At that moment, Jinda told us that we should try to seize the mountain pass. Otherwise, if the Chinese would get to the top of the pass, not a single person would be able to survive. Even though Jinda was shouting like that, nobody was listening to him. All people were trying to run away on their own way. At that point, his order was not working. Therefore, Jinda told me that I should take as many people as I could and capture the mountain pass. If the Chinese got there [first], not a single one of us would be spared. Andru Jinda said that three times. I was thinking that Jinda would die, because he got hit with much shrapnel and I thought we should not bury his body. We should carry it with us. I never thought that my talisman would protect me, because it was spoiled [polluted] with Jinda's blood when I treated his wound.   

**Q:**  How did you treat his wound?   

**A:**  If one mixes <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> with the melted butter and applies it on the wound, it can stop the bleeding. At that point, the [other] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> told me to go up to the mountain pass. They were swearing by the three jewels that they would not leave Andru Jinda alive or dead, unless all of them were wiped out. Jinda told me that he will be okay, and that "You should take as many people as you can and go up to the mountain pass." He told me to take his gun which was very precious to him, but I said I was not going to take his gun. I had an English 303 carbines, two cartridge belts full of bullets, a sten-gun and a pistol. I took over my servant's good horse. There was another Litangba called Shalotsang Chöndze who said that he would go with me. After that, I gave an order calling on all of the people to go to capture the mountain pass. I told them that if the Chinese got on the mountain pass, not a single person would survive. Then there were about a hundred riders following me.   

**Q:**  At that point, they accepted your order, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You left Jinda over there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I took the hundred riders with me. When we went up, the horses had to take a rest because they could not go for a long time [uphill]. Then I gave them an order. "First, I will go up the mountain pass and everyone should follow me. If I should be killed, all of you should pile up the corpses one upon another. You should never withdraw from this place. If the Chinese get on the pass, all of us will die." All of them said, "No problem." Then when we went up to the pass. My horse was good as was Shalotsang's. So the two of us got on the mountain pass first. I left my horse there, and went on the pass [on foot]. At that point, the Chinese were setting up their guns on the ground and they were coming up. We encountered the Chinese on the mountain pass at the same time.   

**Q:**  At that moment, there was only the two of you, right?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there was only the two of us. Later on, many people also came up. I shot my sten-gun immediately. The Chinese were not able to shoot because they were coming up walking. When I shot them, they were running away here and down there. Some of them got shot. If we could go further, we would be able to seize the place.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Chinese shoot at you?   

**A:**  At first they were not able to shoot, as they were running away. After that, many Chinese came up, and then they were shooting from two sides. When we were shooting at each other, I got hit with many bullets.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese were you able to kill?   

**A:**  Several Chinese fell down, but I was not able to count them. And many of them were running along the corner of the mountain. After that, the two of us were able to seize the place. When we were shooting at each other, the mountain pass was enveloped in dust.   

**Q:**  At that moment, did you get hit with the bullets?   

**A:**  Yes, I got hit with many bullets. That night I got hit with 16 bullets. One bullet hit between my thumb and index finger, and was bleeding so I tied up the wound and stopped the bleeding. The other bullets hit on my back, ribs, stomach and hips, but I was protected from all of them by my talisman.   

**Q:**  Actually, your body was spoiled with Jinda's blood, but the talisman still protected you, right?   

**A:**  Not only Jinda's blood, I got polluted with the Chinese troops blood also.   

**Q:**  Didn't you think that the talisman would not protect you?   

**A:**  Yes, I didn't have faith in the talisman at that point. It was only the next day that I knew how many bullets hit me. When we were fighting, it became dark, so I couldn't see it. The next day, I knew that I was hit with 16 bullets that night and two bullets during daytime.   

**Q:**  Were there any traces of the bullets?   

**A:**  In some parts of my body, there were reddish blisters. In some other parts there were bruises. Some of the bullets were stuck in me and I could just pull them out. One bullet hit my back and blood was coming out of my mouth.   

**Q:**  You were able to count the bullets from the traces, right?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda's wound was treated and they left that place. When the two of us were lying there in the dust and shooting the Chinese, the other people thought that the two of us had been killed. After Jinda left, the other people left also.   

**Q:**  How did that happen, tell me in detail.   

**A:**  That was the way that we got separated.   

**Q:**  The other people took Jinda with them, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They took Jinda on horseback, and there were many cavalry with him.   

**Q:**  At that moment, did you fall down?   

**A:**  I didn't fall down. The two of us were capturing that place. That was in the late evening. The people who were behind us thought that two of us had been killed.   

**Q:**  When the two of you were lying down, they thought that you were killed, and they left you, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Your partner was Shalotsang Chöndze, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that moment, it became dark, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you came back, all of the other people had already left, right?   

**A:**  There were 4 riders still waiting at the corner. We asked them what they were doing? One of them was a little bit related to me, and he said, "We thought you might be coming, so we were waiting for you." I asked them where the horses were and they said, "Your partners were sure that you were killed, so they took your horses with them." They were saying two different things [lying]. I told them, if they were sure that I was dead, why were they waiting for us? Actually, the four of them were also left behind, and when they came to that place, they saw that the Chinese were there, so they were hiding there.   

**Q:**  What happened later on?   

**A:**  Then all of us discussed what to do. At that moment, the Chinese were shooting signal flare guns. That was on the 28-29 Tibetan date, so it was dark. Then we told the four of them to go ahead, we could see where Jinda's wound had been treated, so we said we would take two horses and follow them. But they said that "Two people could ride a horse together, let's go together." I told them that that would not be okay, "You guys go ahead." Then the two of us rode a horse and a mule and came up again. At that moment, we encountered the Chinese. I dismounted my horse and I was ready to fire my sten-gun. The Chinese were speaking Chinese to us. Then the two of us started to shoot the Chinese, and we were started shooting at each other. We could see the faces of the Chinese in the flashes from the firing in the darkness.   

**Q:**  Did you see whether the Chinese got hit with the bullets?   

**A:**  No, we just saw their faces in the flash of the gunshots at night. After that, when the Chinese shot a signal flare gun, I saw that 3-4 Chinese had been killed in that place, and among these there was the soldier who was firing the bren-gun. At that moment, two of our horses had already been killed, so I dragged down that bren-gun. Again the Chinese were shooting us. At that point, I was shot on my back. There is a difference in getting protected by the talisman depending on the power of the gun. At that moment, I fell down when I was shot on the back, but we were still shooting at the Chinese. At that point, the Chinese were coming near to us and I thought I might get captured by the Chinese. When I didn't have time to shoot, I thought of using my sword for killing the Chinese or killing myself.   

**Q:**  Did you take out your sword?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. After that, when they fired the signal gun, I found that there were no Chinese there. Then when I checked the bren-gun, I found that the bullet holder was missing, so I threw the bren-gun down. Then the two of us went the whole night lying down while the Chinese were shooting signal flares. Then two of us came to the bank of a lake on the mountain. I drank some lake water, which made me unable to move. I felt like my blood [flow] was blocked. That lake water had a problem. We were going around there for 4 nights and 5 days without any food. That was the place around <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Lungshö.   

**Q:**  You came from Namtso to Lungshö, right?   

**A:**  That was not the real Namtso lake, that was just a small lake on the mountain. After that the two of us were not able to go any more.   

**Q:**  Were you bleeding?   

**A:**  My wound stopped bleeding. There was a type of plant used for starting fires [Tib. སུལུ] and there were alpine willow trees in that place. And there were many rocky mountains. We spent the night in that place.   

**Q:**  There were no Chinese in that place, right?   

**A:**  At night, there were no Chinese in that place. The next morning at dawn, when I looked at the mountains around us through my binoculars, I saw neither the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> nor the Chinese. Then when we came down slowly, we found that there were some households, and we saw a large plume of smoke rising from a household. Just after that, I heard a sound of a whistle from the Chinese. They were thinking that the Chushigandru might come down from this area and they were waiting in that place. The Chinese were drinking tea and they were coming up.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese see you?   

**A:**  No, they were not able to see us, but we could see them. They were drinking tea and a holding meeting. Probably, there were about 200-300 soldiers. About 200 soldiers were going towards <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Thil, and about 100 soldiers were coming up towards the place where the two of us were staying. Actually, they didn't have a reason to come to this mountain area. In case they would come near to us, the two of us had made up our minds to destroy ourselves as well as others [if they were noticed]. We didn't dare to shoot them. If we had shot at them we could have killed as many as we wanted. They were going upwards. I looked at the traces where I had gotten shot. Shalotsang Chöndze Tsempel's clothes were torn up with bullets, but not even a single bullet had hit his body.   

**Q:**  That means he had much a more effective talisman, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Your talisman was also very good. How could people believe you if you tell those things?   

**A:**  After the Chinese went up, a plane was flying quite low. We were saying that we could shoot the plane if we fired. But how could we dare to shoot. Actually, it was for watching where Andru Jinda was going. Andru Jinda and those people crossed the mountain pass went down to Lharigo.   

**Q:**  Only the two of you were left there?   

**A:**  Yes. They had been sure that we were dead.   

**Q:**  If you had been able to go back to Lhoka via the Nyemo ferry site without encountering the Chinese, what was the plan?   

**A:**  We got all of the weapons from the Tibetan government, and we were planning to take them to Lhoka. That was because the soldiers of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> needed weapons and it was impossible for us to recruit militia if we didn't have weapons [to give them]. For that reason, we were definitely planning to take the weapons to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  After you fainted and then woke up at the pass and found everyone had moved on, tell me about that again? What did you think when you woke up?   

**A:**  I got hit with a lot of bullets, and I fainted and fell down. When Shalotsang Chöndze was still shooting, the time was very late and there were about 100 riders behind us. Our partners were sure that the two of us were dead and went away after Andru Jinda left,. They also took our horses with them.   

**Q:**  After you woke up, why did you decide to organize a regiment in Phembo and go to Lhasa to ask for guns rather than just go back to Lhoka?   

**A:**  The two of us were left on the mountain pass in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> for 6 days and nights. We didn't have food, so we were not able to go forward. After that, we met some nomads from Drigung Yangri Monastery, and they gave us butter, dried cheese and tsamba. After we got the food, we met one of our people called Changnang. The nomad had an [extra] horse and Changnang had an [extra] mule, so the three of us had horses to ride. Then we went to Yangri Monastery. At that time, the monastery was holding a prayer assembly. We went to the monastery at night. The main lama of Drigung, the Drigung Kyamgön, was then about 11-12 years old. That was the lama who is now living in Ladakh. We asked them to do divination [Tib. མོ] regarding the injured Andru Jinda, and they suggested that we perform many rituals.   

**Q:**  What did you ask them to do divination for?   

**A:**  We told the lama that our leader Andru Jinda was wounded by artillery fire, so we asked whether his life was in danger. The result of the dice was number 8. He said that his life is in great danger. Then we told the lama that we would perform whatever rituals that need to be done. So he suggested many rituals to perform. After that, he did another divination and the dice number was 13. He said that the life of Andru Jinda is tied to the pillar, and the monastery will perform many rituals like the Sangjö Chilu [Tib. བཟང་སྤྱོད་འཆི་བླུ] in the monastery while they were holding the prayer assembly. They also said that many animals should be saved by buying the animals scheduled to be slaughtered. They were asking us whether we could do that or not. We told him that we can do that in Lhasa, because there were some people [we knew who were] staying in Lhasa. At that point we didn't know where to go. We had to keep the secret, so we handed the lama three pebbles, one white, one black and one yellow, and we told him to do the divination too see which of the pebbles would be better. We decided to act according to the results of the divination. The lama said that the yellow pebble would be better. The white one was for going wherever Andru Jinda was staying. The black one was for going to the north again. The yellow one was for going to Phembo. Therefore we decided to go to Phembo. However, it would be useless to just stay in Phembo as we had to know about the situation in Lhasa and the whereabouts of the Andru Jinda. And we had to send messengers to the main [Chushigandru] regiment in Lhoka. So I went directly to Sera monastery where one of my relatives was living. I left my horse and the rifle there, and took my pistol and went to Lhasa wearing a monk's robe. In those days, my head was shaved. The mother and the daughter of Shalotsang were staying in Ramoche in Lhasa. So we went to their home.   

**Q:**  When you came to Lhasa, how was the situation? What did you think about helping to take the Dalai Lama out in 1958?   

**A:**  We didn't think about helping to take the Dalai Lama out in 1958. When Shalotsang and I went to Lhasa, Phala sent the message through Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi saying that the Dalai Lama would not be able to stay in Lhasa, what is your opinion? The two of us were thinking that "The Dalai Lama is the heart of the political and religious leadership of Tibet, and we were working hard for him. If he was in danger, you guys should be able to hand him to us outwardly, internally and secretly [Tib. ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གསུམ], and e will take him to Lhoka."   

**Q:**  Did Phala tell you to go to Lhoka?   

**A:**  No. He just told me to go outside of Lhasa, but he didn't tell me to Lhoka. He told me that all of a sudden. Actually, according to our plan that was discussed with Phala, Gusung Depön, Depön Tashi Bera and Kelsang Dramdrü, we needed to get 500 English 303 carbines, 18 sten-guns and 6 cannons from the Tibetan government. And we were also requesting an audience with the Dalai Lama. Phala had accepted all of these requests. He asked us, "If we give you the guns, how are you going to take them?" We told him that "We will take the weapons by pretending we are stealing them, so please tell us where we can get the weapons and then we will pretend to steal them." Then Phala asked who would take the weapons? We told him that we would arrange for some monks we knew in Sera <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་པོ་རག] A medium size khamtsen in Loseling College in Drepung Monastery.">Bombora</a> Khamtsen who were from Litang and Chantreng.   

**Q:**  From where you were supposed to take the weapons?   

**A:**  They didn't mention the place.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1958?   

**A:**  Yes, that was when two of us were in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were you able to get those guns?   

**A:**  No. One day all of a sudden Phala sent Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi. They brought bread and tea, a blessed ribbon from the Dalai Lama, the talisman <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Mahe and 10-20 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> of Tibetan currency. The message was that the two of us should leave Lhasa as soon as possible because the situation was very tense. But we didn't know what the tense situation was. Was it because our secret was revealed? That was not the case. The two of us had many partners who were the scattered soldiers of the Chushigandru. So we sent them out of Lhasa, but the two of us didn't leave Lhasa. We were saying that we wouldn't leave until we got information. We sent Chödrag [Tib. ཆོས་གྲགས], the trader of Andrutsang, to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Kelsang Ngawang who was a very close friend of Andru Jinda. Kelsang Ngawang said, "Whatever Phala told you was consulted with me, so you don't need to be suspicious. You two didn't reveal the secret. The situation is tense and you should be careful outside. We will be careful inside". Kelsang Ngawang sent us 1,600 bullets. He also didn't mention the reason for this.   

**Q:**  After going outside, did you plan to make war?   

**A:**  Yes, we planned to fight.   

**Q:**  What was the plan?   

**A:**  There were about 30 scattered soldiers from Kham, and we set up a regiment in Phembo. We planned to destroy the power station in Dogde [Tib. དོག་བདེ]. We only had about 30 people, so the plan was also small. After we came to Phembo we recruited some soldiers and then we had 62 soldiers. On the 25th of the 10th Tibetan calendar, on the Death Anniversary of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a>, my elder brother Sonam Phüntso, Gyagpön Kelsang Dramdrü, and Wangden Tashi sent a messenger to deliver a letter to me. In the letter it was written that "According to the result of divination, you must try to go back to Lhoka through Chushul. 105 Chinese trucks arrived at Lhoka on the 16th of the 10th month. And they were planning to go back again." They were planning to capture Lhoka by sending the troops and the weapons to Lhoka. After that I decided to go to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Did you receive a message from Lhoka for returning to Lhoka?   

**A:**  We didn't have any contact with Lhoka. That was the message from Lhasa, as I mentioned above.   

**Q:**  After receiving the message, why did you decide to go to Lhoka?   

**A:**  That was because of the divination and their plan. It had become very important to go to Lhoka. So we gave up the plan of attacking the power station in Dogde. We received the messenger on the 25th, and we left Phembo on the 29th of 10th Tibetan month and went through Chushul to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  What did you find there? What had happened since you and Andrutsang had gone to Shang? You said that the main base had split into two factions, so who was in charge?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda was not there. He went directly to Jagra Pemba [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར].   

**Q:**  You were alone, right?   

**A:**  There were about 60-70 riders with me after we made the war in Gongkar. When we arrived at Chongye Riwodechen [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས་རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན], we met Seysey from Targye Gomba with about 100 riders. They told me that the main regiment and Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje didn't get along well.   

