# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0012.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** November 2002  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] was a Litang (Khamba) monk who became a monastic manager/trader (Tib. ཇིསོ) and then became one of the top military commanders in Chushigandru. In this interview, he first describes fighting in the north and his travelling to E Lhagyari. He also comments on his status with Andrutsang and his other peers, and then he discusses the political maneuverings of Jagö Namgyal Dorje, Chamdo Dotse, and Namseling. He also describes the Dalai Lama's leaving Tibet, and the actions of Chushigandru, the CIA's attempt to train 60-70 Tibetans for covert actions, and his experiences trying to organize and supply a small army. Finally, he describes how the Khambas tried to stop the Dalai Lama from returning in 1956 by trying to launch a revolt in Yadong.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0012_07/H_0012_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  At that moment, I felt very sad, because, I was trying to prepare a war as soon as I arrived in Lhoka. Many Chinese trucks were coming to Lhoka, and the Chinese were a danger in Lhoka and Lhasa. After that, I led 10 riders and went to the main regiment directly. The main regiment had been moved to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> and then to E Lhagyari.   

**Q:**  The main regiment was not in Drigu, right?   

**A:**  They had moved to Lhagyari. I arrived at Lhagyari on the 15th of the 11th Tibetan calendar. On the 16th we held a meeting. All of the Tsondzin who were appointed by Andru Jinda were in the main regiment. I explained at the meeting the thinking of Andru Jinda, and how we fought the battles and our plans. They were very respectful to me, and they regarded me very highly. That was because they had received a letter from Andru Jinda in which it said, "The survival of Radrü Ngawang and Shalotsang Tsempel made me so happy, like a thousand soldiers had survived. The two of them were not scattered casually, they had been scattered because of the wrong planning of the main regiment."   

**Q:**  They had received the letter before you arrived there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Because of that they were very glad, and another thing was because we destroyed about 20 trucks in Gongkar. So they were regarding me almost like Andru Jinda. I told them "All of us have to sacrifice everything to fight the Chinese and safeguard the security of the Dalai Lama. These two are our only duty. The reason why they didn't get along well, was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje and 600-700 riders were sent from the main regiment to Dakpo to bring back Andru Jinda. After they arrived at Dakpo, they were not able to go immediately. They had to stay in Dakpo for many months, which caused a lot of trouble to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>s of Dakpo. Therefore, the elderly miser of Dakpo made a report to the main regiment. It was written in the report, "We will supply whatever food for the people and the fodder for the horses, but if the troops remain in Dakpo for such a long time, that would cause difficulties to us. So we request the main regiment to withdraw them back to Lhoka". After receiving this report, the main regiment told Namgyal Dorje that they should either go as soon as possible to receive Andru Jinda, or they should come back to the regiment. Therefore, they were angry with it, and they swore by the three jewels saying that they would either receive Andru Jinda, or they would never return to the regiment until they became wiped out or dead.   

**Q:**  Did they send a reply to the letter?   

**A:**  Yes, that was written in the letter. Therefore, it became like they didn't get along well.   

**Q:**  Who wrote them the letter?   

**A:**  That was written by Jangtsa Chöndze and those people in charge of the main regiment.   

**Q:**  When you got to the regiment, they had already sent the letter, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they had already received the reply. At that point, I told them that it would be useless to remain like that. "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje had many tough people and good horses, so if we have to make war, it would not be okay if we do not gather together. We have to send people to talk with Namgyal Dorje." When we were discussing that matter at the meeting, I suggested that, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lonyendra, Baba Gen Yeshe, and Chamdo Dotse should try to go to Dakpo.   

**Q:**  For what they were supposed to go?   

**A:**  That was for talking with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje and telling him to come back to the main regiment. Gen Yeshe had arrived at Lhoka not long ago, and Lonyendra arrived after I came to Lhoka. Lonyendra said, "It will not be convenient for us to go because Gen Yeshe and I had never gone through any hardship [combat]. You Radrü Ngawang must go to talk with him, and Chamdo Dotse must accompany you. You should take two servants and leave as soon as possible." Therefore, I accepted to go to Dakpo with Chamdo Dotse and two servants, and left Lhoka for Dakpo. When we crossed a mountain pass of Dakpo and went down the downhill, I saw there were 8-10 riders coming up. They were from Ganzi, they said that "Namgyal Dorje has already crossed the river and left to bring back Andru Jinda, it would be useless for you guys to go there." I asked them "Where did they go?" They said that they went to Wölga Chöling [Tib. འོལ་དགའ་ཆོས་གླིང], and they were going to stay there. After that, I came back to the main regiment and we consulted about that matter. I heard that if we crossed the Rong Lukhang or Gepa [Tib. གད་པ] ferry site, we would reach Wölga Chöling directly. So two of us went to that place. On the way, we came to an estate that belonged to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, that was located near Lhagyari, and we had to stay there overnight. Namseling was staying in his estate. He invited us to dinner and we were talking about the battle in Gongkar. I told him that I am going for that purpose. He said that it would be good to get along well. After that, when we went to Wölga Dzingche [Tib. རྫིང་ཆེ], where all of the soldiers of Namgyal Dorje had arrived.   

**Q:**  Then you met with them, right?   

**A:**  Yes, if I can tell you briefly?   

**Q:**  Please do not tell briefly. Please elaborate as much as you can.   

**A:**  Then Chamdo Dotse and I told them to hold a meeting, as we had to talk with them. The meeting was held in the upstairs assembly hall of the Wölga Chöling Monastery where the elderly monks used to hold meetings. There was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje, Litang Alo Dawa [Tib. ཟླ་བ], Phuma Rignam [Tib. ཕུ་མ་རིག་རྣམ], who was the Pön of Derge, Bachung Pön [Tib. སྦ་ཆུང་དཔོན], etc. It was all of the great people. There were people from Chamdo, Chantreng, Markham and Traya. All together there were about 600-700 riders. I told them about Andru Jinda completely, in detail. And I told them about the danger in Lhoka, and about the Chinese trucks and soldiers arriving in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Where did the Chinese bring their troops?   

**A:**  They brought their troops to Tsetang.   

**Q:**  Did you know the amount of Chinese soldiers brought there?   

**A:**  Kelsang Dramdrü knew that in one group there were 105 trucks with soldiers, ammunition and food. I told them that "Andru Jinda is important, but how are you planning to go, not knowing exactly the whereabouts of Andru Jinda? Even if you could go down there, how are you going to come back? The horses will be exhausted. Andru Jinda had already changed horses with the misers [so there won't be more available]. So you should send a messenger and be careful. If Andru comes this to side, and if you go to that side, Andru Jinda will have to send people to bring you guys back." The meeting was held for three days. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje and his people had already sworn that either they would bring back Andru Jinda or they would never return until all of them are dead.   

**Q:**  Were they insisting on saying that again?   

**A:**  Yes, they did not listen to us. So I went to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje late in the evening as he was the main person. I told him, let's go out for a while, so we went to a small fence in a field. I told him that we would have to swear. He said okay. Then we took off our amulets [Tib. གའུ]. I said, "I have something to tell you, I didn't even tell my relatives and the people who we eat with. I didn't even tell Alo Dawa who is here. I am telling you this, and you should keep this in your mind for consideration, and you should swear that you will never tell this to anybody." Then we swore by putting our guns on our heads. That was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>'s custom. Then he asked me what was the matter. I told him, "You should think carefully. Andru Jinda is very important, and the people who are with Jinda also have relatives. I am not telling you that they are not important. But the most important is the Dalai Lama. He can no longer stay in Lhasa. So, if we are not able to make a good plan in Lhoka, and if the regiment in Lhoka were to become scattered, we would be defeated very easily. If the regiment is destroyed, then everything is useless. Therefore, you should think about that carefully." Then he said, "Oh! Your talk is very good, if this is the case, tomorrow you and Chamdo Dotse should make a suggestion and I will say that I agree with you". The next day, we held the meeting. Namgyal Dorje praised me very much saying that I had been to the north with Jinda and about the battle in Gongkar, and he said that I was very famous. Then he told us,"Today, Dotse and you should give us orders or instructions, and we don't have any choice but to accept them. We should not think about the small matters". At that moment, all of the people were looking at Namgyal Dorje's face. Then I told them, "We don't have any order to pass on. You guys should swear that you will agree with whatever Namgyal Dorje tells you." Then I took down a statue of Buddha, and I told them, "Chamdo Dotse and I came here for the common cause. We didn't have any private purposes." Chamdo Dotse and I put the statue on our heads, then I put that statue on all of their heads. That was swearing that we would trust each other. After that, I told them "Andru Jinda is important, and the main regiment is in great danger. And it is dangerous for the Dalai Lama to stay in Lhasa. If we cannot make a good plan in Lhoka, I swear by the three jewels that it will destroy ourselves as well as others. We knew the matter and came here for this purpose". Then all of them were telling me to give the order. I told them that I didn't have any order to give but that "We should hold a meeting. You guys have sworn by the three jewels that you are not going to the main regiment, so we should get together at the Rong Lukhang ferry site [i.e., another nearby place]." Everyone agreed on that and all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> and the soldiers moved to the Rong Lukhang ferry site. We held the meeting at the Lukhang ferry site on the 1st to the 6th of the 12th Tibetan month.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1958?   

**A:**  That was in January 1959 [10-15 January 1959]. After that, all of us gathered together and divided the troops for making war. We planned to build a regiment in the area from Gongkar upwards and from Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང] downwards. Then soldiers had to go to Rama ferry site. Alo Dawa was appointed as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and he was sent to Samye. We sent about 300-400 riders from Chamdo, Derge and Markham to Wölga Dzingche. That was for making guerrilla warfare in Kongpo Gyashing, Bala, and Nyingtri [Tib. ཉིང་ཁྲི]. That was to start fighting as soon as possible without taking rest and looking at the situation.   

**Q:**  That was dividing and assigning the troops for guerilla warfare, right?   

**A:**  And we arranged sending the defense troops in Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] and Tsang.   

**Q:**  Who was sent to Nangkartse?   

**A:**  Lama Adru from Traya, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lekshey and Minyag Abo Yönden. They led 150 riders. In those places we had to send troops to be on watch, as there was not much danger of war. Litang Magji Kunga Samden [Tib. kun dg'a bsam gtan], Chamdo Magji Changri Lhagyal [Tib. བྱང་རི་ལྷ་རྒྱལ] and Derge Magji Chudo Pön were assigned to defend the area from Gongkar Dzong up to Nyetang. They were to make guerilla warfare against the trucks coming from Tölung Tsurphu.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers did they have?   

**A:**  They had about 700 soldiers under the three magji. Magji Lingtsang Yarnang Wangyal [Tib. གླིང་ཚང་ཡར་ནང་དབང་རྒྱལ], he was sent there later on. There were also 100 riders with Litang Alo Dawa who were sent to Samye. And we were assigned to fight in Tsetang.   

**Q:**  Who was with you?   

**A:**  There were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> Seysey and Pachen [Tib. དཔའ་ཆེན] from Taryge Gomba, Traya Ngawang Yönden and Baba Gen Ale. We were assigned to make war in Tsetang. We had about 500 cavalry. We made the war in Tsetang on the 10th of 12th Tibetan month.   

**Q:**  That was in the year 1958, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [Note: It was actually 19 January 1959] The other people were also fighting in the places where they were assigned.   

**Q:**  Were all of the other soldiers making war at that time?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the Chinese soldiers come to where they were making war?   

**A:**  Yes. The Kongpo area was filled with Chinese cavalry.   

**Q:**  Generally speaking did all of them fight almost at the same time?   

**A:**  There was only 1-2-3-4 days difference, it was almost at the same time.   

**Q:**  Why did you leave Lhasa in a very urgent manner?   

**A:**  They didn't mention clearly what was the urgent matter. Only after did we learn that the urgent matter was that when they held the morning tea ceremonial Drungja in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, all of the kalön attended. When they held the Drungja, the officials above the third rank, for monk officials the Khenche [Tib. མཁན་ཆེ] and for lay officials the kalön, would attend inside the assembly hall. The officials below the fourth rank would attend outside at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> ga.   

**Q:**  Inside and the outside would not attend that ceremonial together, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**A:**  When they were holding the Drungja, some of the Chinese official came there all of a sudden.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1958?   

**A:**  Yes, that was at the end of 1958. The Chinese came all of a sudden and they said, "We have arrested Andru Gombo Tashi, what is your opinion for punishing him"?   

**Q:**  The Chinese asked who?   

**A:**  They asked the Kashag at the place where they were holding the Drungja. Probably, the officials above <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> were there. At that moment, Phala Drönyerchemmo was very much scared. He never thought that the Chinese were telling a lie. He thought they were telling the truth. Phala told me later on that, the moment he saw the image of Andru Jinda was like seeing him in a movie, and his hair was standing up, like erect. At that time, the kalön probably could not give an answer for a while. At that moment, Tsendrön Kelsang Ngawang told the Chinese, "You were able to correctly arrest Andru Jinda [Tib. མ་ནོར་བ]. He is the main leader of the reactionaries, and he is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> of the Chushigandru. So first you should hand over Andrutsang to the government of the Dalai Lama." Then the Chinese said, "If we hand him over to you, what are you going to do with him?" Kelsang Ngawang said, "We can punish him slowly. First we should tell him to send letters to all of the reactionaries telling them to surrender. After all of them have surrendered, the Chinese and the Tibetans can punish him according to the law." So, the Chinese didn't give any answer and went back. Later I heard that Phala and Kelsang Ngawang consulted, and they were thinking that the Chinese would take Andru Jinda around <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street. At that time, Shalotsang Tsempel and I were staying in Ramoche, so they thought that the two of us might rush forward [Tib. མཆོང] against the Chinese. That was possible because of a strong feeling of sadness. Therefore it would be dangerous for us, so they decided to send the two of us to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  So it was for that reason that Kelsang Ngawang sent the message through Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We learned about that later on. Later on, Phala was glad because our work was done well. I asked him what the urgent matter was? Why didn't he support us with the weapons? And he told us the matter above. After about 10 days, a messenger [Tib. ཨ་དྲུང] came from Lharigo. Andru Jinda sent a snuff box in which he put a letter to Phala. The messenger told about how Andru Jinda was injured but later he got better. And it was also written in the letter.   

**Q:**  From where did Andru Jinda send that letter?   

**A:**  From Lharigo. After that, they were relaxed. Otherwise, the government was sure that Gombo Tashi was arrested. They never thought that the Chinese had told a lie.   

**Q:**  Was Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje the son of the Jagö Tomden [Tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན]?   

**A:**  He was not the son of Tomden, he was one of the cousins [Tib. ཚ་བོ] of the Jagötsang family.   

**Q:**  Why did one group stay in Drigutang and one go to Lhagyari?   

**A:**  The regiment in Drigu moved to Lhagyari.   

**Q:**  So there weren't two groups, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You talked about meeting Gen Yeshe and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lonyendra for two days when you were so unhappy over an event and you had to cry, so please tell me about this in detail. What were the main points?   

**A:**  I didn't meet the two of them. I felt great regret in Chongye Riwoche and I had tears in my eyes because we had thought that the main regiment was doing well, and we never thought that they became split into two groups.   

**Q:**  Why did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje say that he would not listen to the main base?   

**A:**  They had arranged for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje to go to bring back Andrutsang. He accepted that, and they had already sent him, but they stayed for many months in Dakpo.   

**Q:**  The reason for not listening to the main base, was because they had sworn not to return to the base, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You said that an issue was that the misers were angry because the Khambas were taking things from them and you were so angry and disappointed that you were going to take your regiment and go somewhere else on your own, but they said don't do that. Is that correct?   

**A:**  Yes, in Chongye Riwodechen, Kunga Samden, Changri Lhagyal, Seysey, Chudobu and I held a meeting. The regiment under Kunga Samden stayed in the place called Narag in Chongye for a couple of days. They were saying that the household Naragtshang was a spy of the Chinese, so they took all of the grain and things from that household, like robbing them. And the women had to run away up into the mountains.   

**Q:**  Did the soldiers under Kunga Samden cause the women to run away?   

**A:**  That was caused by the soldiers under the above mentioned three magji.   

**Q:**  You heard about that in Chongye Riwodechen, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When I came through Narag, the misers showed me that situation. And they told me that they were doing things like that.   

**Q:**  What did they show you?   

**A:**  They showed me how the livestock feeding troughs were full of grain, although their horses could not eat that much. And the monks among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> fighters wanted the misers to bring them young monks [Tib. གྲྭ་ཕྲུག] [for homosexual activity]. The misers were reporting those things to me. Our 27-Point military regulations were very strict, so how could those things be allowed to happen? Leave alone raping, we were not allowed to have sexual relations with our girlfriends. If we did that, we would lose our lives. I made a plan at the meeting and told them, " The Army to Defend the Religion is for defending Buddhism, so we have to abide by the 27-Points in the military regulations [Tib. དམག་ཁྲིམས]. But this place has done things like this, so I am going to take my own 60 or so soldiers and go to fight with the Chinese [alone]. I am not going to stay here anymore.   

**Q:**  It was after the misers made the appeal to you that you decided to go, correct?   

**A:**  Yes. The people of Narag made that appeal.   

**Q:**  When you went to Dakpo, did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lonyendra say that he is not going to come with you?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. I told my opinion saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lonyendra should go and talk with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje. The two of them said [same as mentioned above, about telling Radrü to go].   

**Q:**  When you met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> in his estate, did you have an argument?   

**A:**  That was not really an argument, there was just a little bit of difference in the way we used words [Tib. ཚིག་རྒྱག་སྟངས་མཐོ་དམན].   

**Q:**  Please tell me in detail what was the difference? How important was it? Is it correct that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> brought a letter for approval to Tsetang saying he would become the head of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>? What was the content of the letter? Who was on Namseling's side? These are all related questions.   

**A:**  He sent that letter to get the signatures of the people. The difference in the use of words occurred when he gave a dinner for Chamdo Dotse and me. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> said, "It was a mistake not to seize the place after you fought the battle in Gongkar and destroyed the trucks." I told him, "Kungö, you guys were staying on your estates, so it is easy for you to talk about that. We didn't know where the main base was. We had 62 riders, but all of us didn't have guns. And there were 105 trucks of Chinese. At that point, we destroyed 27 trucks, but the other [Chinese] soldiers were coming around the mountain carrying cannons, so how could we seize the place? We were trained in guerilla warfare." The two of us were talking like that.   

**Q:**  So it was not an argument whether <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> would be the head of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, right?   

**A:**  In the beginning, that was not the issue. That argument came later on. In the beginning, the argument was a small one. With respect to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> becoming a leader of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, we [initially] didn't know about the reason why the Tibetan government sent Namseling and Trekhang Khenjung to Lhoka. But later we knew that there were Lhoka militias in Chushigandru, and if Athar and those people could support them with weapons, Namseling was supposed to be the leader of the militias and was to make solidarity/unity inside Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  How did you know that later on?   

**A:**  When I got to Lhoka, it had been several months, since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Trekhang Khenjung had arrived in Lhoka. At that time, I heard that Namseling had written a letter to Phala saying "The military regulations of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> were not being adhered to well. And America had given a little amount of aid to Athar and Lotse, but that was not useful for many people. It would not be okay if we don't make a new plan, but I can't do anything, because Chushigandru is not getting along well internally"   

**Q:**  Did you hear that from a certain person?   

**A:**  Yes. Actually, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> just stayed in his estate. He didn't take any responsibility. In fact, if <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was not getting along well, the two of them should have taken responsibility, but they didn't. That was why I was angry. On the other hand, I knew that Namseling and Andru Jinda were friends. At that time, Andru Jinda had already gone to Jagra Pembar [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར]. After that, we made all of the preparations for making war, and we appointed 8 people among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> to supervise the military regulations. And we also made an arrangement wherein two riders should go wherever we were making war to supervise the adherence to the regulations.   

**Q:**  How many points were there in the regulation?   

**A:**  It was written in the regulation that we were not allowed to rape women and rob the misers in the battlefield.   

**Q:**  Who were those 8 supervisors?   

**A:**  Chamdo Lönyen [Tib. བློ་སྙན], Chantreng Thubden [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན], Markham Abo Rabgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་རྒྱས], Markham Gen Gurdrag [Tib. རྒན་གུར་གྲགས], Tsetang Tempel [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང་བསྟན་འཕེལ] who was from Markham but was living in Tsetang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Chödrag and Ganzi Drölma [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ]. We had the regulations, but at that point, we appointed 8 supervisors [to enforce them] during battle. After the preparations for war were made, we started to fight. When we were fighting in Tsetang, Chamdo Lonyen and Chantreng Thubden were sent from the main regiment to Tsetang. They said, "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lonyendra and Jangtsa Chöndze had consulted and Namseling said, 'It would be useless to remain like that, I was the person who made the plan for Andru Jinda in the beginning. The two of us were like one man and one life. According to my opinion, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje, Sandu Lonyendra, and Jangtsa Chöndze should go to India. Namgyal Dorje should then go to Taiwan directly and try to get weapons as soon as possible. If we have weapons, I am ready to recruit 10,000 militia from Lhoka.' Jangtsa Chöndze knows how the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had been working hard since its offering of the golden throne. You should do the publicity in Sikkim, Buthan and India and try to get support from those places. Only Sandu Nyendra can go to Buthan because he has friends in Buthan, and he should go to see Gyalo Thondup about getting the U.S. aid as soon as possible." And it was said that Namseling would be the representative of Andru Jinda staying in the main regiment."   

**Q:**  Did the three of them appoint <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> as the representative of Andru Jinda?   

**A:**  Yes, they consulted and appointed him.   

**Q:**  Actually, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> told the three of them to leave, and three of them appointed Namseling, right?   

**A:**  Yes, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> himself also told them that he would be the head. And Namseling said that he needed 20 cavalry as bodyguards exclusively from Litangba. They wrote in the letter that people should sign if they agreed to that or not.   

**Q:**  Mainly, the three of them made <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> the head, right?   

**A:**  They also got approval from all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> in the main base.   

**Q:**  They sent the letter to Tsetang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that moment, there were about 10-15 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> in Tsetang. We held a meeting and read the letter at the meeting. When we let all of the people tell their opinions, everyone was agitated.   

**Q:**  Was it the people from Litang who were agitated?   

**A:**  No. It was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> who were in Tsetang at that time. There were people from Litang, Chantreng, Targye Gomba, Markham and Tau.   

**A:**  At the time, all of the people were saying that the three of them were trying to run away, and that "There is nobody whose life is not precious. We also have to save our lives. It has been 7 months since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> came to Lhoka, where he has been lying down or dying until now. If he is capable, he is a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> of the Tibetan government and the government had so many weapons, so why didn't he try to get weapons from them? He was starting to learn the scriptures in the monastery, and [later] when they get the Geshe degree, we will be completely destroyed." They meant that the plan for sending the three people out [would take too long]. On the other hand, they were talking about an unavoidable bad omen [Tib. ལྟས་ངན་ཟློག་ཏུ་མི་རུང་བ]. "Andru Gombo Tashi is not dead, so what they were talking about with being the representative of Andru Gombo Tashi, we will never accept that." They sent back Chamdo Lonyen with the letter.   

**Q:**  At that point, who were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s side, other than the three people?   

**A:**  In the main regiment, on his side there were the three of them, and Baba Gen Yeshe, Chamdo Tashi and all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> in the main base.   

**Q:**  Comparing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> in Tsetang and in the main base, which had more?   

**A:**  In the main regiment there was only one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, but there were many tsondzin. The only magji in the main base was in charge of the weapons and ammunitions.   

**Q:**  Most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> were in the battlefield, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were in Tsetang, Chushul and everywhere.   

**Q:**  Most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> were in the main base, so they were standing on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s side, they were dragged by those people, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The U.S. said try to hold a territory, when did they say this? Did they say that while the Dalai Lama was on his way to India? Was it before they went to Ganden Chöngor?   

**A:**  It was later in 1959 when the Dalai Lama had already reached Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང] and we had arrived at the border. At that time, all of us were running away after we had lost the land. We had already arrived at the Indian border. Athar, the two of them, received a telegraph from the U.S. saying that if we can hold a territory, they are ready to drop weapons. In the beginning they didn't drop them, but at that time, they were saying they were ready to drop [supplies].   

**Q:**  Did you hear that from Andrutsang?   

**A:**  I heard that from Athar and Lotse.   

**Q:**  They received the telegraph when you arrived at the border, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The two of them told Andru Jinda and he told us.   

**Q:**  What happened after you were in India in 1959 and 1960?   

**A:**  After coming to India, the only thought and the plan we had was to try to get weapons support from India and make war with the Chinese again. But after arriving in India, it was not easy to [get support]. At first, we had to hand over our own weapons to the Indians and they gave us receipts. The Indians told us, "Your weapons would not be qualified for making war, so we will give you more weapons than these, so you don't need to be worried about that."   

**Q:**  Did the Indians tell you that they would give you more weapons than that?   

**A:**  Yes. They told us that to comfort us. After that, from Missamari, we went to Kalimpong. When we arrived at Kalimpong, the Guomindang Chiang Kaishek sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Tsempel Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དཔལ་རྡོ་རྗེ], Amdo Chamba Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན] and Baba Kelsang Chömpel [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཆོས་འཕེལ] to Kalimpong. They were powerful people.   

**Q:**  Were they people from the Guomindang?   

**A:**  Yes. They were sent from Taiwan to Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  When they came, did they tell you that they were from the Guomindang?   

**A:**  Yes. And at that time Chiang Kaishek sent 20,000 Rs to express congratulations to Andru Gombo Tashi and also sent 20,000 Rs to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Jimpa Gyatso [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]. They were saying, "The economy of the Guomindang can challenge any of the countries in the world. You don't need to work on construction projects like building roads, you Andru Jinda should make a plan [to oppose the Chinese Communists]." They were talking a lot, indicating that they could do something. Actually, they might have had a plan.   

**Q:**  Was that between the year 1959-60?   

**A:**  Yes. At that moment, Andru Jinda was not able to give an answer. That was because the Dalai Lama said that Taiwan must announce that Chinese territories belonged to the Chinese, and that the Tibetan territories belonged to Tibet, and that the Chinese would be happy in China and the that Tibetans would be happy in Tibet [Tib. རྒྱ་རྒྱ་ས, བོད་བོད་ས, རྒྱ་རྒྱ་ཡུལ་ལ་སྐྱིད་བོད་བོད་ཡུལ་ལ་སྐྱིད]. But they [the Guomindang] didn't do that. At that time, Chiang Kaishek sent his representatives from Taiwan to Mön Tawang Tezpur when the Dalai Lama arrived there, but he didn't make that statement.   

**Q:**  Did you know the name of the representatives of Chiang Kaishek?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Were they Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The three Amdos were from the Guomindang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were two Amdowas and one Baba. They were working for the Guomindang.   

**Q:**  They told like that, but they were not able put it into action, right?   

**A:**  They were not able to put it into action because all of the people who were in the organization were looking at Andru Jinda. At that time, they [Guomindang] had gained over [Tib. བཟོ་ཏ་བཟོ] most of the important people among the Khambas and Amdos. At that point, Andru Jinda sent me to deliver the message to Gyalo Thondup saying "If you can do something through peaceful and military methods [Tib. ཞི་དྲག་གཉིས] you should do it as soon as possible. If you can't do that, I am getting into a difficult situation [Tib. དཀའ་ལས་ཁག་པོ་བཟོ་གི་འདུག]." Actually, Andru Jinda was getting into a difficult situation. Gyalo Thondup sent an answer saying, "Andru Gombo Tashi, you are a person who has gone through many hardships. The Dalai Lama is very pleased about what you did. Nowadays, all of us have come to another country, so there are many people saying that I can do this and that. You should think carefully and stay firm." I delivered the message to Jinda. At that time, Gyalo Thondup and B. Malik, who was the main head of the Indian intelligence office, had a very close relation, like one person and one mind. Just after that, Gyalo Thondup was able to sent 60-70 people to America to be trained.   

**Q:**  Were those Tibetans?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1959-1960.   

**Q:**  They were not Athar and Lotse?   

**A:**  No. They were sent long before that. Those 60-70 people were sent after we arrived in India.   

**Q:**  Were all of the 60-70 people Khambas?   

**A:**  There were people from Kham, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, and Ütsang. The Indians sent their intelligent agents to the borders.   

**Q:**  Did Gyalo Thondup sent those people through Malik, the head of the Indian intelligence office? The expenditure was spent by the CIA, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the expenditure was spent by the U.S. CIA and they were sent from India through the relations of B. Malik. Malik could tell the CIA whatever he wanted to tell them.   

**Q:**  Did Gyalo consult with Malik and send those people?   

**A:**  Yes, so they were able to establish the 500 ITBP, Indo-Tibet Border Police. These were exclusively Tibetans. So we were able to do many things.   

**Q:**  That was established under the help of the Indian government, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they changed all of the names of those people.   

**Q:**  In which place did they establish the ITBP?   

**A:**  Before that, the Indians already had the ITBP so they added the 500 Tibetans onto that. They were trained in the place called Naha, which was a very hot place. Most of them were sent to the border to Simla. Simla was near to [Tibet]. They also sent many Indian intelligence [IB] agents and the Indians were able to send Indians and Tibetans who were trained by America. After that we were sent to Mustang, Lo Chumig Gyatsa [Tib. གློ་ཆུ་མིག་རྒྱ་ཚ], so the [relations] between the Guomindang was left [aside] like that.   

**Q:**  Gyalo Thondup said, "After coming to India, there will be some people saying that we will do this and that, but do not take notice of all of them". Did he mean the Guomindang?   

**A:**  Yes. You should explain better about the giving of money to Andrutsang. Andru Jinda didn't accept that money. He said, "I don't know Chiang Kaishek, the hard work was done by the people, if you are giving money to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> organization, I will tell them about that. But I am not going to accept that." So he had a severe argument with Tsempel Dorje.   

**Q:**  Tsempel Dorje was the person who brought the money, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Tsempel Dorje was a show-offish person, and he told Andru Jinda that Chiang Kaishek sent the money to make him famous, because he had been working hard, so he should not refuse it [Tib. འགན་པ་ཤོད་ཡས་ཡོད་མ་རེད].   

**Q:**  Actually, the money was received, right?   

**A:**  Jinda didn't take that money.   

**Q:**  Did Jimpa Gyatso accept the money?   

**A:**  He knew Chiang Kaishek from Chengdu in the early days. He asked Jinda whether he should accept the money. Jinda told him that "If you know Chiang Kaishek, you can take the money. He sent you the money, you didn't tell him that you need money." At that time, Ch1ang Kaishek made a phone call to Tsempel Dorje saying that he should do whatever Andru Jinda told him to do. After that, Jinda told a meeting of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, "Chiang Kaishek has sent 20,000 Rs, so it would be better if we accept that. However, we were not able to make the decision, so we told the oracle of Shungden of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤང་ལུང་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་མདའ] The protector deity Shungden.">Panglung Gyalchen</a> [Tib. སྤང་ལུང་རྒྱལ་ཆེན] to go into trance and consulted about that."   

**Q:**  The Shungden oracle had come to Kalimpong, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was he a person in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. He was the main oracle of Panglung. Gen Ale, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lekshey and I went to ask for the divination. After going into a trance, the oracle said, "You didn't tell them that you need money, so whoever would give you money, go ahead and take it". So we took the money for the organization.   

**Q:**  How did you move the regiment from Drigu to E Lhagyari?   

**A:**  Drigutang was the place where the regiment was established in the beginning,. It was like the northern plains [Tib. བྱང་ཐང] and it was very cold. During the cold winter, they moved to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>. Tsöna was also very cold. And at that time all of the work should be done where the Chinese were living and in the places near Lhasa. Therefore, we moved to Lhagyari.   

**Q:**  Was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> near Lhagyari?   

**A:**  Mön Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང] is near to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>. Lhagyari was near to the Rong Lukhang ferry site, Tsetang and Lhasa. Tsöna is far away from Lhasa. For that reason we moved to Lhagyari.   

**Q:**  It didn't split into two organizations, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the main cause of the contradiction between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and the Khambas?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda had appointed Jangtsa Chöndze, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Jimpa Gyatso and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje to work in the main office. The Khambas were saying that it was extremely inappropriate to send two of the leaders to India, and to have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> become the leader, although he hadn't gone through any hardships.   

**Q:**  And they were saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> sent the three of them out for running away, right?   

**A:**  Yes, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> sent those people so that they [Namseling and those people] could control the power [Tib. དབང་སྒྱུར].   

**Q:**  After you got the weapons from Shang, did you encounter the People's Liberation Army?   

**A:**  Yes. We fought battles with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Where was that?   

**A:**  That was in Wuyug Dzomtang. That was the first battle we fought after we got the guns from Shang.   

**Q:**  Were you planning to fight guerilla warfare after arriving in Drigutang with the weapons that you got from Shang?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where were you planning to fight mainly?   

**A:**  That was in Tsetang, and after that we were planning to fight using guerilla warfare everywhere.   

**Q:**  Looking back to 1958-1959, what would have made a difference if we did this or that? Do you think that if we had done like that, the situation would be different than the present situation?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to feel regrets about, because the Chinese had already wiped out [Tib. རྩ་མེད་ཤུལ་མེད] the people in Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>. They were making a merciless war. The Chinese were just verbally talking about [peaceful liberation] in the areas above the Yangtze River, but actually, they were going to destroy all of the monasteries, Lamas and the monks. We were just hoping for the Third World War and some kind of effect of the Three Jewels, otherwise, we didn't hope that we could win the battle against the Chinese. We were just thinking that "The Dalai Lama is a precious stone which we cannot get from anywhere else in the world. It would not be okay if he would fall into the hands of the Chinese. If the Chinese didn't give power to the Dalai Lama, we should definitely try to take him to India or somewhere else." Most people were thinking in that way. The only thing that I felt regrets about was what I told Gyalo Thondup and the CIA, "Because you didn't support [weapons] to Lhoka immediately, that caused a great damage to us [Tib. སྐྱོན་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱབ]. And the Chinese knew about that. [If we could get the support] our guerilla warfare could continue for years and years. There was guerilla warfare in Kham, Amdo, Lhoka, in the north and everywhere. They could not wipe out the guerilla warfare easily. Because the U.S. didn't give a little bit of beneficial support, our main guerilla warfare was wiped out. The Chinese had made a great preparation and we could not hold on." So I was telling them that they [U.S.] harmed us [Tib. གནོད་སྐྱེལ] instead of helping us. If we got many weapons, [from the U.S.] we didn't need to get the weapons from Shang. At that time, there were some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> in Lhagyari like Chandzö Tashi and those people. And in Chongye Riwodechen there was the Magji Alo Dawa, and there were about 17-18 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and tsondzin who were saying "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> is pro-Chinese. When we were remaining firm like yogurt and making preparation for war, he sent three tsondzin out. Therefore, all of the people became discouraged."   

**Q:**  They talked about that in Chongye Riwodechen, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they made a report to the Dalai Lama and they had signed the report. At that time, I was in Tsetang. The report should have been submitted through Phala, but when Phala learned about the report he told them, "When people are burning the auspicious incense, do not roar a bad omen [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་ལྷ་བསངས་གཏོང་ས་ལ། ལྟས་ངན་པའི་འུར་སྒྲ་མ་རྒྱག]. The Dalai Lama is so fond of you people, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> is my relative, so I can guarantee that he is not pro-Chinese." Phala stopped them from submitting the report. After that, they held a meeting, and they said at the meeting that they were discouraged. At that point, when Namseling was trying to say something, Phala told him "Brother, keep your mouth shut" [Tib. ལོ་ཀགས་ཁྱོད་རང་ཁ་ཚུམས].   

**Q:**  Where was that?   

**A:**  That was in Chongye Riwodechen when the Dalai Lama was there. Phala told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, "This is your fault, there is no way that you can speak."   

**Q:**  In the beginning, when the people in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> got together and you pooled your wealth together, what was your thinking for being so enthusiastic?   

**A:**  The Chinese had already destroyed us in Kham, so we knew that the wealth was useless. So we bought guns and horses with our wealth. We were thinking that we would die either in a good or a bad way. At that point, Andru Jinda was holding endless meetings. Every day, people were saying that we would never have attachments to one's parents and children, we would do whatever we should do to oppose the Chinese. The people became more and more enthusiastic.   

**Q:**  At that time, were they saying that they were going to defend Buddhism or were they were thinking for taking revenge for the destruction made in their homeland by the Chinese? Or were they saying that they want independence for Tibet? What was the principle?   

**A:**  Probably, people didn't have much understanding of independence. The main point was that among the Tibetans, Buddhism is just like our hearts. The main reason for opposing the Chinese was because the Chinese were saying, "The religion is poison, exploitation and suppression." There can be differences in terms of economy between strong countries and weak countries, but the Chinese named the Lamas the yellow bandits, and the monks the red thieves which made all the people mad [with anger].   

**Q:**  That was the reason for the people gathering together and pooling their wealth together, and being enthusiastic, right?   

**A:**  Yes, especially in Lhasa, the Dalai Lama was the temporal and spiritual leader of Tibet, all of us were thinking for him.   

**Q:**  Please write down the names of the 17 offices of the Chushigandru.   

**A:**  Yes, I will.   

**Q:**  In 1956, when the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama went to India, did you have any plan for stopping two of them from coming back to Tibet and causing disturbance in Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, when two of them visited India, all of the traders from the three provinces [Tib. ཆོལ་ཁ] in Kalimpong had left their guns in Sikkim. All of the traders in Kalimpong, the regiments in Lhasa, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of the three great monasteries; Sera, Drepung and Ganden, Andru Gombo Tashi and other main people such as the chandzö of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྟོད] The Upper Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyütö</a> [Tib. rgyud sotd] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] The Lower Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüme</a> [Tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] monasteries, all of them had discussed about that matter. At that time, I was in Kalimpong. When I came from Kalimpong to Lhasa, I was supposed to go to America for CIA training. At that moment, Andru Jinda told me, "You can't go for training, I need you as my assistant." We decided to send Lobsang Palden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན] as a messenger from India to Lhasa where I was living. When the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama were on their pilgrimage, the traders from the three Cholkha living in Kalimpong decided to make a revolt in Yadong. At that time, all of the traders' private owned guns were in Gangtok.   

**Q:**  They were going to use the guns and make the revolt in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, as soon as the revolt took place in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, there was supposed to be a revolt in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  That was when the two of them were in India, right?   

**A:**  That was for stopping them from coming back from India. After making that plan, they sent the messenger Lobsang Palden to me.   

**Q:**  Who sent Lobsang Palden?   

**A:**  The traders in Kalimpong sent him to me. At that point, I was in Lhasa. At first, Andru Jinda and I sent Lobsang Palden from Lhasa to Kalimpong and told them "He is the messenger for delivering the letters and they should send him to me." Lobsang Palden brought a letter from Kalimpong, it was written in the letter, "We can't make the revolt in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, we can't prepare that attack. You should make the revolt in Lhasa" When I delivered the letter to Andru Jinda, he laughed. At first I didn't know what was written in the letter. I asked Jinda what was the matter? He said, "They are not keeping their word. They are saying that they can't make the revolt, and we should make the revolt here. What are they talking about? How can we make the revolt doing something against the steps that were arranged from the beginning? Leave alone doing something for Buddhism, there is a danger of doing something disgraceful [Tib. ཞབས་འདྲེན་ཆེན་པོ]. If the secret would be revealed, the result would be terrible." That was right, the Chinese knew about that plan, and they sent Zhou Enlai to visit Nehru, and told Nehru that the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama should go back to Lhasa as soon as possible, otherwise there would be a disturbance in Tibet. So Andru Jinda and the main people had to run away. Andru Jinda had to stay in retreat in the Ganden Monastery for about 5 months.   

**Q:**  He might have been having a good time by doing prayers?   

**A:**  He didn't have any choice but to be in retreat.   

