# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0012.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** November 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 66  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] was a Litang (Khamba) monk who became a monastic manager/trader (Tib. Jiso) and then became one of the top military commanders in Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses how he became the Jiso of the Litang monastery and the work he did. He also talks about the early years when the People's Liberation Army first came to Litang, about when the Dalai Lama passed through Kham on his way back from Beijing in 1955, and Alo Chöndze's activities. He then talks about the uprising in Litang in 1956 and how this led to the rise of the Chushigandru in Lhasa. He also talks about the decision to move to Drigutang, the start of the fighting in 1958 and finally the uprising of 1959.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0012_01/H_0012_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Ngawangla, where is your homeland?   

**A:**  My home is in Litang.   

**Q:**  What were you doing in Litang? What did your parents do?   

**A:**  My father was a chief [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] of a place called Rangla. I was a monk at Litang Monastery. When I was 18 years old I became the Jiso of the monastery. This was a 3 year term. When I was 21, the year I handed back the Jiso responsibilities, that was the year the communists first came from China to Dartsedo. That was in 1949. When the communists first arrived at places like Gyarong and Gyeltang in Yunnan they were under the leadership of a person nicknamed "Uncle Baldy," Aku Lemar [Tib. ཨ་ཁུ་ཀླད་དམར]. The Gyeltang people put up a fierce fight. Then Gyarong also seems to have fought. There was Gyarong Trochita and Gyarong Chotse Gyalpo - Gyarong had a number of kingdoms. They fought a lot.   

**Q:**  What period was this?   

**A:**  This was in 1949 when the Chinese were coming up from Dartsedo. In our Kham area, Litang and Targye Gomba Monastery first decided to fight. What they [the Chinese] did was to say nice things. They were saying that they were doing beneficial things for the minorities. That the name of their army was the liberation army. That the "18th Army Corps" [Ch. shi ba jun] is like a god's army and is brave and good-natured. They sent around all kinds of propaganda like this. In the meantime, the Guomindang commander Tan Sizhang came via Gyarong and took control of Dartsedo, but he could not hold on for more than a week and then he went straight to Minyag. Then he went past our Litang area to Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་འཕྲེང] and then via Dzayul [Tib. རྫ་ཡུལ] he escaped. Actually, he really wanted to go to the Tibetan government [in Lhasa], but the government there didn't want to cooperate with him. Tan Sizhang was very strong and had wonderful weapons and ammunition. In China proper, the Guomindang had lost and they didn't have any other source of support. He came within a day's journey of Litang and then went to Chantreng, and then to Tsawagang [Tib. ཚ་བ་སྒང] and to Dzayul. So when the Tibetan government met the messenger he sent, they did not know whether he was Guomindang or Communist, right? And so the government did not accept him. So he left via Dzayul with a few other leaders to Burma, and from there, they managed to go to Taiwan. However, most of the soldiers who were in Dzayul surrendered to the communists.   

**Q:**  You mean the soldiers that were at Dzayul, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There was fighting and some died, but most joined the communists. So we were at Dartsedo. The Chinese went from Minyag to Ganzi and to the Gamtog Drukha [Tib. སྐམ་ཐོག་གྲུ་ཁ] ferry site. They did not come to Litang. The road to Litang was not good and the Litang people had made preparations to fight. So the Chinese heard about that and went straight up to Ganzi and then Derge. From Derge they said that they were going to help the minorities, that they were here for the freedom of religion, and that they had a lenient policy [Tib. སྲིད་ཇུས་གུ་ཡངས]. They said all sweet things about this and that. And at this time, you know they had abundant dayan [silver coins]. Yes, they were mostly liberal. They gave these [coins] to the beggars, to lamas, and for salaries and everything. At that time, it was all dayan coins and there wasn't any paper currency. So all the traders too [got these]. So in 1949, there was no fighting. Then they came to Gamtog Drukha and from Chamdo the Tibetan government, Sawang Ngabö was sent there for defense. So in 1949, probably, in the 8th or 9th month, there was fighting in Chamdo and it was lost. Then there was nobody to stop the Chinese. From Dartsedo, those who were going west went straight to Lhasa. Those [others} went from Xining. When they arrived at Lhasa, the 18th Army Corps had come first from Dartsedo and the Xining troops arrived later. That is why the 18th Army Corps said that they are the ones who took Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese first came to Litang, was that in 1949?   

**A:**  Yes. They did not come to Litang first. They came to Minyag and Ganzi, which were close to Litang. In August or September they came to Litang.   

**Q:**  Where were you when they first arrived?   

**A:**  I was in Dartsedo. I was the Jiso of Litang monastery and so for trade we had to bring a lot of tea. Then the communists arrived. When we were there, the Guomindang's Tan Sizhang came and then the communist came. So we just watched since we were not afraid at that time. The reason being that the Chinese were saying that they were friends of the minorities and that there was absolutely no need to fear them. So a lot of that propaganda was being said. So for this reason, at Dartsedo, among the Khambas, there was no one fighting.   

**Q:**  Then did you return from Dartsedo to Litang.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay most of the time - at Litang?   

**A:**  I was mostly at Litang. Then we went to Lhasa. The Chinese appointed leaders gave "education" [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱོང] to the poor, then the traders-and they didn't do anything bad, right? Then in 1954, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama, the Tibetan government officials, and the Khamba chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་ཁག] went down to Beijing and [the Chinese government] took them here and there. When they were returning, they had promised to come to Litang Monastery and Litang Monastery was making preparations, but at that time we had no motorable roads so the Chinese said that since there was no motorable road, they could not be responsible [and the Dalai Lama did not go to Litang]. At Minyag Rangakha, there is a large field where the two monasteries of Litang were to perform a long life prayer [for the Dalai Lama], the Tenshug of Dakini [Tib. མཁའ་འགྲོ་བརྟན་བཞུགས] and receive an audience. So since we were the more responsible people, we made preparations at Rangakha. At that place there were the Litang monastery's officials, the abbots and kudrak and all the chiefs like Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན], Uthogpön [Tib. དབུ་ཐོག་དཔོན], Changpapön [Tib. བྱང་པ་དཔོན], Degongpön [Tib. སྡེ་གོང་དཔོན] and other chiefs (Tib. pön [དཔོན]). So we all received an audience at Minyag Ranglagang and the Dalai Lama also gave a teaching. That was the first time we met the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  At that meeting, did he say anything regarding politics? The 17-Point Agreement was already signed, so did he say anything?   

**A:**  I don't remember him saying anything about that.   

**Q:**  Or that you should do your best regarding relations between the Chinese and the Tibetans. That one should not whip up sentiments?   

**A:**  No, nothing specific like that. But to our various chiefs, the Dalai Lama gave images of Avaloketisvara [Tib. སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས], Manjushri ['jam dpal dbyangs] and others. And as to all the offerings (gifts) of the Litang Monastery, he did not accept any and returned them. There were many dayan coins. At that time Alo Chöndze was the leader of the People's Association, right? He came to Dartsedo and he was a Litangba. Since he knew the most, he made all the arrangements and did a good job. He said that Tibet is Tibet and China is China. That was the reason why the Tibetan People's Organization had formed. The Dalai Lama, he [Alo Chöndze] said, needs 100% power over the Tibetan people - and for that reason the organization was formed. So the Litang area needs to think about this. The Dalai Lama gave religious not political advice. The representative (of the Dalai Lama) who was sent to Litang was Trijang Rimpoche. He gave both political and religious advice. He went from Litang to all over Chantreng and Gyeltang. They [the Chinese] sent bodyguards with him. Trijang Rimpoche gave religious teachings, but he also said that Tibet is Tibet and China is China, however, the policy of Mao Zedong states that unlike earlier times he was going to help the minorities a lot. Whether this would actually be put into practice or not was something that we would know later, and something we would see and hope for. But just saying these things we just couldn't say, blessed be it. However, these days we have plenty of dayan coins and plenty of trade, "So are you very happy about this?" So this is what he [Trijang] said. So this is what the Chinese said when they said that Trijang Rimpoche had sown poison in Litang. So in January of 1956, the 17th day or something, the first revolt took place in Litang. The first revolt in Litang was led by Yönrupön Jigme [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད] something. Among the Litang nomads, he was very powerful. He never liked the Chinese, no matter how nice they were to him or whatever title they gave him. Later he was appointed as the Chairman [Tib. ཞུ་྾ཨི] of all in Litang, but he refused the title.   

**Q:**  He was appointed the Chairman of all Litang?   

**A:**  Yes, he was given the Fu Zhuxi (Deputy Chairman) rank, but he refused it. So then they put his photograph there and put a khata around it [since he didn’t participate]. That's what the Chinese did. Then in 1955, around December or so, about 100 Litang horsemen were returning from Litang Monastery and about 400 Chinese were waiting (in ambush) for them. Two of the people under him [Yönrupön] were killed and so too was his famous servant. So about 12-13 were killed and wounded. The fighting was very fierce and the Chinese were killed except for about 100 of them who escaped. So that's where it started. The Chinese said that this was never an order from the government. They said that they had no orders to get rid of Yönrupön. This they said was just done by a few officials so please don't feel angry. We will "compensate" [Tib. མི་སྟོང] you for your dead and our dead will be considered a "loss" without compensation. So they were bluffing us, right? Anyway there was no need to bluff us. In 1956, January 16th or 17th, the war started. Between 1954 to 1955, the Chinese were doing education. They were telling the poor nomads and the poor farmers that they didn't know agriculture well and didn't know how to trade, and that's why they were poor. So they educated them for 2-3 years. Daily they received a wage of 2 or 3 dayan coins. They were also given material things, clothes and material for making clothing. What they told them in 1954 was this. They told them that according to Tibetan customs there were a lot of trerim (classes). The worst class was the lamas and the monks since they take your wealth away. The lamas are the same as bandits.   

**Q:**  Like bandits?   

**A:**  Yes, because when a person is sick or dies, a lama has to be invited. And whether it is animals or money, isn't it that the best is taken away by him. He doesn't do any work but he takes all and eats it, and under him the chandzö and all collect the wealth together and trade and make money. So he is a bandit. The monk is regarded as a red thief. The reason being that when people are sick or dead, all household wealth like tea, butter, money has to be given to him. If one is a nomad, then you have to give butter and if an agriculturalist, then grain. He doesn't work. You work very hard and he takes it away so this is very bad and that is why you have not improved [there has been no development]. So all this talking about classes started and then they said we had to get rid of them starting from the officials and chiefs. So everybody thought that now it is no good and people became suspicious that they were going to get rid of all the lamas and leaders, and all the wealthy ones. If the so called liberation is to take the wealth from the rich and give it to the poor, that is something else, but that was not the case. Everybody had weapons. Some households had 100 guns, others 10-15. Every household had at least one. So when all those talks started and everybody was suspicious, the first fight was with Yönrupön in January 1956. Then in the Ngari Shingkham region, there was a powerful nomad by the name of Gaboga Sangbo, and the Uthogpön and Degongpön. Then, among the agriculturalists, there were Nokotho, Changbapön, Dewapön and many others. So they all became united and rose up. The way the Chinese had prepared was like this. When they came up from Dartsedo, they thought that there wouldn't be a large revolt. But in our Litang Monastery, all the farmers were there. It's a large monastery. When I served as Jiso and when we had to give Donggo for the Mönlam, there were more than 5,700 monks. It is actually bigger than Drepung. So when they attacked the monastery from the north, south and west of the monastery, outside the monastery there were so many Chinese corpses that the place became like dzaro pasi [??]. I was not there then. So for 27 days there was fighting at the monastery itself. Then, since they could not take over the monastery, they called for reinforcements from Derge and Ganzi. Then they called for air strikes. In one day they destroyed Ba Chöde [Tib. འབའ་ཆོས་སྡེ] Monastery. Chantreng Sampheling [Tib. བསམ་འཕེལ་གླིང] Monastery was also destroyed. Litang monastery was not hit at first. They bombed just outside it and when the stones fell it killed one or two monks. The next day the plane was to come, right, so everybody was saying that the monastery would be destroyed and that it is better to go outside and fight. So they decided to go outside. However, then Yönrupön said that he and his men had made many pledges to the protective deities of the monastery saying that if they were going to die then they will do so in the monastery and Yönrupön said that I cannot break that pledge so I want to die in the monastery itself. Then they all said that if our chief dies [alone] it will not be alright so we all want to die inside. So Yönrupön and his nomad group, along with his relative Dagö Drigö [Tib. མདའ་རྒོད་གྲི་རྒོད], stayed in the monastery and they fought and fought and the monastery was loosing. Then Yönrupön said that he was going to surrender, but he said that a leader must come [to accept the surrender] when another leader [him] surrenders [so he demanded a high Chinese officer come]. Then the two main Chinese Regimental Commanders (tuanzhang), one of whom was the pockmarked Commander nicknamed "webbed finger" [Tib. བྱ་ལག་ཅན] came to accept the surrender and take their arms. Yönrupön and Dagö Drigö hid two Canadian pistols in their dress which they did not surrender. The People's Liberation Army took them below the monastery, past the wall where the monastery's yaks were slaughtered. The leaders went there together with them while the soldiers were busy collecting and taking away the arms. When they reached the yak corral, the two [Tibetans] took out their pistols and shot the two Chinese commanders. Then there was fighting and it was said that if they had fled at this time, they could have. They had this excellent protective amulet [Tib. མཚོན་སྲུང] which protected them. Near the mountain, there was the place called Raluk Dembo where they left their amulet and returned to the dead bodies of the two Chinese commanders and covered themselves with their blood and then fought. Yönrupön died there. Dagö Drigö was caught alive and at the hospital he was able to say only a word or two before he died. So from 1956 to 57, 58, 59, 60-the guerrilla war continued probably until 1975-76.   

**Q:**  It continued until then?   

**A:**  The policy was relaxed after Mao's death. At that time there were surrenders. Now we don't hear about this, right? I left Litang in 1955 and in the 11th month I arrived at Lhasa. In the 1st month of 1956, we heard that the fighting had started in Litang. Many of us said that looking at what Chinese were saying in Litang, the situation is not stable. At Lhasa we traders- there was Andru Gombo Tashi. Yönrupön and Litang Monastery and all sent letters and people to us at our meetings in Lhasa. When the fighting started in 1956, the Chinese were saying that west of the Yangtze River the liberation will be peaceful. East of the river, in Kham and Amdo, they were saying that if they do not agree to be peacefully liberated, then they will do so forcefully. So this was the order of China. They said that if you agree to peaceful liberation, then you should hand in all your arms and ammunition. If you do not, then we will start the war and if we do that then you will be in difficulty. They made this propaganda. So everybody said that whatever they say, it is a matter of how we should die. Then when fighting started in Litang, it gradually spread to Nyarong, Tawu [Tib. རྟའུ], Ganzi, Trango [Tib. བྲག་མགོ] and Lhagang [Tib. ལྷ་གང]. By 1957-58 almost all over Kham the revolt had began in earnest. Then messengers and leaders approached the Tibetan government and requested them to either file a law case [Tib. ཁ་མཆུ] or to assist them with arms or foreign help or whatever, since our people are being destroyed. So they sent many messengers to Andru Gombo Tashi and we also sent people [from Lhasa] to Litang. When the fighting was going on, my younger brother Sonam Tsering [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་ཚེ་རིང] and many other people were sent down [to Kham]. So we were wondering what the best course of action was. So we said that we should approach the Guomindang or America. The reason was that we had to know how to bomb from the sky [aerial strikes]. So we were discussing these things. You know this Litang Athar, yes, him and Lotse, Tsewang Dorji and a few of us got ready and at Kalimpong, the brothers of Baba Jangratsang [Tib. ལྕང་ར་ཚང] like Jangra Lekshey [Tib. ལེགས་བཤད] who is still there-poor guy he's dead now-died in Kham. [the speaker was not among those who went to Kalimpong]. So we were wondering what to do and Gyalo Thondup was approached. So he said that if you people have such courage, then I will make the arrangements. You don't have to go to the Guomindang. I will go to the strongest one and so they were sent. Later, Gyado Wangdü [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་དབང་འདུས] and Gyadotsang's servant, they were sort of sent together. In 1957, Gyado Wangdü, Tsewang Dorji [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ], their servant, Jangratsang Tashi (he was the best wireless operator, the former two were not as good) were dropped at Litang, but the best wireless operator got altitude sickness [Tib. དབུགས་ཤོར] and could not be dropped. So the others could not communicate too well. So he returned to India and took the land route and we escorted him to Litang. When he arrived there, the Chinese already knew about it - the three that were dropped had been killed. So the Chinese were very suspicious and had made preparations everywhere. Then in 1957-58, while they were fighting, in 1958, the message was not received properly and not a drop of help was received [in Litang]. Athar and Lotse were dropped at Samye. Their work was to make connections with the [Lhasa] government and communicate their [the government’s] plans (to the U.S.). So they met Andru Gombo Tashi and us and wired our plans. When they met Drönyerchemmo [Phala] in Lhasa, the [relations between] Tibet and China were kind of tense. So the Drönyerchemmo said whatever plans you guys have, that's it, but the Tibetan government is not ready to say we have this and that plan. He told Andru Gombo Tashi and you guys to come with what you have to say and that he will also arrange for an audience with the Dalai Lama. Now the government cannot be blamed because if the Chinese found out about the connection, immediately they will do something to the Dalai Lama. So no proper connection was allowed to be made. So what we did was to get all the traders together. Among the Litangba, there was myself, Gasitsang Ngawang Dadrag [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང་ངག་དབང་ཟླ་གྲགས] and pockmarked Chödra [Tib. ཆོས་གྲགས] who are both still alive, and Ngalö Bugö [Tib. ང་ལོས་བུ་རྒོད], etc. So 6 of us Litangbas pooled our wealth together. The reason being that they were wealthy traders and I had a large capital too. And so all Litangbas organized and consulted the deities and the protector deities and said that we have to perform rituals. Then [it was said that] the people between the ages 18-60 should go down [to fight in Kham]. Regarding arms, they told Andru Gombo Tashi to find out if they should buy their own or whether help could be obtained from the Tibetan government. So [we] were pushing for that. All the Litangbas met and we all said it was good and we all contributed our wealth and consulted the deities and asked for divination from the lamas. So for performing the rituals, there were 100-200 monks at Andru Gombo Tashi's house and we also offered 1000 of five kinds of offerings like butter lamps, water offerings and incense, etc [Tib. སྟོང་མཆོད]. So once we were united, all personal trade was banned. So we were buying horses and guns. So we Litangbas had organized and likewise, the Babas approached Andru Jinda and said that they would like to do the same. Then followed Targye Gomba, Ganzi and many smaller areas made connections. So all the traders of Kham or Dotö were united. Then the Amdo traders united. Then the three great monasteries who had excellent relations with Andru Jinda since long ago. Previously, when the People's Association began, there was a connection with Andru Gombo Tashi. So by the time that we had come [to Lhasa], Alo Chöndze was already in prison. The Tibetan government just went through the motions of putting him in the prison. I say prison, but it was not that bad. Then he was released under the guarantee of the three great monasteries and he was sent to India. We were also united with all the Tibetan army regiments in Lhasa internally. Whoever was touched, there was the understanding that they would [at some time] rise up. Likewise, with the kudrak, there was this overt-covert thing [Tib. ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གསུམ] --people like Drönyerchemmo Phala, the Bodyguard Regiment's Commander Takla and the Trapchi commander [Tashi Bera]. It was understood [that they were in it too]. Then in the monk official category, there were many also but I can't remember their names. Andru Jinda's main connection was with Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང] and Kesang Yeshe [Ngawang].   

**Q:**  Was he a magji?   

**A:**  He was a Tsendrön. He was Phala Drönyerchemmo's main person. So when all the preparations were made, the organization's name was Chushigandru. Trijang Rimpoche was asked and he said that based on a story there is the name Chushigandru and so I think that would be a good name. However, you should ask for divination from the Senior Tutor Ling Rimpoche and from the protective deities. So the name Chushigandru was adopted and you know we were making preparations for the long-life offering. So at the meeting, it was said that we have to give something novel. Until then, when people would write a petition to the Dalai Lama, they would write, "To the golden throne" [Tib. གསེར་ཁྲིའི་དྲུང་དུ], but there was no actual golden throne and so we said that one should be made. So this was no easy job. You have to have a few thousand sang of gold. Now as for all the traders in the Kham area, since the Chinese held it, nobody knows [what they thought], but at Lhasa they wanted to make offerings and they didn't care at all how much was spent. They didn't care about money (laughs). But we just couldn't begin making the throne just like that. We had to get permission from the Chinese and in order to do that we had to make connections with them. This was done by Bapa Phüntso Wangye, Baba Gen Yeshe and others who had loyalty to the Baba. Since this was religious, we were trying from that angle and the Chinese also didn't oppose it. Among the government officials, there were many high and low and we had to get permission from them. Obviously we had to seek the Dalai Lama's order. We had to go to all the kudrak. The goldsmiths who would make the golden throne all belonged to units [Tib. ཁུངས] so we had to take a khata and go to each one. Now in this regard, Sandutsang was very familiar with all the kudrak. Andru Gombo Tashi was well respected by the likes of Phala Drönyerchemmo, Namseling and many others. He had lived in Lhasa for a long time. So permission was received from everybody and the work began in the courtyard (khyamra [Tib. འཁྱམ་ར]) in the Jokhang. There were a lot of contributions. The Chinese sent 18 vehicles free of charge from Shigatse to Lhasa to transport rice, grain, and flour that was donated in that area.   

**Q:**  The Chinese sent them?   

**A:**  Yes, Phüntso Wangye sent it without charge. The Chinese were saying to the Kashag that the Amdo and Khamba traders only have religion in their mouths, but the real purpose of the organization was something else. Do you know that? The area this side of the Yangtze River is for peaceful liberation, but if you examine what the Khambas and the Amdowas are doing, it will lead to forceful liberation. What the Kashag told the Chinese was that in the land of the Amdowas and Khambas, the Chinese have brought war and are killing thousands and tens of thousands daily. If the Dalai Lama tells the Chinese, the Chinese are not going to listen and since the Chinese are not going to listen, then its useless to tell the Khambas and the Amdowas. They are making preparations to fight and will leave from this country [Tib. ལུང་པ] and they are not going to fight in Lhasa. So such replies were given (laughter). The Chinese said that there is a danger that peaceful liberation will turn into forceful liberation. The Chinese said that a lot. Anyways, we were all united. The throne was made and religious offerings were provided. Then in the 8th Tibetan month, on the 10th day, Andrutsang asked the oracle of the deity Panglung Gyelchen [Tib. སྤང་ལུང་རྒྱལ་ཆེན] to go into trance .   

**Q:**  Which? Panglung?   

**A:**  Panglung Gyelchen is Shungden [Tib. ཤུགས་ལྡན]. He is the main one we consult at the Panglung Hermitage. Nechung and others are not easy to consult [since they are] government ones. Dampa Lodrö [Tib. དམ་པ་བློ་གྲོས] had a house and he was consulted in that house [he was the medium]. He prophesied that up till the 25th day of the 4th Tibetan month, even if it is your life [that is at risk], it will be okay. But not after that, so whatever you have planned, do it before that date. So at that time it was the 10th day, right? Then on the 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th and on the 15th was the anniversary day of the Buddha's birth, death and the enlightenment in Sagadawa [Tib. ས་ག་ཟླ་བ] right? On the 16th, Andru Gombo Tashi organized a small group of riders, about 10-15 and about 10-12 mules. Then he crossed the Kuru Bridge on a motorcycle. All the horses had been already prepared in Trip Tsechogling [Tib. གྲིབ་ཚེ་མཆོག་གླིང] [across the bridge]. We all crossed the bridge with our pistols--there were Chinese guards. He [Andru] went on a motorcycle up to Tsechogling and then rode on horseback and escaped to Lhoka. Then all the traders of Dokham [Amdo and Kham] went. It was told that Andru Jinda went for a pilgrimage and so after that there was a lot of activity. Every day there were 100 riders, 200 riders, 50 riders. Some were going via Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར], others via Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར], others via Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]. So to tell you briefly, that's how we left from Lhasa. The foundation for this was well made because previous the People's Association had put forth some political ideas. Later, with the fighting in Kham, everybody in Lhasa was very anxious. So the three great monasteries and all the various monasteries of Tibet and the incarnate lamas (Lings) in Lhasa like Tsomönling once they started thinking about the religion and politics of Tibet, they began disliking the Chinese. If the Tibetan Regiments actually rose up it would be of no use, right? So we had methods - the gyagpön and rupön were coming to the Chushigandru meetings. There was the Trapchi Gyagpön Kesang Dramdrü [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ] and Gyagpön Wangden Tashi [Tib. དབང་ལྡན་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. They were there [with the Chushigandru] from the start.   

**Q:**  They were with you?   

**A:**  Yes, wherever we met. However, when we made the pledge about what we are and where we are going, at those meetings they were not there. The reason for that was because they were not allowed to come to those meetings. Otherwise, they were always there. Even now, Kesang Dramdrü is alive and Wangden Tashi is not dead now, but he's sick. Even the Upper and Lower Tantric colleges (Tib. gyütö and gyüme) and all the Labrang in Lhasa, everybody hated the Chinese. There was doubt as to whether it was possible to be united and accomplish something, and to form an organization was no problem at all. So everybody worked well together in receiving the teaching of the Kalachakra, and it became very famous. Right after that, we established it [the organization]. The military camp was at Lhoka. Before people started going to Lhoka, at Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] the Tibetan government had stored five hundred English 303 carbines, 18 sten-guns, 6 large cannons and 2 smaller ones. And there was a lot of ammunition stored there. So we were going to get that at first. But before that. There was concern because the Chinese Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] defected to the Trapchi Regiment's garrison. They could not keep him, right? So they asked Andru Gombo Tashi if he could look after him. Andru consulted the deity Panglung Gyechen, who said to keep him since he will be of help and will not cause harm. So he was kept. He had brought about 4 rifles with him. He was a gunnery commander and he knew everything about the preparations that the Chinese had made. He actually told us the truth about the arrangements that the Chinese had made and described the various ways the Potala, Lhasa, Drepung, Sera and Norbulinga were to be fired upon. He told us all the plans. He was kept at the Trapchi Goddess [Tib. ལྷ་མོ] Temple. When he was sent to Andru Jinda, there was Lobsang Champa [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བྱམས་པ] and the 3 other riders. He was made to dress in Tibetan robes and we took him at night from Norbulinga across Ramadruka ferry site to Lhoka. The ones who took him were Tenzin Chödra [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་གྲགས] and Drogö. One is dead, but Drogö is still in Nepal. Lobsang Tashi was helpful later since he knew all about the Chinese preparations. So when the protective deities were consulted, it was said that he [the deity] will protect Andru Jinda up until the 25th, not after. And so it was not possible to be prepared to get guns and ammunition [first], and so all left for Lhoka.   

**Q:**  So when did you gather at Lhoka?   

**A:**  From May 1958. By July, all the traders had arrived.   

**Q:**  All the various groups [Tib. ཤོག་ཁ] were there?   

**A:**  Yes, all of them. The Amdowas were there. The Khambas were already organized, right. So when it was said that the move had begun, there were 100, 50, 60, 200 riders [leaving at different times]. So at first when they moved, the Khambas and the Amdowas had to take the name. Actually, there were people leaving from the army. They could not just leave [openly] because the Chinese would arrest them right away. Andru Jinda said and we had talks that the Khamba and Amdowas must break two laws. One was the Tibetan government's. You know there is this thing about Tibet being peacefully liberated and not allowed a military camp to be established. So we had to have a military camp, right? Regarding the Chinese law, the revolt is breaking the law, right? So we have to make this. However, covertly, the three great monasteries, the military, the kudrak, labrangs and lings [labrangs of famous incarnation lines in Lhasa] said that it is better that [we sort of organize separately]. The traders were made to take an oath. If that was not there, then it would be very difficult for the various traders to leave [for Lhoka]. Then on the outside we heard, though we never saw, that Yabshi Sawangchemmo [Gyalo Thondup], the brother of the Dalai Lama, was there. That preparations had been made with America and grand talk like that [was said]. That preparations were made with the Indian government, the U.S. and that once we start revolting, that Nehru himself will come and file a law suit. So there were all these kinds of talks to "fool" us [Tib. མགོ་སྐོར་ས]. There also was Shakabpa and Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen, the Tsidrung Champa Wangdü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུད] and the one who was kalön later at the Delhi office.   

**Q:**  Thubden Nyinji [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད]?   

**A:**  Yes, Thubden Nyinji. These monk officials voluntarily [Tib. ཁས་ལེན་པ] went [to India]. Alo Chöndze also went. There was also a famous elderly monk from Ganden. So they were saying they were going to do this and that. Then the various traders could not stay. I stayed back for about a month. Most of the Litangbas were sent with me including Andrutsang's relatives Lobsang and Ragrag. We all came later because we were all young and we were carrying messages to the traders [when they should leave].   

**Q:**  Did the wives and children remain at Lhasa?   

**A:**  They all stayed at Lhasa and the traders left. Later the wives and children came to give beer and khata scarves and said don't cry and we will pray for you. So they told their wives not to cry and the children not to worry. The earlier ones who left sort of left under secrecy, but later the Chinese never stopped them and let them leave - 100 riders, 200 riders. So when leaving they brought beer and threw khata scarves over the necks and people were saying to pray for goodwill, etc.   

**Q:**  All together, how many were there? How many units/groups?   

**A:**  We had about 23 including the Kadang and Khadang [regiments]. These were solely Amdowas and Khambas. Then there was Tsangpa Jola you know, the one who now went over to the Chinese. He was a companion of Alo Chöndze and them. When he joined the People's Association, he came from Tsang. He was not brought with [Alo to India] and he came to Drigutang. Andru Jinda and he knew each other and he stayed with Chushigandru. Now the misers of Lhoka were saying that they will send people [to fight], but please give us arms. The misers had no arms, so what to do. So Andru Jinda said that you misers have given us money and food. The government also had a lot of grain in Lhoka but they could not give it to us openly. But secretly, they told them [the various counties] to give the grain and for the Chushigandru to take it by force so that internally we will have no grievances. Phala Drönyerchemmo was very powerful, right? So all our talk was through him.   

**Q:**  Through him?   

**A:**  Through Phala. He said that there will never be permission from the government, but whatever you want to take it, and deep down the Dalai Lama will not be angry. So whatever he could say he would. Then we established the camp and hoisted the flag and then we went to Shang Ganden Chöngor. About 900 riders went.  

**Q:**  All together, how many were you at Drigutang?   

**A:**  At first we didn't have that many. There were about 2,000, out of which about 1,000 went to Shang Ganden Chöngor. Later, a lot came from Kham. At first there were a little over 2,000. Later many monks from the three great monasteries joined.   

**Q:**  Did many monks join?   

**A:**  Oh Yes. They came in groups of five, ten and from Ganden, in the 100's. About 100-200 Ganden monks came. They had their own regiments like Kadang, Khadang and the headquarters [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང]. Sera and Drepung did not have this. They joined the various other groups.   

**Q:**  Now we were saying that at Drigutang there were about 2,000. So we were at this point and then what happened?   

**A:**  So I'll start from there. After we established the camp, we appointed people from among the more prominent people to look after the miser. They were called Tsondzin. Their work was office work and to oversee the misers, and to see if the fighters were giving them difficulties or not. Then a military headquarters [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང] was established in which there were 11 magji selected from the prominent people of the various groups and prominent traders. So we gave khata and held an auspicious ceremony. There were 13 Tsondzin and 30 odd others and workers at the office. Then we made the constitution [Tib. རྩ་ཁྲིམས] with 27 articles regarding the prohibitions with regard to the fighting and the miser. Then, on or about, the 18th of August, we left from Drigutang to the north. We were going to get the arms at Shang Ganden Chöngor. We had no plans to fight the Chinese. Andru Jinda had ordered that if the Chinese shoot, do not return the fire but run away since we have to accomplish our work first [of getting arms]. At Yangpajen, we ran into the Chinese.   

**Q:**  At Yangpajen?   

**A:**  Yes, Chang Yangpajen. There was a small skirmish there. No casualties on our side, but a few Chinese were killed.   

**Q:**  So there was fighting?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we went straight and then we arrived at Dokarsumdo [Tib. མདོ་ཁ་གསུམ་མདོ]. It was difficult to travel together as one regiment of about a thousand riders. The reason being that there were 1,000 horses, 500 mules so all together there were 1,500 animals. If one got ready to start around dawn, [loading up, etc.] was not completed until around 9 or 10 in the morning. So we made two separate regiments. When the first group reached Dokarsumdo, the Chinese were waiting there. We did not know that they were there until we reached their 4th gunnery position [Tib. འཛིང་ར]. Then they began shooting. They had made nine gunnery positions. So from about 8 in the morning, all day long, and that whole night and the whole next day, the fight continued. All the Chinese in the first 4 gunnery positions were wiped out. Probably about 1,000 Chinese were killed or wounded. We probably captured, including machine guns, cannons and rifles, about 500-600 guns. We lost 3 of our magji--Chantreng Magji Lungta Tsering [Tib. རླུང་རྟ་ཚེ་རིང], Gaba [Tib. སྒ་པ] Magji Gelek Phüntsog [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་ཕུན་ཚོགས], and Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ] Magji Athang. When Andru counted the dead, the number was 49 and about 97 were wounded. That was in hand-to-hand combat [Tib. དམར་འཛིང]. After 3 days and nights of fighting, we left via the Shugola Pass [Tib. ཤོག་བུ་ལ]. The wounded were attended to as best we could and the dead bodies we could throw in the river we did. Some others just had to be left there. The Chinese got their amulets, charm boxes and all the gold [items] since most were traders [and had nice things], and about 100 rifles and pistols. So we travelled for a day and then before we reached Shang Ganden Chöngor we sent some volunteers to Ganden Chöngor Monastery. Then the people were divided and sent. When we got to the monastery, there were no Chinese there. The group that was to go to the monastery could not go. I went to the dzong. With me was Derge Magji Phuba Trinley [Tib. ཕུར་པ་འཕྲིན་ལས] and Gyeltang Magji Ayang Gomba who was very famous. We were to take over the dzong fort. There was the dzong head and a monk who was from Gyarong. They stopped us and told us, "We received the order from the Tibetan government saying you should not come at all." They had received a government order. They said, "Whether you are Chushigandru or whoever you are, please stay where we have arranged a place for you to stay. We at the monastery and the dzong are staying like a bird staying on a pile of thorns. The monasteries had already received many edicts from the Tibetan government saying that the Chinese or the monks in the khamtsen might come [to get the weapons], but do not hand over the weapons indiscriminately. You should keep the weapons carefully [Tib. བདག་པོ་ཡག་པོ་རྒྱོབས]. Then we sent some of our soldiers to capture the dzong head and the monk. And then we went to the dzong fort right way. The gate of the dzong was closed and they would not open it. We banged on the door with big rocks and people started coming down from the dzong. They were all young misers and we thought that they may be Chinese. They said that they were not Chinese. Then when we went inside, there were no Chinese. There were about 30-odd misers who each had an English 303 carbine. And they had kept stones ready to be used. So we took over the dzong fort and the dzong head and the monks came over to us. Then we hoisted our flag on the roof of the dzong fort. The monastery was below this. In the monastery the monks were all armed and they said that they were going to really shoot. The monks told us, "You should go down to the village where we have arranged a place where you should go. We can talk later on." The Chinese had also sent some people to get the weapons [in Ganden Chöngor]. There was a small monastery called Tralun [Tib. བཀྲས་ལྷུན] that belonged to Tashilhunpo. The Chinese had already arrived there. There were about 30-40 cavalry of an artillery unit. Then they left right away. When we heard the Chinese had come, at that point, it was the turn of the group under the Baba Magji to go [to attack the Chinese there]. When they were sent there, they [Chinese] had all run away into the rocks. They had fled up to the rocky mountain at the upper reaches of the valley. They had left all their horses and the mules there. They [Khambas] brought back the horses. The Chinese had hidden the cannons somewhere, but they [Khambas] said they could not find them. After we took over Ganden Chöngor, we started going back. So when Andru Gombo Tashi and the monastery started talking, the monastery would not let them in at all. So Andru Gombo Tashi told the various groups to get ready and to fire only if they were fired on first, and to bring the abbots of the monastic college and the monastic officials. Then we will talk and take the arms. Otherwise there is no room for discussions. So internally there was this arrangement, but everybody did not know about it. Our soldiers were saying that it is just too much if the first thing we have to do is to destroy our own monastery. So they were insisting that this should not happen (laughter). So Jinda said,"If we don't need the arms, then that’s okay. If we do need them, then there is no alternative. So he told them that they should only fire when fired upon." So all the monastic officials were tied up. The abbots told us, "You have to tie us up." We said that we are not going to tie you up, but the abbot said, "No, no you have to tie us up." Then we brought them to the park [Tib. ལྕང་ར]. There everyone was looking and we brought them out. The armory was beyond the main prayer assembly hall [Tib. ཚོམ་ཆེན]. There was a small door behind which all the arms were there. Most of the English 303 carbines had already been distributed to the monks. There were 496 English 303 carbines, 18 bren-guns and 18 sten-guns, 8 big and small cannons. There was ammunition in steel boxes containing 2,500 rounds each. The ammunition could not be loaded on horses. Each horse and mule could carry only 1,000 rounds of ammunition There were about a hundred steel boxes of ammunition. They said to send the main Magji only into the ammunition storeroom and that the monks will bring it out and give it to you. So I was sent. One had to be quite righteous from the point of the people [miser] and all. When this was done, they regarded me very highly. I went with two other monks and they said that the Chinese would not allow them to live normally and asked if I would let them have 100 English 303 carbines and the ammunition for that. I said, alright and left 100 rifles and 10-15 boxes of ammunition. Everything else was taken out. Then I told Jinda that they asked me to leave some arms and I did that. He said, well, its alright but don't tell anyone. Then they had a meeting and said, Oh, this is not going to be useful so they said to take all the arms. So all the rifles and pistols that the monastery had they said to take away. Then the monks said that they all wanted to go along with us, at least the able bodied ones. So we said that there's no way you all can go. You are not ready with horses, etc and we can not take monks to war at all. You all stay here, nothing will happen. And if it should happen, then we have a plan of our own. So we said that the Indians and the Americans were going to help us. We used to say things like that (laughs). So we did not take any monks with us but we did take all the arms- We had brought a Chinese artillery soldier, the Chinese Lobsang Tashi and the Amdowa Kelsang Gyel who was trained in artillery in the Xining war. They were experts and could shoot accurately. Then we got a lot of Chinese arms and ammunition. In this area there was said to be some people who liked the Chinese. Most of them were the miser of the monastery that belonged to Tashilhunpo. They might have been thinking that they would be skinned [disliked] [by the Khambas]. That was because at that point there seems to be something between the people in Ü [Tib. དབུས] and Tashilhunpo. But actually we didn't have anything like that. We said that there is nothing for you to be worried about. We are all Tibetans and we are doing it for the sake of religion and politics [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ཆབ་སྲིད]. We are not on the side of the kudrak of the government or Tashilhunpo. We are just doing it on the basis that Tibet is Tibet and China is China. Anyway, we had to get all the horses and the mules from them and about 100 mules had to be loaded with all the arms. Then we fought the most severe and first battle at Dokarsumdo. At Wuyug Dzomtang [Tib. འོད་ཡུག་འཛོམས་ཐང] there were Chinese who were coming from Tsang and Lhasa in their vehicles. We ambushed them and really shot them up. Maybe one may have been wounded but not one of our men died. Many Chinese vehicles were destroyed. Many Chinese cadres were killed. The vehicles were burned. Yadong Labrang's Chandzö came in the Chinese vehicles, but we didn't know that he was there and he was killed.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes.   

**Q:**  Yadong?   

**A:**  Yadong Dunggar [Tib. དུང་དཀར] Labrang. You know Yadong Geshe Rimpoche [Tib. དགེ་བཤེས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]?   

**Q:**  Yes, Yes.   

**A:**  The Labrang's vehicle was there. The fighters did not recognize them, so they shot him. He was wounded and then died. Then we tried to cross the river through the ferry port in lower [Tib. མཐིལ] Nyemo, but from Tsang one to two thousand Chinese were coming down and from Chushul there were more coming. And before we arrived at the port, the Chinese who were coming from Chushul had already arrived. Then from Dokarsumdo another [group of PLA troops] was coming. So the fight was coming from all three directions. So three regiments arrived at Nyemo. The place was very big. On one side were all the houses and the fields where the Chinese were coming. So from three different directions they were coming--then there was the real big battle. There were about 1500-600 Chinese coming from Takdruka. It is said that there were two to three thousand, but there were more than a thousand. Then before dawn we lost a lot of men and we began to loose ground, and we lost about half of the village area. At Dokarsumdo, we were waiting there and a lot of killing took place. The ones who were coming from Chushul --our group was divided into groups like Amdo, Targye Gomba, Chantrengpa and others. We suffered a lot of casualties and we killed a hell of a lot of them. The fight lasted two whole days and nights and on the third we withdrew and returned to Yangpajen.   

**Q:**  Yangpajen?   

**A:**  Chang Yangpajen. The Chinese were also at this place. At the place called Nyemo Karkhang [Tib. བཀར་ཁང], about 500 Chinese had arrived. At this encounter, we lost our famous Litangba named Singa [Tib. གཟིམ་འགག]. We did not suffer many casualties, but we killed so many Chinese and then the Chinese ran away towards Tölung Tshurpu [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་མཚུར་བུ]. Then we had to go to the north. We had to go to Yangpajen. When we went there, there were so many trucks that there was no way to go ahead, so we crossed the road and arrived at Chang Namtso Lake [Tib. བྱང་གནམ་མཚོ]. We killed quite a lot of them, but it wasn't too bad. A few [of us] were wounded. When we got to Namtso, there were no Chinese, but planes were coming. There were a lot of nomads there and we bought a lot of meat. So we stayed there for about 3 days. Then at Dam [Tib. འདམ] airport, we tried but were not able to destroy the airfield.   

**Q:**  Airfield?   

**A:**  You know, the Dam airfield for Lhasa. The Chinese were waiting in ambush and we fought with the Chinese at the airport. Some of our people were wounded. Then we ran into vehicles coming from Nagchuka [Tib. ནག་ཆུ་ཁ]. There were about 4 to 5 trucks which we destroyed. Then on the pass there were Chinese guards who had build a house and bunkers made from sod found on the grasslands [Tib. སྤོ་ཐོ]. This was [destroyed]. In Dam, we fought each other two or three times, and then we went to Reting. There we had two separate fights, but only one Amdowa was killed and 5-6 people were wounded. Then we went to Reting and towards Chundo [Tib. ཆུ་མདོ]. Then at Drigung Lungshö [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་ཀླུང་ཤོད] the Chinese had come and were waiting. There wasn't anything to eat and it was very difficult. We sent people to find food to eat and but we could not buy anything. They [the locals] told us to take food by force because if they sold it to us then the Chinese would not leave them alone. So some money was just left. Then we went to the Drigung Monastery. We gave them the horses of our people who had died. It was no use for us to take them. In this way we were able to fight in Drigung. At Drigung Lungshö there were about 200 Chinese and except for 20-30 of them who fled, almost all of them were wiped out [Tib. རྩ་མེད] We fought for a day, that night and the next day, and only about 20-30 Chinese escaped. A lot were wounded. Two Tsawarongpas died. We captured their [the Chinese] arms and horses. / Then at Mashung [Tib. སྨ་གཞུང] they had the cannons ready and Andru Gombo Tashi was wounded. In this area, the nomads said that the Chinese have been waiting in ambush for several days and the trucks have been arriving. So we said that it had to be taken and volunteers were sent. The Chinese had prepared all their guns and started shooting. We were holding a meeting. I had a pair of binoculars and was looking through it when something went whistling by. The Chinese were attacking I said. The Chinese had all the cannons ready and they started firing. All you could hear was the sound of their cannons. The shells were landing about 100 yards away. So we said to fall back, and we did. No bullets of ours could ever reach them. When they started firing the cannons they fired about 100 rounds. The whole place was just filled with clouds of dust. Then Jinda Andrutsang appeared. A cannon was shot near Jinda and he was hit by shrapnel, and along with him was an old man from Markham. He was cut from down here by the shrapnel. Among Andrutsang's servants was Tamdrin Wangyal [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་དབང་རྒྱལ]. Nothing happened to him and he was saying, "Gyelchen Dorje Shungden helped me" [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཤུགས་ལྡན་མཁྱེན]. But there were 5-6 other servants, including Rarag, who were covered in blood. Jinda had blood running over his eyes. I was there trying to wipe the blood. He [Andru Jinda] said, "Ngawang Yeshe, Ngawang Yeshe, I'm alright, I'm alright, the amulet has protected me. Bring some water, bring some water". So we brought him some water and he drank it all down. Then we said you can't stay like this, can you continue? He replied that that was no problem. A scarf was tied on his head and his body was all hit. He didn't let us touch his body. Then he was put on a horse and we went to a hilly nook [Tib. རི་ཁུག] where we could not get hit by the cannon fire. There we made fire with some kind of bushes [Tib. སུ་རུ] and melted some butter and poured it on his wounds. Then all the magji arrived and everyone was concerned. The cannons and the machine guns were firing and we thought that if we do not take over the pass then we will all be destroyed. So with these cannons firing there was no way to fight and so we thought that each group should leave separately. Then all the magji insisted and said, "Radrü Ngawang, now you please go with as many people as you can get [to take the pass]. As far as Jinda is concerned, no matter whether he would be alive or dead, even if we are wiped out, we will not leave things be." They swore in the name of the Dalai Lama and told me this. Now I was thinking that Jinda was probably going to die and that his body should not be left around. If the Chinese get hold of it, then it would be most shameful. I thought I would take him to a remote spot. That was all that was in my thoughts. So they were insisting a lot. So I said, "Alright you go down and I will go to the mountain pass. Then I called out to them [my partners for attacking the pass] and told them to come with me. Shalotsang [Tib. ཤག་ལྷོ་ཚང] Chöndze and I had good horses. I had a wounded servant who had an excellent horse so I [took his] and said to give him another one. So I had about 100 horsemen with me and there was this spot at the pass. Then I instructed them, "Today, all of you better die one after another [Tib. གཅིག་ཐོག་གཉིས་ཐོག] because if the Chinese do manage to come to here, you had better stack up the dead bodies [fight to the end] because if we loose this area then Jinda who is below with about 500-600 soldiers will be wiped out. The situation today is not like an every day affair, but it is an unprecedented one. Today, we have to fight with so many soldiers. Whoever dies, just stack up the bodies. After that we got onto the mountain pass at the same time as the Chinese got there. We fired the sten-guns that we had gotten from the government [Shang Ganden Chönkor]. They [the Chinese] were using their guns as walking sticks and were coming towards us, so they could not come forward. The mountain pass was very high. We had three guns for each person, and we shot them. The bullets hit their bodies, and their eyes were blocked with sand that rose when we were shooting around. Then we crossed the mountain pass. After a while, they [Chinese] turned their backs and ran away. After seizing that place, the two of us didn't flee but stayed there. They [the other Khambas] might have thought that we two were killed and I thought that my partners were killed because they didn't come, but later I learned that they didn't wait and had already fled. At that time, my best servants were with me. We had good horses, but they were not trained, so when they had to fight many times, they had fled. So when the two of us went back [from the pass], there were no horses, and my partners were not waiting there for us as they had fled. At that point, we had got separated from them [Note: in later interviews it turns out he had been knocked unconscious and left for dead]. We couldn't go in the daytime because the whole area was full of Chinese. For 5 days and nights we were just eating some blessed pills from our amulets and some tsamba we had. After 5 days and nights, we met a nomad and one of our fighters who had gotten separated also came there riding a horse and he had also brought a mule. The another person was someone who leased livestock [Tib. ཤེ་མ] from the Yangri Monastery so then we bought a mare that belonged to the monastery. We then went to the Yangri Monastery. In the monastery, Drigung Kyamgön [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་སྐྱབས་མགོན] Rimpoche who was 11-12 years old and his tutor were there. The monks in the monastery were assembling for prayers, and in the morning I asked for a divination from the Lama about Gombo Tashi. The lama's tutor looked at the divination scripture and said that there is a serious hindrance for him. Then I asked what rituals we should perform. The Lama suggested that we should spare hundreds of lives of animals that otherwise would be killed. And we were told to recite some scriptures like Sangjo Chilu [Tib. བཟང་སྤྱོད་འཆི་བླུ]. After that, he did another divination of which the dice came on number 9. When the tutor checked the divine scripture, it was said, "The life of Jinda was tied to the pillar so there will no problem for him. We can recite the scriptures here for you, but you should go ahead and spare the lives of the animals." We told them that there were people of Andrutsang in Lhasa, and they will spare the lives of the animals. At that time, my partner Shalotsang had about 200 notes of 100 sang denomination in his waist. Usually, I would not tie notes because I had the protective talisman and the notes are dirty. We offered some hundred sang money notes to the monastery for performing the rituals. At that moment, the monastery gave us tea leaves, meat and tsamba. We got three horses from the monastery. We didn't know which direction we should go, so we asked for divination. It said that it will be better to go to Phembo. When we were going to Phembo, we saw there were about 20-30 Chinese cavalry and 300-400 soldiers coming to collect the corpses of the Chinese killed in Lungshö [Tib. ཀླུང་ཤོད]. At that point, it has been 5-6 days since the battle had taken place. There were many people going up and down to and from the monastery. They didn't know us, because our horses were saddled with nomad's saddles. After that, we went directly to Phembo. Then some of our soldiers who were scattered got together in Phembo and there were 15-20 riders who came from our homeland Gaba. We all got together. At that moment, Lobsang Tempa [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་པ] was already there. Shalotsang Chöndze and I went to Sera where some of my relatives were. We were wearing monk's robes and carrying the sten-gun and my Canadian pistol under our monk's robes. At that time, the mother of Shalotsang was living in Ramoche. We went to that place. There were many people gathered in Lhasa. I knew Gyagpön Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi from before that so then we called them and reported to Drönyerchemmo (Phala) about what happened in the meantime. Also the Commander of the Bodyguard Regiment of the Dalai Lama and Depön Tashi Bera the commander of the regiments of the Tibetan government and we were like in the same group and we were consulting about matters, so I stayed many days in Lhasa. We let Kesang Dramdrü write down how we made war with the Chinese and how we killed the Chinese. It was like a story. We were afraid that people might know that this was his handwriting, so we let the monks copy it. I stayed in Lhasa for about a month.   

