# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0012.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** October 2002  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Tsewang Namgyal Shelling  
**Name:** Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] was a Litang (Khamba) monk who became a monastic manager/trader (Tib. ཇིསོ) and then became one of the top military commanders in Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses the origin and establishment of Chushigandru in Lhoka and the expedition led by Gombo Tashi to take the weapons stored in an arsenal of the Tibetan government at Shang Ganden Chöngor. He discusses, in detail, the events and battles getting to Shang and how they secured the arms without having to engage the monastery in battle.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0012_05/H_0012_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A:**  I am 76.   

**Q:**  In what animal year were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in the Hare Year.   

**Q:**  What was the planning and decision to move to Drigutang? If the offering of the golden throne was related to the plan, you can tell us, if it was not related, you don't need to tell us about that. How was it planned from the beginning and how was it decided on?   

**A:**  All of the traders of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, including the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>was who were then in Lhasa, came to an unified agreement without discussion [Tib. མ་གྲོས་བསམ་པ་གཅིག་མཐུན]. That was the time when in the Kham and Amdo areas, the Chinese, under the pretext of the Democratic Reforms, were killing several thousands of people every day. Therefore we were saying that we could no longer stay in Lhasa easily [without doing something]. At that time, Andru Jinda [after a meeting] made an agreement in the Kangyur Temple [in his houses] that said all of the people from Kham and Amdo who were attending the meeting there should decide now that they will abide by all the points in this agreement and will never withdraw. We made a written oath [Tib. མནའ་གན] saying that "We will never reveal the secrets of the meeting. It was also written in the oath that we will not stay in Lhasa, and will have to go and stay outside of Lhasa. So all of the people who take this oath should go to the place where we should go." At the time of making the oath, Andru Jinda didn't mention the name of the where we should go. Two of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment, Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi, were siding with Andru Jinda and they attended the meetings of Chushigandru from the beginning to the end. Andru Jinda, however, was saying to us that the two of them were spies and were representatives of the Tibetan government. As a consequence, he told the two of them that they could not attend the meeting where we took the oath. So he told them to leave when it came time to take the oath. After that, we took the oath.   

**Q:**  When you took the oath, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> were not there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who were the main people who signed the written oath?   

**A:**  From Litang there was 1. Andru Jinda, 2. Radrü Ngawang, 3. Kunga Samden [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་བསམ་གཏན], 4. Jase, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of the Litang Gasi [Tib. ག་གཟི] Labrang, 5. Lobsang Champa [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བྱམས་པ], 6. Rarag and 7. Chödrag [Tib. ཆོས་གྲགས] Bartsak ["pockmarked"], he was the father of Lobsang Senge [Tib. བློ་བཟང་སེང་གེ]. All together, there were about 30-40 people from Litang. From Targye Gomba [Tib. dar rgays dgon pa] there was 1. Jama Ngadru [Tib. བྱ་མ་ངག་དྲུག], 2. Pedor [Tib. དཔལ་རྡོར] Gyau [beard], he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> of Targye Gomba, 3. The chandzö of Ganzi Lamdrag [Tib. ལམ་བྲག] and 4. Tsültrim [Tib. ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས] the chandzö of the Ganzi Kyamgön [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས་སྐྱབས་མགོན]. From Chamdo there was 1. Dotse [Tib. རྡོ་ཚེ] and 2. Tsering Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་རྡོ་རྗེ], he was appointed as the magji of Chamdo in Drigu. From Tsawarong there was 1. Thampa Lodrö [Tib. དམ་པ་བློ་གྲོས], 2. Aba, 3. the chandzö of Ju Samdong [Tib. འཇུས་ཟམ་གདོང] Rimpoche and 4. the chandzö of the Ludrup [Tib. ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ] Rimpoche, he was from Kongtse Rawa. From Derge there was 1. Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ], 2. Phurba Trinley [Tib. ཕུར་པ་འཕྲིན་ལས], he was the magji of Derge and 3. Tsering Ngodrub [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་དངོས་དྲུབ]. From Ga pa [Tib. སྒ་པ] there was Wangchen Lhangön [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་ལྷ་མགོན]. From Gyeltang there was 1. The chandzö of Kharchen Lama, he was the most important person from Gyeltang and 2. Abo Tsültrim [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས], he was also a very important person. From Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་འཕྲེང] there was 1. Lonphel Tsültrim [Tib. blo 'phel thshul khrims], 2. Dawa [Tib. ལྡ་བ] and 3. Kelsang Chönzin [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཆོས་འཛིན]. From Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས] there was 1. Abo Rabgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་རྒྱས] and 2. Gen Gurdrag [Tib. རྒན་གུར་དྲག], he was the Tsondzin of Markham. Then there was Thöndrup Phüntso [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་ཕུན་ཚོགས] from Gonjo and Yeshe [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས] from Nyarong [Tib. ཉག་རོང]. And from Tau [Tib. རྟ་འུ] there was, 1. Norbu, he was the Tsondzin and 2. Khedrub [Tib. མཁས་གྲུབ], he was the magji. From <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> there was 1. Tshelo [Tib. ཚེ་བློ], 2. Gonkhog, 3. Jimpa Gyatso [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] and 4. Kado. There were many other people from Amdo. From Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ] there was Lama Atru.   

**Q:**  Was he a Lama?   

**A:**  No, he was just called Lama and also Ngawang Yönden [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཡོན་ཏན].   

**Q:**  Did you sign a written oath?   

**A:**  Words were written in the oath, and some people signed it, while some people put their seal on it.   

**Q:**  Did also you swear verbally?   

**A:**  All people put their heads under the Kangyur Scripture, and they swore.   

**Q:**  What was the main content of the written oath?   

**A:**  We were not be allowed to tell even one's family members about the matters discussed at the meetings to oppose the Chinese. Everyone had to keep this secret. If the secret would be revealed, it would be very dangerous. Also everyone in the groups would be able to go to the [designated] place without leaving a single person behind. These were the main points, and the horses and the guns were prepared before that.   

**Q:**  Was it written in the oath that you were going to Drigutang?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  The written oath was not for going to Drigutang, right?   

**A:**  Actually, the place was Drigutang, but it was not mentioned in the oath.   

**Q:**  Andru Jinda didn't tell the people about the place where they should go, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The oath was signed for going somewhere, because you could no longer stay in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In what year the oath was signed?   

**A:**  That was probably in January 1958. Two or three months after we signed it we left Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did Andru Jinda consult with you and a few <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and say let's go to Drigutang, or did you call a meeting and tell the people that we are going to Drigutang?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. Andru Jinda left Lhasa crossing the Kuru Bridge on a motorcycle with about 20 riders. That was on the 16th of the 4th Tibetan month.   

**Q:**  Before he left, did he give the order for you guys to go to Drigutang?   

**A:**  I was the person left in Lhasa to deliver the message regarding this matter.   

**Q:**  So, you became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was given the responsibility to deliver the message. The message was that Andru Jinda has gone for a pilgrimage in the Lhoka area, and he said that you guys should come for a pilgrimage in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  You were given the responsibility for delivering the message, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You were in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you delivered the message, did you tell them that they should go for a pilgrimage, or did you tell them that outwardly we should go for pilgrimage, but actually we are going to Drigutang?   

**A:**  No. At that point, I didn't even know that we were going to Drigutang.   

**Q:**  Who were the inner circle people who knew that you were going to Drigutang?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda said that we are going to Lhoka, but he never mentioned that we were going to Drigutang.   

**Q:**  He didn't even tell you about that?   

**A:**  No, he didn't.   

**Q:**  Andru Jinda didn't tell all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> about going to Drigutang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. On the very day that Andru Jinda left, Gyeltang Kharchen Chandzö [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཐང་མཁར་ཆེན] left Lhasa with about 40 riders.   

**Q:**  Even they didn't know about going to Drigutang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After you got there in Drigutang, how was the organization done among the fighters?   

**A:**  On the day [I left], Lobsang Champa, Chödrag and I took the Chinese [defector] Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Linga and escorted him to the Rama ferry site. We had dressed him in a Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>, and because his face was reddish, we stuck some black bandages on it. On the other side of the river, there were some people from Litang who would take him to Lhoka. After Andru Jinda and Kharchen Chandzö got to Lhoka, they left messages at all of the ferry sites, such as the Jagsam ferry site, the Rong Lukhang ferry site and the Benza [Tib. བན་རྩ] ferry site, saying that all people coming to Lhoka should come to Drigutang. When we were going to Lhoka, the Chinese knew that we were going, but in case the Chinese stopped us, we had a wide scale plan. If Andru Jinda and the soldiers of theChushigandru were stopped, the three great monasteries, Sera, Drepung and Ganden, and the regiments [of the Tibetan army] would rise up. Andru Jinda had signed an oath saying that the people would also rise up. Internally, all of the regiments of the Tibetan army were united with Andru Jinda. Therefore, the Chinese let us go wherever we were going. After I delivered all of the messages, I left Lhasa on the 25-26th of the 4th Tibetan month.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1958?   

**A:**  Yes. Andru Lobsang who was the relative of Andru Jinda was there [with me].   

**Q:**  Was he a brother of Andru Jinda?   

**A:**  He was related to him closely, but was not his brother. And there was Lobsang Champa and so on. Altogether there were 42 riders all from Litang who left Lhasa on the day I left. There were 30 odd riders from Thampa Lodrö's [Tsawarongpa] group, and about 20 some riders from Apo Rabgye's Markham group. So altogether we were a little more than 100 riders who left Lhasa on the same day. We went through the Ngachen [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན] Power Station and crossed the shallow part of the river in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> area. Then we went via Ganden Monastery and crossed the Rong Lukhang ferry site. At that moment, most of the Khambas who had taken the oath and were ready to leave had left Lhasa. When we arrived at that ferry site, we got the message saying that we should go to Drigutang. All of the people from Derge and Gaba were also going to Drigutang. We arrived at Drigu on the 6th of June.   

**Q:**  You mean the people from Litang arrived at Drigu, right?   

**A:**  Not only the people from Litang. There were people from Tsawarongpa, Markham, Derge and Amdo. In the beginning, when we gathered in Drigu, there were about 2050-2060 riders.   

**Q:**  All of them arrived at Drigu on the 6th of June, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Now, the regiment was set up in Drigutang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We were all living in tents on the bank of the lake. After Andru Jinda arrived at Lhoka, he called the misers and the officials of the monasteries for a meeting and arranged and got the food for the people and the fodder for the horses ready. In the meantime, some of the monks from the big monasteries were saying that they were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, and they had done some bad things like robbing from the misers. They were just using the name of the Chushigandru, so Andru Jinda sent 10-20 some riders and eliminated [Tib. མེད་པ་བཟོ] those people.   

**Q:**  You mean they were expelled?   

**A:**  Yes, some of them were arrested and sent back to their masters or their owners [Tib. མི་བདག], some of them were expelled and some of them joined the Chushigandru. There were some monks from Dakpo [Tib. དྭགས་པོ] Labrang who were sent back to their monastery.   

**Q:**  Why did you choose Drigutang instead of another place? What kind of military strategy was taken into consideration? Though it was decided by Andru, tell me what was your thinking.   

**A:**  Some of us were thinking that the regiment of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> would be set up in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda had told us, "Perhaps Nehru of India might come to Tibet and hold talks between the Chinese and the Tibetans for settling the matters through peaceful means. This is one kind of hope, and a possibility if we could make a strong effort. The Chinese were saying that they would liberate the areas above the Yangtze River through peaceful means. So if the Dalai Lama told Chairman Mao that the Chinese should stop the war of the military liberation in Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, we were hoping that Chairman Mao might possibly accept that and stop the war and there was a possibility for a peaceful settlement." He told this to us when we asked him what kind of plan he had. We were thinking that if Nehru would come, he would come from India and India is a very big country with many soldiers. If Nehru would come, many soldiers would come. If many soldiers didn't come, they won't be able to talk with the Chinese. If Nehru would mediate, that would be powerful. Therefore, if the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> would make the war in the Lhoka area, it was a good place to get food for the people and fodder for the horses. And it was also close to India. We were thinking that that was the plan of Andru Jinda. There were 7 of us who told Andru Jinda our opinions.   

**Q:**  Who were the 7 people?   

**A:**  Ngawang Dadrag of Gasitsang, who is now living in Darjeeling. Litang Athar, Lotse of Gasitsang, Drega Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. [?] blo bzang rgyal mtshan], Tempel Chödrag [Tib. བསྟན་འཕེལ་ཆོས་གྲགས] from Litang Napo [Tib. སྣ་པོ], Nale Bugö [Tib.[?] bu rgod], who was killed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> when he came with Athar and Lobsang Champa who now lives in Nepal. We had been making war day and night in Litang and now we didn't want to stay like that. We were talking to each other, saying that we should get weapons from the Tibetan government and go to Litang to make war. We were causing a lot of trouble for Andru Jinda, telling him that he should ask the Tibetan government for weapon support and that we should not remain like this. All of the traders of Litang gave up doing business. The people got together, and our wealth was pooled together and we bought guns and horses. We were saying that all people from age 18-60 should go back to Kham and make war. At that time, Andru Jinda said "You all are very enthusiastic in giving up business, and people gathering together and pooling your wealth together. If all of you are in unison on that opinion, that is very good." But the seven of us were telling each other that Lhoka might be the only place to go. All of us being traders, we told Andru Jinda that we were going to send several thousands of loads of tea leaves and cloth to Lhoka, so that we wouldn't need to ask the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>s for food and fodder as soon as we arrived there. If we had something to pay to the miser, that would be good. We told Andru Jinda about that, but Jinda was probably thinking that the secret might be revealed so he said, "Don't worry about the food and the fodder, I have already made a plan for that. After we get to Lhoka, we don't need to worry about the food and the fodder." He didn't accept our opinion. We all were traders so we could have sent tens of thousands of loads to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  That was all private wealth, right?   

**A:**  Yes. If we had something to pay, in the future, people wouldn't need to say that we took away this and that from the misers. We were thinking from a broader perspective. We were thinking that Lhoka is a vast area, and it is near to India and Bhutan. And Athar and those people have contact with the American CIA. So, it would be difficult for America to drop weapons if we stay amidst the Chinese. Therefore, we were thinking that Lhoka is the only place to go.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any pressure from Phala who was afraid of fighting accidentally erupting in Lhasa. So did he tell Andrutsang to please leave Lhasa?   

**A:**  No. he didn't say that. Phala was the person who had the closest relation with the Khambas. Whatever should be reported to the Dalai Lama, he was the most important person. Phala, Gusung Depön and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Kelsang Ngawang were the main people who had relations with Andru Jinda They were very close friends. Phala was seeing the danger if trouble would take place in Lhasa because the Dalai Lama was living in Lhasa. Although, the Tibetan government had a lot of weapons and ammunition in Lhasa, it was not convenient for them to give it to the Chushigandru. So Phala told Andru Jinda that the weapons in Shang Ganden Chöngor woule be beneficial for him. Phala, most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were pro-Dalai Lama. However, the kudrak, like Ngabö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, were verbally powerful in the Tibetan government. Those people were thinking that it would be absolutely useless for the Khambas or the people of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> to fight with the Chinese. They were very tactful and were obedient to whatever the Chinese were telling them to do. And we heard that there were many kudrak following them. Phala and many kudrak knew that the Chinese were not going to give the authority above [the area west of] the Yangtze River [Tibet] to the Dalai Lama. The Chinese had kind of insulted [Tib. བརྙས་བརྐོ] the Dalai Lama many times about giving the protective talisman <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Mahe to the Khambas. And the Chinese were saying that the area above the Yangtze River was to get a peaceful liberation and so on.   

**Q:**  Who decided to go to Drigu, was it Andrutsang?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda was very familiar with the places in Lhoka since he had gone for a pilgrimage in Pemakö [Tib. པད་མ་བཀོད], Tsari [Tib. ཙ་རི] and to all of the places in Lhoka. He decided whatever he thought. He didn't consult with any people. I have never heard that he consulted with a single person.   

**Q:**  How was your regiment organized from the beginning?   

**A:**  After we got to Drigutang, from the 11th of June to the 13th, we held meetings for three days. That was an urgent meeting. We made the list of how many soldiers had come from each area. Then we differentiated the famous and the best people from all of the groups. The elderly people wouldn't be able to make war, so they were appointed as the ones in charge. They worked in the main offices and they were the people who were giving orders. They were called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན]. Andru Jinda was among the tsondzin as well as the magji. There were about 27-28 tsondzin appointed. And there were 17 offices. Under the main office there was the court and the intelligence office.   

**Q:**  Could you tell me the names of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>?   

**A:**  I can't tell you all of the names today.   

**Q:**  Please tell me later. At that time were there 4 top commanders?   

**A:**  No, there weren't 4 top commanders. On the 12th, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> were appointed, and on the 13th, 18 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> were appointed. I can tell you the names of the magji. Actually, there were 19 magji including Andru Jinda. There were two top magji commanders. The top commander of the right wing (Tib. ཡེརུ་མགཇི [Tib. གཡས་རུ་དམག་སྤྱི]) and the left wing (Tib. Yönru magji [g.yon ru dmag spyi]. The top commander of the right wing was me, the top commander of the left wing was Chantreng Lonphel Tsültrim [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲེང་བློ་འཕེལ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས]. There were 8 magji under the top commander of the right wing and there were 8 magji under the top commander of the left wing. When we burned incense and would parade around, the top commander of the right wing would lead the cavalry on the right side and the top commander of the left wing would lead the riders from the left side. Each top commander would lead about a thousand cavalry. The Chinese had taken photos of them, those were very imposing. I heard that the Chinese had the photos, that were taken by their spies from the mountains near by.   

**Q:**  Were you able to take photos?   

**A:**  We were able to take photos, but they weren't so good.   

**Q:**  If you have photos, we want to ask to use them.   

**A:**  The photos were kept by Gyalo Thondup who is living in Darjeeling. I heard that the person who took the photos gave them to Gyalo Thondup, and he let his son keep them. I heard that the Chinese said that there were more than ten thousand cavalry, but actually there were only two thousand. The Chinese were afraid of us like that.   

**Q:**  At that time, the two of you were the top commanders, so did they call you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> chewa [Tib. ཆེ་བ]?   

**A:**  No. We were called the Yeru Magji and the Yönru Magji. Those names were taken from the ancient Tibetan [military] parade during the Mönlam Festival which had the right and left wing. Our position was similar to the Yasor Tripa [Tib. ཡ་སོར་ཁྲི་པ], commander-in-chief.   

**Q:**  Who selected the Yeru Magji and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཡོན་རུ་དམག་སྤྱི] Commander of the Left Horn/Wing (in Chushigandru).">Yönru Magji</a>?   

**A:**  They were selected through voting done by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and all of the people. They were selected from among the magji. Each group had one magji, but the Litang and Chantreng group had two magji each.   

**Q:**  These were the junior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, right?   

**A:**  Actually, we didn't have any salary. All of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> were the same regardless of whether they were the top or the junior ones.   

**Q:**  You didn't have salaries, but there was a great difference in importance since you were giving orders to the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. First the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> were selected and then the top commanders, or the magji of right wing and the left wing, were selected.   

**Q:**  Who were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> in the right wing?   

**A:**  The 16 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> were not divided into two wings permanently, they would go to the right and left wing, hither and thither.   

**Q:**  Who were the 16 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>?   

**A:**  I will write them down and give you them with the names of the tsondzin.   

**Q:**  Were there 5 liaison officers to establish good relations between the misers and the fighters, and another 5 to take care of the supplies?   

**A:**  That was not 5 people. It was the office making the friendly relations. The heads of the 5 offices were appointed from among the tsondzin. There was the court, the office for intelligence, and the office for publicizing about the Chushigandru. All together there were 17 offices, and there was the headquarters.   

**Q:**  Were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> taking the post of leaders of the offices?   

**A:**  The leaders of the offices were all tsondzin.   

**Q:**  Actually, they were the administration [Tib. འཛིན་སྐྱོང] officers, or the civil officers [Tib. ཞི་བའི་ལས་ཁུངས], right?   

**A:**  Yes, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> of each group were elected by their own people in each group. Gyado Thöndrub and I were elected as magji from among the Litangbas. Lonphel Tsültrim and Kelsang Chönzin were elected from the Chantreng area. Only Nyarong didn't have a magji. It was because they didn't have many people. Actually, if there were not around 100 riders, there would not be a magji. If there were 60-70-80 riders, they can have a magji.  

**Q:**  Who chose the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>?   

**A:**  They were the [more senior] people who had taken the responsibility while still in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were there <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> from all the groups?   

**A:**  Yes. The older people who could make the decision on behalf of their group were the tsondzin.   

**Q:**  These older people were in their fifties, right?   

**A:**  They were in their fifties or sixties. They were unable to engage in war.   

**Q:**  You were in your twenties, right?   

**A:**  I was 31-32 years old.   

**Q:**  If an attack was ordered, how would the chain of command operate?   

**A:**  When we went to the north, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> was leading one's group. And a group was going ahead as an advanced troop [Tib. སྔོན་འགྲོ]. This role was done by turns. Whoever encountered the enemy, he should fight.   

**Q:**  Nobody was giving orders to the advanced troop, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The advanced troop should fight on their own decision, right?   

**A:**  If they encountered the enemy, they had to fight. But if they heard that there was the enemy somewhere ahead, like in Dokarsumdo, then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> would have to think about attacking or defending the place. When they couldn't make the decision, they could ask Andru Jinda.   

**Q:**  Did they have telephones?   

**A:**  No, they had to send a messenger.   

**Q:**  Then it would take many days, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How would they send the messenger?   

**A:**  The messenger would be sent from the advanced troop to the next group of a hundred, and the next group would send a messenger to the next, and like that it would reach the headquarters. And if Andru Jinda gave the order to fight, they would fight.   

**Q:**  Did the order also comes back through the same way, from one group to another group?   

**A:**  Yes, but that was only done sometimes.   

**Q:**  If it was not important, they would make their own decision and fight, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It would take a long time to deliver the message, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They had to wait for the order even if took a long time, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Roughly, how big were the larger groups like that from Litang?   

**A:**  The Litang group had about 180 cavalry. Chantreng had about 150 cavalry.   

**Q:**  The other groups had over hundred cavalries, right?   

**A:**  No. Some of them didn't have a hundred. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> group had a little more than a hundred. The Amdo group had two magjis. There were 150 Amdowas.   

**Q:**  How was the food for the people and fodder for the horses arranged? Please tell me in detail.   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of each <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> gave the order to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> regarding the amount of grain they wanted. And the miser delivered the grain to the dzong according to the order. The dzongpön gave them a receipt for the grain, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, butter and meat that they collected from the miser. And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> gave a receipt to the dzong saying that we will pay the cost of the food later on when we got independence.   

**Q:**  Internally, the Tibetan government had talked about giving the government's [stored] grain in Lhoka to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, right?   

**A:**  Probably there was some kind of order like that. That was why Andru Jinda was saying that he had an arrangement.   

**Q:**  But actually, did they give the grain from the storerooms of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>?   

**A:**  Probably not. I never heard about that.   

**Q:**  Did you take grains from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> like taking the guns from Ganden Chöngor?   

**A:**  No, we didn't.   

**Q:**  What was the thinking when the name of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was changed into the "Volunteer Army to Defend the Religion", Tensung Tanglang Magar [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླངས་དམག་སྒར]?   

**A:**  The so called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> included the Khambas and the Amdowas. That was the named given in Lhasa. Tensung Tanglang Magar was the name after setting up the regiment in Drigu.   

**Q:**  That was the name of the regiment, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was the name of the organization, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there any people other than the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> in the regiment?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they name it Tanglang Magar because there were people other than the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>?   

**A:**  Tensung Tanglang Magar was the proper joining of the name and deed because monks, lamas, the people from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, women and nuns were allowed to join it. It was a voluntary organization [of more than Khambas].   

**Q:**  Did women join the Tanglang Magar?   

**A:**  There were no women from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> who joined the regiment.   

**Q:**  Were there women from Kham?   

**A:**  Yes. There were many women from Kham who joined the Tanglang Magar.   

**Q:**  Did they cook for the Regiment?   

**A:**  Probably, they were doing cooking in the regiment. But there were women fighting also. That was a misunderstanding, there were women only in Kham, not in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  The name Tanglang Magar only existed after the people gathered in Drigu, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At the opening celebration, who gave the speeches?   

**A:**  The speech was given by Andrutsang on the 16th of June,the day when we burned incense. He announced the names of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> of the Chushigandru. The representatives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, the estates and the monasteries in Lhoka also attended the meeting. We had prepared very elaborately for the celebration.   

**Q:**  Did you a give a speech?   

**A:**  No, after Andru Jinda gave the speech, the representatives of the monasteries gave speeches.   

**Q:**  All of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> were sitting on the stage, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In 1958 were 500 riders directly sent to Shang Ganden Chöngor to get the guns?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How did they send the 500 riders?   

**A:**  Probably, there was a talk about sending 500 riders from Lhasa before we went to Lhoka. We were preparing for 500 riders to go to Ganden Chöngor to get the guns. In the meantime, the situation became tense, so Andru Jinda had to go to Lhoka suddenly. After arriving in Lhoka, and after the celebration was done, nobody was talking about Ganden Chöngor. It was a secret. Andru Jinda and some inner circle people knew about it. Publicly it was said that the "northern troop" [Tib. བྱང་དམག] had to go to the north [that was how they explained the force leaving to get the guns]. They were about 1,000 cavalry.   

**Q:**  Actually, you were going to Shang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We were going to get those weapons. We needed a lot of weapons because there were many Amdowas and monks from the big monasteries who didn't have weapons. All of the traders had a pistol and a rifle, and all bought horses.   

**Q:**  Did all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> know about getting guns from Ganden Chöngor?   

**A:**  I knew about it. Some of us knew about it, but not all the magji. We were saying that Jinda shouldn't go to Shang but should stay with the main regiment. He should send us wherever he needs us to go. He can send 100 riders as a group. But Jinda was afraid that the soldiers would not behave friendly toward the misers on the way, so if he didn't lead them well, they would not treat them kindly. On the other hand, the talk about getting guns from Ganden Chöngor was held between Phala and Andru Jinda, and nobody knew about that. Therefore, if he didn't go, the other people wouldn't know the way to get the guns, so he insisted that he would go to the north. In the meantime, he appointed three people as his representatives in Lhoka. Jangtsa Chöndze [Tib. འཇང་ཚ], who was very eloquent and good in writing, Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Jimpa Gyatso. They were appointed as the main <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> staying in Drigu.   

**Q:**  They were appointed by Andru Jinda himself, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that point, you were among the people who was going to fight, right?   

**A:**  I was with Jinda.   

**Q:**  The three of them were not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When many soldiers would newly come and if they needed to appoint more <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, the three of them would appoint them.   

**Q:**  They were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were staying in the main office of the tsondzin.   

**Q:**  Were they appointed from among the 27 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they were the people who were giving orders when Jinda was not there.   

**Q:**  Were you planning to get the guns from Shang Ganden Chöngor from the beginning?   

**A:**  Yes, that was planned from Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was Ganden Chöngor the only place to get the guns?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who made the decision to take guns from Ganden Chöngor? Did Andru Jinda ask Phala for the guns, or did Phala tell Jinda to get the guns?   

**A:**  I was not there when they were talking about that, but I think that Andru Jinda requested that the Tibetan government should help the Khambas with weapons. I heard that Phala, the Gusung Depön and Depön Tashi Bera were present when he made the request. They could not support us with weapons from Lhasa, so Phala told Jinda that the weapons in Ganden Chöngor would be beneficial for the Khambas and there were no Tibetan government soldiers over there [guarding them]. The responsibility for keeping the weapons was given to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and the monks of Ganden Chöngor. I think internally there was an order to Ganden Chöngor saying that if Andru Jinda would come, they should hand over the weapons to him.   

**Q:**  When they went to get the weapons, the Khambas pretended to tie up the abbot of Ganden Chöngor, right?   

**A:**  That was an act. In the beginning, we were sent to Shang with 200 riders [as an advance unit]. Before we arrived at Ganden Chöngor, we came to the river called Chungbo. That was the river of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> Tanag [Tib. རྟ་ནག]. There was an iron bridge, but the horses could not cross the bridge so we had to let the horses swim across the river. The horses were not able to cross the river so we had to walk. We were supposed to arrive at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and the monastery before dawn, but when we were walking the whole way, day broke before we arrived at Ganden Chöngor.   

**Q:**  What time was that when the horses could not cross?   

**A:**  That was about 3-4 p.m. We had to wait for a long time. It took about 1-2 hours for the horses to cross the river.   

**Q:**  So, you were walking to Ganden Chöngor at night, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When we gathered together there were about 80-90 people out of the 200 people. And there were only 4 magji.   

**Q:**  Who were the 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>?   

**A:**  The Baba <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> was Pedor, the magji of Targye Gomba was Phurba Trinley, there was a magji of Derge and me. From among the 4 magji, Phurba Trinley and I were assigned to go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. The two of us led 30 soldiers. The magjis of the Baba and Targye Gomba were assigned to go to the monastery. We arrived at the dzong after sunrise. Before we arrived at the dzong, there were two representatives of the dzong coming down from it. One was a man with a golden earring and the other was a monk. They asked us where we were going. We told them that we needed to see the dzongpön. They said that the dzongpön was out. We told them that we were sent by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> Tensung Tanglang Magar from a very long distance so we didn't have any choice but to go to the dzong. They said, "Please do not go the dzong." The man with the earring was the representative of the lay official dzongpön, and the monk, who was from Gyelrong, was the representative of the monk official dzongpön. He was a famous person and also an official of the Ganden Chöngor monastery. They were saying that they had received an edict from the Tibetan government saying that the dzong and monastery should be careful and should not let people come to the dzong indiscriminately, and that it was not okay to hand over the weapon if someone were to come get them. They had distributed the weapons to the monks. In the dzong, they had distributed 30 English 305 carbines to about 30 misers, some of them were young and some of them were like household heads. They didn't let us go to the dzong, saying that we "should stay down there in the misers' houses. We will arrange places for you to stay and then we can talk. We have heard that the Chushigandru had offered a golden throne, but we never heard about the Tensung Tanglang Magar." After that, I asked Phurba Trinley to stay with the representatives and talk with them, and left 5-6 people with him. I let them hold on to the representatives there. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> Ayong Gomba and I took about 20 some people and went to the dzong. When we arrived at the dzong, the big gates of the dzong were closed. So we stoned the gate with big stones, and we shouted that they should open the gate. Then an old man and a youngster came over and opened the gate. We loaded the rifles and pressed the rifles towards their chest saying that there were Chinese inside the dzong. They said, "There is not a single Chinese here, please come on in." When we went inside the dzong, there were about 20-30 youngsters who were misers. Then we saw that they had about 30 some 305 English carbines in a room.   

**Q:**  Were those distributed to the misers?   

**A:**  Yes. They were for protecting the dzong.   

**Q:**  Did they try to shoot you?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Were they afraid?   

**A:**  Yes, they were showing the appearance of fear. They untied their hair braids to show respect, and they were telling us to come in.   

**Q:**  When you went to Ganden Chöngor, did you know that the Tibetan government had internally given the weapons?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda probably had a plan, but we didn't know much about that.   

**Q:**  Did you think that the Tibetan government was not really willing to give the weapons?   

**A:**  We were suspicious because they were not letting us go to the dzong.   

**Q:**  From the beginning, didn't you think that they were play-acting?   

**A:**  No, I didn't think like that.   

**Q:**  Were you angry when they didn't let you in?   

**A:**  Yes, we were angry, so we held the representatives and went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. After we got to the dzong, the representatives and Phurba Trinley were coming up.   

**Q:**  Did they tie up the representatives?   

**A:**  No, they were entertaining us, making tea for us, and serving meat for us.   

**Q:**  Why did they change their attitude so quickly? Were they afraid?   

**A:**  Yes, they were afraid of us. We had already seized the dzong. The monks in the monastery were holding guns, and they told the Khambas that if the Khambas destroyed one of the eight gates of the monastery they will shoot them. They said that the Khambas should stay down there [where the misers lived] and they will deliver messages to them.   

**Q:**  You heard that from the people who went to the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that point, the Khambas were thinking that it would not be okay to shoot in the monastery, because we were saying that we were Tensung Tanglang Magar. So they stayed in the orchard down there. The monastery was protected by the monks. We erected the flag of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. Since the dzong was seized, the monastery would be easier to seize.   

**Q:**  If you had to shoot from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, that would be easy, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the representatives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> were entertaining us very elaborately. I told them, "if a single needle is lost from this place, you can claim it to me. Please give us food and drink. Tomorrow, the main regiment will arrive, and our main leader will come so you can talk with him." At that point, they were obedient. The next day the main regiment arrived with the sound of trumpets. They were coming up and the whole area was filled with rising dust. To one side of that place, there was a monastery called Talhün Gomba [Tib. བཀྲ་ལྷུན་དགོན་པ] which belonged to Tashilhunpo. There were about a hundred Chinese soldiers in that monastery. If we didn't arrive there for one or two days, the Chinese would have provoked the monastery. There were two mules for loading artillery, and probably there might have been two or four artillery pieces. All of the Chinese were cavalry.   

**Q:**  When you guys arrived there had the Chinese arrive?   

**A:**  They had arrived one day before we arrived.   

**Q:**  Did you see the Chinese?   

**A:**  No. The representatives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> received a message saying that the Chinese had arrived there.   

**Q:**  Who delivered the message?   

**A:**  That might have been the miser. The representatives told us that the Chinese had already arrived there,so you should think about what you should do. So we two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> sent a message to the other two magji and the soldiers saying that "There are a hundred Chinese in that monastery, so you should stop them from coming up." When they went to the monastery, the Chinese cavalry had already fled and had left 50-60 horses and mules. They had climbed up the rocky mountain.   

**Q:**  Did you get the artillery?   

**A:**  They had hidden the artillery somewhere, so we didn't get that. When we went to the monastery and searched for the artillery, we didn't find it. There was rice and food tins, and quilts and clothing. We took down all of this stuffs. The next day the main regiment arrived and we consulted about the matter.   

**Q:**  After the main regiment arrived, how many soldiers were there?   

**A:**  There were about one thousand soldiers.   

**Q:**  All of them had come to Ganden Chöngor, right?   

**A:**  Some of the soldiers were killed in Dokarsumdo, and there were some injured, so there were about a hundred missing. But, there were still 800-900 soldiers. When Andru Jinda and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> talked with the monastery, they didn't accept what they said and they were insisting that we should hand over an order from the Tibetan government. Otherwise, they received an order saying that we were not allowed to hand over the weapons to anybody. They showed us the order.   

**Q:**  In one of the tapes, it was said that in the edict it said do not hand over the weapons to the Khambas or the Khamtsen. What does that mean?   

**A:**  That was not Khamtsen, that was Khamdzü [Tib. ཁམས་རྫུས], the fake Khambas. At that point, we didn't know that there was any internal talk with the monastery. Then Andru Jinda called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and said, "Now the monastery is not accepting us. We came here for this purpose, and many people have lost their lives so we should surround the monastery and before dawn we should destroy the gates and force the monks to come out." After that, the magji passed the orders to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a>. At that point, the gyagpön and the soldiers were requesting Andru Jinda give a different order. They said that we were saying that we were the Tensung Tanglang Magar, so if we had to shoot the monastery, that would be very shameful.   

**Q:**  At that point, weren't you in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>?   

**A:**  I had to attend the meeting, so I left people in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> for protection. After reporting that view to Andru Jinda, Andru said, "How foolish you are. We have been working hard for this. They are not accepting us when we talked with them, so now should we give up getting the weapons? We should never give this up. If the monks don't shoot us, we don't have to shoot them. The monks might not shoot at us. But if they shoot at us, we have to shoot them. After getting in the monastery, you should tie up the abbots and the monastic officials and bring them out." Before dawn, we destroyed the gates with big stones and entered the monastery. When we were in the monastery, nobody was shooting at us. Some of us went to the place where the abbot was living. The abbot took a rope and told us, "You should tie me up." When we told him, "Please, we are not going to tie you up." He was insisting on that we should tie him up. At that point, we came to know that they had an internal talk about this so we tied up all of the officials and took them out.   

**Q:**  That was the play-acting, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that moment, I knew they were play-acting. We relaxed when Andru Jinda said that if they don't shoot at us, we don't need to shoot them.   

**Q:**  So, the first acting was played by the abbot, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we took all of the monastic officials of the monastery to the regiment and talked with them. The officials said, "Please, do not send ordinary fighters inside the ammunition store room. The monks will bring out the guns that are behind the door of the dharma grove. One of your people should go in the storeroom to have a look to see what is in the storeroom." The abbots said, "Magji Radrü Ngawang, would you please go into the storeroom with an assistant." So I went in the ammunition storeroom.   

**Q:**  How were the guns placed in the storeroom? How many guns were there?   

**A:**  They had already distributed about 200 English 303 carbines and ammunition to the monks. The storeroom was located inside the assembly hall, and there was a secret door through the cupboard under the shrine. The storeroom was as big as a two pillared Tibetan house. All of the bullets were in iron trunks, each trunk containing 2,500 bullets. When we had to load the animals, we had to divide the bullets in one trunk into two loads.   

**Q:**  How many trunks were there?   

**A:**  There were about a hundred trunks.   

**Q:**  How many guns were there?   

**A:**  There were 493 English 303 carbine, but 6 rifles were missing. And there were 20 bren-guns, 18 sten-guns and 2 big cannons.   

**Q:**  Could that room hold all of this?  

**A:**  No. The cannons were placed in another room. There were 6 small cannons in the same room. The monks who took out the guns told us to leave 100 English 303 carbines with ammunition for them. They were saying that the Chinese wouldn't let us stay quiet, so we were also going to fight with the Chinese in the monastery and we were going to die. Then I told Andru Jinda that they wanted guns, so I had left 100 rifles with them. Jinda said, "that is their wish." Later on, after considering the issue, the monks gave all of the guns to us, including the privately owned pistols and rifles in the Labrang in the monastery. They were going to say that the reactionaries robbed our guns and horses.   

**Q:**  Did they give you horses?   

**A:**  We didn't need horses at that point. But we needed mules for loading the weapons. In the upper part of the valley there were some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> estates so I sent Lobsang Champa and some people to get the mules. They brought about 50 mules from those places.   

**Q:**  Did those mules belong to estates of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>? Had they left the mules out on the pastures, or had they kept them in the estate?   

**A:**  They kept the mules in their estate, and they had also let some of them graze on the mountain side. Those were taken by force. They didn't have any choice, but to give us the mules. They made receipts or documents for all of the guns and also the bayonets, and they handed over all of the guns.   

**Q:**  Before getting the guns, were you planning to fight after getting the guns. For example, was the idea to fight in Central Tibet? Or was it to go back and fight in Kham? Was it to split up into small groups and harass the Chinese?   

**A:**  Our plan was to go to Lhoka as soon as we got the guns. We didn't have any plan to make war or split up into small groups. We held a meeting in Ganden Chöngor at which it was said that "It would not be okay for a thousands riders to carry so many weapons. We should split the riders into groups of about 300 and some of them should try to get through via <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, and some of them should go through Chushul and try to get to Lhoka. It would be difficult to go together."   

**Q:**  Where did you talk about that?   

**A:**  That was in Ganden Chöngor.   

**Q:**  Was that after getting the guns?   

**A:**  Yes. The majority of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and the soldiers were saying that we should go together to Lhoka led by Andru Jinda. They didn't agree to divide up the troops. So all of us planned to go together to Lhoka. Before that, there was another plan saying that Baba Gen Yeshe and his people who were living in Kalimpong should try to get the guns from the arsenal in the Gyantse Regiment.   

**Q:**  Who gave the order to do this, was it the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  Phala and those people told Andru Jinda and they sent people to Gen Yeshe who was then in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Did they tell Gen Yeshe to gather the people of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and on the way back try to get the guns in Gyantse?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But were they able to get the guns?   

**A:**  When Gen Yeshe came back, he was saying that it was not convenient to get the guns because we had taken the guns from Ganden Chöngor, so the Chinese were on alert.   

**Q:**  After that were you able to go to Lhoka together?   

**A:**  We were not able to go to Lhoka because the Chinese blocked us. We had to go through Chushul, but we were not able to get through there. So we tried to get through via the ferry site in Nyemo Thil [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་མཐིལ]. When we arrived there, we encountered 500 Chinese soldiers coming up who were sent from Chushul. And the ferry site was occupied by the Chinese. So we made war in Nyemo for three days and nights. That was a large scale battle in Nyemo Thil.   

**Q:**  You knew how effective the People's Liberation Army had been in Kham in 1956-57, so how were you planning to defeat them after moving to Drigu? And what confidence did you have regarding that?   

**A:**  According to the plan at the beginning in 1957-58, Gyalo Thondup sent people for training with the U.S. CIA. All together 30-40 people were sent for training. At that time, Litang had not been lost, they were still making war. A different kind of training was done to be able to get the U.S. aid in Litang, Derge, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and Markham. Athar and those people were in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Was Athar dropped?   

**A:**  They were dropped in 1957 and they came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What had Athar told or advised you, or what did Gyalo Thondup tell you? Did the order come through Athar or did you receive the order from Gyalo directly?   

**A:**  At the beginning, Athar and Baba Jangra Tashi Tseden [Tib. ལྕང་ར་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་བརྟན] were in Kalimpong. Initially, they were supposed to go to Taiwan - Guomindang. Jangra Tashi had some relations with Taiwan. I was in Kalimpong doing business. That was in 1956. There were about 5-6 people who were to get trained by the Guomindang. We held a meeting, and Athar and those people told me that I should bring as many people as I can from Lhasa to India. I told them, I heard that in Darjeeling somewhere there is an elder brother of the Dalai Lama called Gyalo Thondup so you guys better go see him.   

**Q:**  You were the first person who put forward that strategy, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then Athar, Jangra Tashi Tseden and 2-3 other people, went to see Gyalo Thondup. They didn't recognize him.   

**Q:**  You also heard about Gyalo, and didn't have relations with him, right?   

**A:**  Yes. that was in 1956.   

**Q:**  Did you send them [people] from Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, I sent them from Kalimpong to Darjeeling. They told Gyalo Thondup that they could no longer stay like that, and they had a plan . Gyalo told them, "You guys are very enthusiastic, but just a few people is not enough. You should try to get more people from Tibet. Taiwan is a small place, and the Guomindang had lost their own land, so what could they do for you. I will prepare for a much more bigger one [plan]. You guys should be well-prepared for getting more people, and you should keep this secret tightly in Lhasa and Tibet. Otherwise, it is dangerous. I will send you to a much more bigger country."   

**Q:**  Did he mean the U.S.?   

**A:**  Yes, but he didn't mention that.   

**Q:**  You were the person who made the contact with Gyalo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after they [Athar] came back, they said that Gyalo was very glad and that he was a great person. He said, he would send us to a bigger country, and that a small country could not do anything. After I went back to Lhasa, I was supposed to report to Andru Jinda and bring people to India.   

**Q:**  Was the golden throne offered yet or no?   

**A:**  No, it was not offered yet.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was not established, right?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> didn't even have a name.   

**Q:**  If there wasn't even a name, how did it become an organization, how did you send them to Gyalo?   

**A:**  Athar, Lotse, Tsewang Dorje and I were all friends.   

**Q:**  You were just friends and didn't have any shape of an organization, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But at that time, the war was being made in Kham, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were still making war in Kham, and we couldn't tolerate that.   

**Q:**  You said that you should report to Andru Jinda, but actually he didn't become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> then, right?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda was the main leader of the Litangba. When the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama visited India, Andru Jinda made preparations to stop the two of them from coming back from India. He had prepared a revolt to occur before the two of them came back [to prevent their return].   

**Q:**  At that time, you didn't have an organization, but Andru Jinda was acting as a main leader of Litang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was it because he was an able person, having excellent methods to deal with the issue? But he was not a big leader of a group or tribe. He was not a Pön [Tib. དཔོན].   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. He was just a big trader.   

**Q:**  After Athar was trained and dropped in Lhoka, did Gyalo pass orders through Athar?   

**A:**  Then we had a contact.   

**Q:**  Did the orders come through Athar?   

**A:**  No. They were only trained by the CIA.   

**Q:**  They were sending the telegraph messages, right?   

**A:**  Their duty was assigned by the CIA. There was Athar, Lotse, Tsewang Dorje, Gyado Wangdü, Bulü, Jangra Tashi and Jangra Yeshe. All together there were 7 people. Gyado Wangdü with 4 people were dropped in Litang in 1957. Athar and Lotse were dropped in Samye in 1957. They were dropped in one day. Later we sent many people for training. Athar and Lotse didn't have any duties from the Chushigandru. Their duty was to make the contacts between the CIA and the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  When they were dropped, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was not set up, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The two of them didn't have the duty to revolt. Actually, they had relations with Andru Jinda. Andru Jinda told Phala that such and such person had come. They were making contact with the Tibetan government, asking them "What shall we do?" Phala said, "They are going to meet me, right?" Andru replied, "They will definitely meet you." And Phala told Andru to keep the coming of the two people secret.   

**Q:**  Did you tell that to Phala?   

**A:**  No, Andru Jinda told Phala. Only a few of us knew that two of them had been dropped.   

**Q:**  Did Phala meet Athar?   

**A:**  Yes. Andru Jinda, Athar and Lotse met Phala secretly. Phala told them that the two of them had worked very hard, so the two experienced difficulties. You should keep the secret well. If the secret would be revealed, that would be terrible.   

