# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0012.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** November 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 66  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] was a Litang (Khamba) monk who became a monastic manager/trader (Tib. ཇིསོ) and then became one of the top military commanders in Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses how he went to Phembo after getting separated from Gombo Tashi's main force, and then to Lhasa. He also discusses his dealings with Phala's people in Lhasa where he went to try to secure weapons for his fighters in Phembo, and then explains his decision to return with them to Lhoka. He talks about his discussions in Lhasa about getting the Dalai Lama out of Lhasa with Phala's people, and the famous ambush he conducted against a Chinese convoy on his way back to Lhoka, and how he was selected to lead the second attack on Tsetang. Then he discusses, in detail, the arrival of Namseling and Samjola in Lhoka and their mission, as well as the problems they encountered. Finally, he discusses the CIA's refusal to provide arms to the Khambas at the appropriate time, and then the failure of the mission when they parachuted into Tibet after 1959.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0012_02/H_0012_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  After that, in Lhasa I told [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a>s] Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi [of the <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>=Regiment] about the matter, and they reported it to the Drönyerchemmo (Phala). He told them that they should discuss this with the Depön of the Gusung Regiment and with Depön Tashi Bera of the Trapchi Regiment. After that, they [Kelsang and Wangden] gave us <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves and brought us so much meat and bread that the two of them could hardly carry it. They said this was to express congratulations from the Tibetan government. And they said that Phala will try to arrange a secret audience with the Dalai Lama. We were talking to the two gyagpön every day regarding our plans, the plans of the Tibetan government, our thoughts, and what the Chinese were saying. In the end, they [Kelsang and Wangden] said that we could not make a [formal] plan [to fight], but internally we will not let you down. However, we cannot overtly help you now with weapons. We had told them that we were planning to set up a regiment in Phembo so you should definitely help to get us about 200-300 English 303 carbines, plus bren-guns, sten-guns, some small cannons that we could carry and 200-300 horses. This was our main plan. We said that it would be useless for us to go after [to find] Andru Jinda. Instead we will collect all the fighters that had been scattered and we will build a new regiment in Phembo or Reting. When we told these opinions, Drönyerchemmo Phala told us through the two of them that it will be difficult for the Dalai Lama to stay [in Lhasa], so what shall we do? What is your opinion about that? We told them that if that is the case, and if it is so dangerous for him, we swear by the three jewels that we have 20-30 soldiers here and we will take the Dalai Lama with us via Chushul. You should be careful internally. At that point, I heard that [Phala] said this will not be okay. We told them that we will prepare whatever we need outside, and you should prepare whatever we need inside. He said, "The Chinese were insulting and abusing [Tib. བརྙས་བརྐོ] us frequently. The Chinese officials are going to see the Dalai Lama directly, and they told him, "The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Mahe" has harmed many of our soldiers. The Dalai Lama said, "I didn't give this talisman specially to the reactionaries. If you think and say like this, it is wrong. The Jigje Mahe was made by the 13th Dalai Lama, and I gave the leftover ones to the people for their religious faith. If you have faith, I can give you one also." They were saying that they saw some of the fighters who were killed had Jigje Mahe in their amulets. The Chinese said to the Dalai Lama, "Sometimes your teachings on the Kalachakra and the Lamrim Chemmo for the traders is not religion, but is just wearing the mask of the religion. Now what are you going to do about the military action that had taken place in the area that was liberated peacefully? Are you able to wipe them out or should we wipe them out? The Dalai Lama answered, "You left me 1,000 soldiers for my external and internal protection [not to fight Khambas], so if you say things like that, isn't that shameful? At that time, all of the stored weapons were in the Potala Palace. So he [Phala] said it is difficult to get the arms. We told them that you have to find a way [to get us the arms]. Then, one day, all of sudden, the two gyagpön came over to meet us. They brought the two of us two Jigje Mahe talismans, two khata scarves, a lot of bread and meat, 600 rounds of ammunitions for the sten-gun and 1,000 rounds of ammunitions for the English 303 carbines. They said that Phala told us to see you off you as soon [from Lhasa] as possible because the situation in Lhasa is not good. At that moment, there were many of our [Khamba] people in Lhasa, and I told them to leave. The main person of Phala was called Kelsang Yeshe [should be Ngawang]. He was a tsendrön. So we sent the watchman of Andrutsang called Chödrag [Tib. ཆོས་གྲགས] to ask the tsendrön, "What happened, did our secret got revealed? What happened so that We received the above mentioned order [to suddenly leave]." He [Kelsang] said, "All of us were consulted about that. Now the situation is very tense, so when you leave be careful. We will not let you down from inside." At that point, Kelsang Yeshe and them collected a little over 1000 bullets and gave them to us. The gyagpön of the Trapchi Regiment and Wangden Tashi were promoted to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and we made an oath again putting the Dalai Lama's photo on our heads saying that they [rupön] will not fail [Tib. མི་འཕྱུགས་པ] inside and we [Khambas] will not fail on the outside. The next evening, we departed for Phembo and built up the regiment in Phembo. At that point, my relatives had came up from my homeland and we met each other. I called back some people who were in Reting and then I had a total of 62 cavalry. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was scattered. We stayed about 20 days and nights [in Phembo]. Once, on the day of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལྔ་མཆོད] The holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ganden Ngamjö</a> holiday, the Death Anniversary of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a>, I sent a messenger to Lhasa. My father and my elder brother were in Lhasa. We had received a letter saying that the two gyagpön had asked <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤང་ལུང་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་མདའ] The protector deity Shungden.">Panglung Gyalchen</a> [Shungden] for a divination which said that we have to go to the main regiment as soon as possible. And the two gyagpön wrote, "The Chinese were making a lot of preparations in Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] Lhoka. One hundred and five vehicles went to Lhoka and have already come back. It will be very important for the two of you go to Lhoka before the battle there starts. Now they are preparing to send another 105 vehicles to Lhoka." We commemorated the Ganden Ngamjö in Ganden Chöngor Monastery in Phembo and offered butter lamps. Then Gyari Nyima arrived from Kham and came for pilgrimage to the monastery. He was planning to go to Lhasa. He was saying that he is going to join the Chushigandru formally. At first, my relatives had come with them, but on the way, my relatives came ahead, because they had their wives and children. After that, I asked for a divination to the deity called Phembo Tsora Chemmo through the oracle who went into trance. He was known to give very accurate divinations. The divination said, "It would be beneficial for you to stay here, but the movement in the main regiment is most important. You should do whatever is good for you before the 5th of the 11th Tibetan month." At that moment it was the 25th so there were only 10 days to decide what to do. So the next day, we held a meeting and decided to go to the main regiment. At that point, I sent a message saying that we will come through Sera and then through Tölung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] The monastery that is the sea of the Karmapa Lamas in Tölung County.">Tshurpu</a> [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་མཚུར་བུ] and we will come to the well-to-do households separately in two cavalry units at one time. We departed at 12 at night and stopped at dawn. The next day we started travelling at 11-12 at night and stopped at dawn. At that point, the people in Phembo didn't know where we had gone. After travelling 5 nights, we arrived at Chushul. There were no Chinese there and there also were no Chushigandru coming to receive us. On the morning of 6th, we crossed on the ferry in the morning. There was a big estate at the backside of the Gombo drong that belonged to Drepung. The defending fighters [Tib. ས་སྲུང] of Chushigandru were staying in that estate. They had filled a room with meat only, and they had plenty of grain. The place was very comfortable so we were planning to stay there for a couple of days and enjoy ourselves. After that, my relative went upstairs taking the binoculars. He said that he saw that the whole area of Chushul was filled with Chinese vehicles coming down [from Lhasa]. When I looked through the binoculars, the whole area was filled with dust. They were trying to go towards Jagsam Chuwori [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ་ཆུ་བོ་རི], to the place where we used to stay overnight. There were 20-30 of them. They [Chinese] were separating the men and the women and children and they were interrogating them. They had set up cannons and bren-guns. At that point, we had already past that way [Chushul]. Then about 80-90 vehicles came over to Chushul. We were waiting at the Jagsam Drukha [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ་གྲུ་ཁ] ferry port. The Chinese had to cross the river in boats. We were in the Jagsam Chuwori [Tib. ཆུ་བོ་རི] monastery. The vehicles didn't come over at night, so after dawn we withdrew to Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར]. We stayed in Gongkar for a night, and on the next day, the Chinese came to that place. We ambushed them and destroyed 29 vehicles. There were about 500-600 Chinese soldiers. It was said that there was not a single Chinese soldier who was not shot. On that day, it was like the protective deities helped us. There were all together 105 vehicles, but in the first batch there were about 30 that came over from the Jagsam Drukha port. We stopped them at the corner where the Gongkar Dzong was located. At that time, the people living in the whole area of Lhasa were so encouraged and said that the Chinese could not do anything. ... all the three great monasteries were saying things like that. This was on the 8th of the 11th Tibetan month [18 December 1958]. On the 9th, at the place called Drachi [Tib. གྲ་ཕྱི] when our fighters were going down, we encountered 3-4 Chinese vehicles, and we fought each other. We had many casualties, but we exterminated the 3-4 vehicles. We took more than 100 weapons from the 30 some vehicles. We took over 8 bren-guns which could be loaded with 50 bullets, and 105 rifles and pistols. My partner Shalotsang Chöndze lost his life in Gongkar. We lost only one person and one person was shot in his hand. In that place we fought the battle from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. After that, the Chinese prepared cannons and they were firing at us. We were just a few guerrillas, so when he thought we couldn't cope with them, we ran away and when we thought we could cope with them, we fought them. Then we ran away and came out at Chongye [Tib. འཕྱོང་རྒས]. The people who fought in Drachi, fought very severely. We made the Chinese get stunned for about two days. Then we fled towards the Yamdro [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག] Lake and came out from Chongye. After that, our regiments made an appointment to join together. The main regiment was in Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི]. At that moment, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཚང] and Baba Gen Yeshe had arrived at the main regiment coming from India through the Bhutanese border. There was [Sandutsang] Lo Nyendra [Tib. བློ་སྙན་གྲགས] with about 20 servants. They were wearing very good clothes, and they had good horses. They had very good relations with the Bhutanese, so they came from Bhutan. When I came from Lhagyari to Sangri [Tib. ཟངས་རི], they came on the next day. After that, we stopped fighting in Lhoka. At that time, only I knew that the Dalai Lama could no longer stay there. They didn't know about that. I wasn't supposed to tell people about that, I should just think about that and do my work. Our regiment was very famous because we fought the battles in Gongkar, so people were all obedient. The people going into trance with deities also praised me a lot and I could do my work very well. All of us were volunteers, and we were not trained. We had to make the people trust us, otherwise it was difficult to give orders to them. Most people came along taking one's own horse and gun. They didn't have discipline like soldiers. I was just working hard to make them trust me, and I was able to manage the regiment very well. We went to receive Andru Jinda, and we fought guerrilla warfare in Kongpo Bala, Dechen korsum [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་སྐོར་གསུམ], and Ganden. We built the regiment in Tölung Tshurpu, Chushul, Nyetang, Samye and there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> appointed in those places. After that, the oracle went into trance with the deity and said that I am the suitable person to fight in Tsetang. Actually, I was very capable of making guerrilla warfare outside. When the deity appointed me, I had to fight day and night in Tsetang, because most of the Chinese were stationed in that place. We fought the battle in Tsetang on the 10th of the 12th Tibetan month [19th January 1959]. On the 28th of 2nd Tibetan month, the Dalai Lama came to Lhoka. On March 10th the revolt took place. He came to Lhoka on the 11th or 12th. On the 12th of the 3rd Tibetan month, when we left Tsetang, the Dalai Lama had already reached India.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Lhoka? Were you with the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  No, we were not with him. His Bodyguard regiment, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> regiment, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> were with him up to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> [Tib. མཚོ་སྣ] and Mön Tawang [Tib. མོན་རྟ་དབང]. After that, all the soldiers came back. After the Dalai Lama left, the revolt took place in Lhasa. At that point, Sera and Drepung could not fight, and all the monks, lamas and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were surrendering and they were running away. At that point, the only people who had weapons were those in Chushigandru. The soldiers who were with the Dalai Lama had weapons, and the monks from Sera and Drepung had guns, but while some of them knew how to shoot, some of them didn't. Anyway, conditions were not complete. After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, Sera and Drepung were shelled and even the trees were cut down by the cannon shells, the people were discouraged. At that point, all the people were saying that we can not fight, and there was not a single person saying that we should fight. All of the monks, kudrak and the ordinary people were saying please let us follow the Dalai Lama. They were just going to throw down their guns and flee. But we wouldn't let them go, right? At that moment, all of the people were discouraged and they were thinking that since the Dalai Lama had reached India, they were sure that there would be a place to go there. Even the soldiers of the Chushigandru were not stable. Some of them were saying let's go [to India]. At that time, we could fight a good battle, but actually we didn't have the backing. Most people were sure that there would be a place to go, and they were fleeing, fearing that they will suffer a loss. After that, Tsöna was lost to the Chinese. That was the main route. When people couldn't pass via Tsöna, most people had to cross the very bad snow mountain pass called Mango La. Half of the horses died, and half of them could pass. After that, the Indians stopped people at the border for a long time. Thousands and tens of thousands of people went to India through that pass and came to Bhutan. People were also going through Phari and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, and the Chinese were stopping people. Actually, all of the households in Lhoka could have fled, but they were thinking there would be no problem. Since the [attachment] towards Samsara [Tib. འཁོར་བ] was important, they thought it will not be so bad and remained there. The monks from Lhasa were crossing the snow mountain pass called Mango La. At that point, the Chinese advance troops were coming on the ground and there were planes flying that they were dropping many bombs, but they could not make much damage. They could only destroy the houses and the dzong. This is my brief story until I reached India.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama left, were all the people kind of scattered?   

**A:**  When he was in Lhasa, half of the people knew about him, and half of the people didn't know whether he was killed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> or he was arrested by the Chinese. All of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> didn't know he was leaving. I sent a messenger and I was told to come to Norbulinga. But if I went to Lhasa, the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> said that they could not give the military orders in Lhoka. I had to say that I have to go, but they didn't let me go. Therefore, I had to tell them so and so should go. At that point, the bank of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> port was full of Chushigandru. In Tsetang we couldn't go outside in daytime, because the Chinese had their bunkers. We were fighting a little bit at night, but we couldn't fight a large-scale battle. Before the Dalai Lama came to Lhoka, the Chinese didn't know about that. They were thinking they had killed him in Norbulinga in the shelling. When all the people learned about that [that he escaped], they were extremely glad. Chushigandru had prepared for war everywhere. But we could hold on (only) for 3 months after the Dalai Lama left, then we lost the land. America was saying through the wireless used by Athar that you should hold on to the land and we will send support. From the beginning, America didn't support us well.   

**Q:**  This is what I want to ask you. Gyalo Thondup talked from Kalimpong with America and they were saying that they would air drop weapons, so did you have great hope for that?   

**A:**  Of course we had a great hope for that. If we got their arms, we could have prepared tens of thousands of militia in Lhoka. They were all volunteers. What can we do if we didn't have weapons? It was useless. The Americans were thinking that we could seize a place for getting trained. They just dropped some rifles called Tashi Kharing, which can be loaded with 5 bullets, and some cannons, that were just for training. If they had dropped numerous bren-guns and such guns, we could have fought very strongly. After the Dalai Lama fled, all of the people were discouraged and started to flee. Then they were saying that they will drop arms. And they were telling us to seize a place. How could we seize a place? There was no way of seizing a place because, at that moment, the Chinese were going to all of the places.   

**Q:**  Before that, why were they not able to drop arms?   

**A:**  That was what we were talking about. In the beginning, the Americans were telling Andru Jinda and Gyalo Thondup that they had a lot of money to give us, and they stirred things up a lot [Tib. དཀྲུག་གཞི]. But we didn't need that. We had things to eat in Tibet. What we needed were weapons. We were telling them to drop arms, but they didn't drop them. Later, they dropped a lot of support in Jagra [Tib. ལྕགས་ར] Pembar and Chang Namtso [Tib. བྱང་གནམ་མཚོ]. At that moment, we had already arrived in India. Andru Jinda's relative Ngawang Tenkyong [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་སྐྱོང], my relative Lobsang Gelek [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས], Jangra Sampel [Tib. ལྕང་ར་བསམ་འཕེལ] and Tempa Trinley [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཕྲིན་ལས]; altogether there were 9 people sent from Lo (Mustang) [Tib. གློ]. After Lhasa was lost they were dropped in Northern Tibet. But at that point, they didn't have people to ask for advice and to trust, so they came back. Lelung Dorje [Tib. སླེ་ལུང་རྡོ་རྗེ] came to Kalimpong and got an audience with the Dalai Lama in Bodhgaya in the year 1959. Then he went back to Tibet again and they dropped him in Chang Namtso, where people used to collect salt. At that point, they dropped a lot of weapons. The nomads used the weapons a lot when they fought the Chinese. They [the air-dropped people] were saying that they had made a commitment to die for Tibet. Anyways, if we go to Tibet or come back, we will die". Out of 6-7 people, only one person, named Andrutsang Yeshe, was imprisoned. Later he was released and now he is in Lhasa. The rest of them all were exterminated. The Litangba Thamba Wangchen [Tib. དམ་པ་དབང་ཆེན], Beri and Jagö [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད] were able to escape. Some of them were killed. After that, they dropped people everywhere, like in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and Gyeltang, and many people were wasted. They couldn't come back. Lotse and those people working on the wireless didn't need to go with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, they were just going to important places.   

**Q:**  They had the relations with America since 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they drop weapons in 1956-57?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They dropped the weapons in Litang in 1957 [Note: This is incorrect]. Athar and Lotse were dropped in Samye in the year 1957.   

**Q:**  Did they drop a large amount of weapons?   

**A:**  There were not many weapons. According to their plan, Athar and Lotse were dropped for the purpose of talking with the Tibetan government. Gyado Wangdü, Gyado Tsewang Doje and Baba Jangra Tashi were dropped in Litang to confirm the places where the weapons should be dropped. At that moment there were probably 4 people, but one person could not jump. The best person who could communicate with the wireless machine was not able to jump down. The other people were said to be not quite capable of communicating. At that point, they didn't get the weapons. If they had dropped the weapons then, no matter whether the weapons were useful or not, there would have been many chances to kill the Chinese.   

**Q:**  They couldn't drop weapons in Lhoka, right?   

**A:**  As I told you before, this was because the people of Ngari Shingkham [the whole region of Litang and Batang and Kham] could not come up [to Lhasa]. So it was cancelled [to drop arms in Lhoka]. People were hoping that many people would come up from our homeland Kham and that America would support us. But all of the people from Litang, Gyeltang and Chantreng could not come up. The people from Derge and Gaba had come up, but they [America] didn't know about them, so they didn't drop the weapons. They just fled to Lhasa and benefited.   

**Q:**  Was America thinking about the Tibetan government seizing some land? What were they telling the Tibetan people? There was talk about setting up a new government in Lhüntse, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they seized the land there and set up the government.   

**Q:**  Did America tell them about that?   

**A:**  Yes. I heard Athar say that there was a telegraph message in which they said, "You should seize some land, and if necessary we will send bodyguards for the Dalai Lama." It was said that the bodyguards had reached Bangladesh. But I don't know if that was true or not. Could it be true?   

**Q:**  I don't know.   

**A:**  They were just telling us to seize some land, but nobody had the responsibility for doing that. If the Dalai Lama was in Tibet, the people would not have the thought of fleeing. They would fight and if it was necessary they would die for that, and they would not flee. America was saying that they would drop whatever support they needed. Athar was saying that America had prepared bodyguards for the Dalai Lama. We had been making preparations for about one year, so they should have dropped the weapons earlier. If the Chinese were coming from China and we were preparing in Tibet, then they could drop the weapons gradually, but that was not the case. We had to rise up amidst the Chinese, so we were setting up regiments in the places where we could set up and they should have dropped the weapons to those places. They might not have been thinking that way. We were telling America, "If you are going to support us, you should do it quickly, otherwise we can't gather the people together and we can't hold the land for a long time." Athar said that the Tibetan government told him to request America to fight the Third World War. Probably, they were implying that without that, we couldn't cope with them [Chinese].   

**Q:**  Samjola and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> came to Lhoka, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did they come for? It was said that the Chinese were telling the Kashag that they had to stop the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, so I think that Samjola and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> had another thought. Why did they come there?   

**A:**  After Andru Jinda had left for Chang [Tib. བྱང], Northern Tibet, the two of them came to Lhoka. We were all in Chang, so we didn't know about that. After I came back, when I was asking them why they came, they told me, "The Chinese said that it will not be okay to build a regiment in Lhoka, this is the responsibility of the Tibetan government, it will not be okay if you don't settle it well. You should tell the Khambas to come to Lhasa and surrender or you should send them somewhere." The Tibetan government was sending government officials and the abbots and representatives of the three great monasteries. After we got to Drigutang, they sent those people a few times. It was written in the edict [they brought], "It will not be okay to set up a regiment there. Tibet has been liberated peacefully. You Khambas and Amdowas should go to your own homeland. It will not be okay to spoil our land." They sent people to talk with Andru Jinda, but they couldn't meet him. They were just talking with the Tsondzin of the Chushigandru. They couldn't find a person to talk with and they were going back. Internally, the [Tibetan] government knew that those people were sent by the Chinese and that the Khambas would not listen to them. The Drönyerchemmo and some other people knew the internal purpose and the reason for doing that. The people from Dotö and Dome were saying that the Tibetan government is sending such a bad edict. The people who didn't know the internal relations, were very disappointed. At that point, the government was saying that they are going to send <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola to tell us that we were not allowed to fight. Actually, the Chinese knew about the relations between Andru Jinda and Namseling.   

**Q:**  Did they know that?   

**A:**  They knew hundred percent. They [Tibetan government] were saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> would be sent to talk with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, but actually he would not return. They let the two of them join the Chushigandru. Samjola was a monk official and Namseling was a lay official. When they arrived in Lhoka, the two of them were arranging to give the Tibetan government's grain to the militias, so that the misers would not have to suffer. Internally, the two of them were sent to the Chushigandru. At that point, Andru Jinda was not there, so just a few people knew about them, but all the people didn't know about why they had sent the two kudrak. People didn't know whether they were good or bad. That was like the proverb: "The outside is not so white and the inside is not so black." [Tib. ཕྱི་ཕྱི་མི་དཀར, ནང་ནང་མི་ནག]. When the Chushigandru was doing a serious robbery from the misers, two of them were telling people that this would not be okay. And they were also telling the misers that it would not be okay if they do not get prepared to meet the needs of the Khambas. When I got there, they were mediating between the Chushigandru and the misers. At that time, Kungö Namseling made an error. We were fighting in Tsetang. Namseling called Gen Yeshe and Athar and said that Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ], Jangtsa [Tib. འཇང་ཚ] Chöndze and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lonyendra [Tib. ས་འདུ་བློ་སྙན་གྲགས] should go to India as soon as possible. Lonyendra should talk with Taiwan and request them to support us as soon as possible. He had a good relations with Taiwan from the Guomindang period. Jangtsa Chöndze knew the situation of the Chushigandru since it was established, so you should tell <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Chemmo [Gyalo Thondup] and all the Tibetan people regardless of high and low rank, about the situation of Chushigandru. Sandu Lonyendra you should go to Bhutan and contact the Indian government. You know Sawang Chemmo, so you ask them to get support like weapons and money as soon as possible. Three of them were the main persons in the office of Chushigandru. During their absence, they decided to appoint Namseling as their substitute. Namseling told Athar [to send the telegraph] to request support with weapons as soon as possible. They said that we were ready to recruit 5000-6000 militia. They passed down the document regarding the appointment of Namseling to get the signatures of approval. Our soldiers were fighting the battle in Tsetang and all of the soldiers were angry, saying, "Why were they concerned about their own lives and took the means for letting them [Lonyendra and those people] escape when we are on the point of dying today or tomorrow? Now we don't know what their purpose is. The Tibetan government is telling us that we are not allowed to stay in this place. They were sending monk and lay officials and the abbots of the three great monasteries. We will never accept him [Namseling] as the substitute for Andru Gombo Tashi." Let alone signing the document, all of the people opposed it severely. Two officials from the Chushigandru came to that place, but we sent them back. So at that moment, they didn't get approval. After one month and 15 days, they didn't consult the people and sent the three of them to India. After they were sent, inside the Chushigandru people were saying that their lives were regarded as precious, but our lives are also the same. People were saying many different things. At that point I told them, "You should not say things like that, the work was already done." Namseling said that he needs bodyguards, and that they should be sent from the Litangbas. Namseling was not able to come to the office, because people didn't approve of him. He had to stay on his own estate. At that moment, they caused a lot of difficulties among the units of hundreds. They [Namseling and other people] were consulting about a matter and the masses didn't approve that. It was really difficult to be in between them. When the Dalai Lama came to Lhoka, our Commander (magji) told the Drönyerchemmo that Namseling is [pro] Chinese. At that point, the Drönyerchemmo told them, "He is my nephew [Tib. ཚ་བོ]. I can guarantee that he is not pro-Chinese. You are not to be blamed, what my relative [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས] did was absolutely wrong." At that point, we heard that the Drönyerchemmo scolded Namseling saying, "The people of the Chushigandru are hardly working continuously, and you didn't go through any hardships. But you were saying that you want to be the leader, that is your fault." We were not there at that point. That was in Chongye Riwodechen [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས་རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན] when the Dalai Lama arrived there. At that time, the Drönyerchemmo told us, "I swear upon my life, that Namseling and Samjola are not [pro] Chinese. When Andru Gombo Tashi comes, you will know about that." Usually, when Andru Jinda says something, we would trust that. Otherwise, at that moment, the people kind of didn't like them because they were not aware about that. When we came from Mango la Pass, we were with Namseling, who knew that there was a way from that place. My relative went ahead. They let him ride a yak. After Andru Jinda came, they were the main partners talking to each other so we knew that he was a good person. But on the other side of the mountain, people had a different opinion. That was the reason why the two of them came to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  After two of them came to Lhoka, did they work on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and the estates?   

**A:**  Yes. We didn't have weapons.   

