# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0012.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Delhi, India  
**Date of Interview:** September 2003  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** unknown  
**Name:** Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 77  
**Date of Birth:** 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] was a Litang (Khamba) monk who became a monastic manager/trader (Tib. ཇིསོ) and then became one of the top military commanders in Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses how he left for Lhoka and the arrival of a large number of Chinese trucks in Lhoka. He discusses how he and Andrutsang planned to get arms in Gyantse in order to hold Lhoka and fight using guerilla warfare, and also the plan to make a disturbance in Yadong and Lhasa to stop the Dalai Lama from going back from India in 1957. He describes the airdrop arranged by Athar and Lotse, his involvement in the fighting in Litang and Kham, and talks about Andru's role in making revolts throughout these areas. Finally, he talks about preparations for a visit by the Dalai Lama, as well as what he heard about the war in Litang and the story of Yönrupön.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0012_08/H_0012_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You had received two messages from Kelsang Ngawang through Kelsang Dramdrü saying that the Dalai Lama could no longer stay in Lhasa and regarding giving guns to you. Which of the messages came first?   

**A:**  It was in the 9th Tibetan month. I don't remember the date. In the beginning, when I was in Lhasa, there was just several days between the two conversations.   

**Q:**  Which was the first one?   

**A:**  The message regarding the difficulty with the Dalai Lama staying in Lhasa came first. It was said that the conduct of the Chinese then was very dangerous.   

**Q:**  Did both of these two things happen in the 9th Tibetan month?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Just before you left for Lhoka, did Kelsang Ngawang give you any final clear answers regarding the Dalai Lama and giving the guns?   

**A:**  The message was delivered by Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi. Regarding the guns, we requested them to support us with 500 303 English carbines, and some bren-guns and cannons. The final answer regarding this matter was that the Drönyerchemmo and the Gusung Depön asked us, "If we give you the guns, how are you going to take them?"   

**Q:**  Was that regarding getting guns through Pomborak Khamtsen [monks]?   

**A:**  Yes, we decided to fake stealing them [Tib. རྐུ་མ་རྐུ་རྫུ].   

**Q:**  When you were just about to leave, did they give you any clear answer whether you could do the fake stealing?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. Finally, they said that they were not ready to give the guns because they had to assemble them which would take several days. They agreed to give the guns and said, "Your plan is good." But when we were just about to leave, all of a sudden Kelsang Dramdrü and Wangden Tashi came and gave us the gifts from the Dalai Lama, like the protective talisman <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Mahe, and said that the situation was very tense so we had to leave.   

**Q:**  At that point, did they tell you about giving guns?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. We also had a plan to see the Dalai Lama secretly. At that point, we received the message saying that "It is impossible to see the Dalai Lama. But don't get disheartened. These are the things that have been given by the Dalai Lama's hands. Regarding giving guns, it has come to a very dangerous point. If we give you guns, there would be a danger of harming you instead of benefiting you. Please, don't get agitated. You should be careful outside, we will be careful inside. The Dalai Lama is the only person that we should think or care about."   

**Q:**  Was this the final answer?   

**A:**  Yes, they said this message was an order from the Drönyerchemmo personally.   

**Q:**  Why didn't you go to Drigutang instead of going to Chongye Riwodechen?   

**A:**  We fought a battle in Gongkar with the Chinese. We were unable to hold the place. There were 105 Chinese trucks and 29 trucks came to place where we were waiting for the ambush and the remaining trucks were still there. We fought the battle from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. And then we left that place. We heard that there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> soldiers in Chongye Riwodechen. That was why we went to Chongye Riwodechen.   

**Q:**  Was it written in the letter sent by Kelsang Dramdrü to you about destroying Chinese vehicles and cleaning the path for the Dalai Lama passing through Lhoka?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't written about that. We received the letter on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan month. It was sent by Kelsang Dramdrü and my brother Sonam Phüntso [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་ཕུན་ཚོགས]. They had asked for divination and sent the letter. It was written in the letter that "105 Chinese trucks had left Tsetang and then came back to Lhasa on the 16th Tibetan date, and they were planning to go to Lhoka again. The Chinese are making a lot of preparations in Lhoka. It would be good if you could return to the main regiment. According to the divination, it would be good for you to go through Chushul."   

**Q:**  They didn't mention anything about destroying the trucks, right?   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  Where is Lhagyari located? What direction is it located from Sangri [Tib. ཟངས་རི]?   

**A:**  It is located near Sangri on the south side. When you come from Dakpo, you will reach Lhagyari. When you go down from Lhagyari you will reach Sangri Khamar. It is across the river. Lhagyari is also near to Dakpo.   

**Q:**  Later on, Andru told you that the reason why you got scattered was because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> made a wrong strategy. Is it not the case that you just got separated? What did he mean the "wrong strategy" [Tib. ཇུས་ནོར]?   

**A:**  Andru was wounded in Mashung and we brought him to a safe place and treated his wounds. At that point, Andru gave the order "The Chinese had been going up to the mountain pass. Therefore, if we can't seize the top of the mountain pass, all of us will be completely destroyed. So Radrü Ngawang should take some soldiers and go to the top of the mountain pass." But, I still didn't listen to him. Then Magji Kelsang Chönzin [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཆོས་འཛིན] and Kharchen Chandzö [Tib. mkar chen] etc., three of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> came and said, "Please don't worry about Andru Jinda. Until all of us are completely destroyed, we will not leave him alive or dead. You should take some soldiers and go up the mountain pass." Jinda also said that again. Then I went up. At the beginning, there were about 80-90 cavalry with me. After that, Shalotsang Tsempel and I got on the mountain pass first just as the Chinese came on the top of the mountain pass. When two of us were lying down in the dust and fighting with the Chinese, the other soldiers thought that we were killed.   

**Q:**  What was the wrong strategy that he made?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda said that it was our fault which that caused Radrü to get separated.   

**Q:**  Did he mean that they asked the oracle of Shungden to go into trance and the deity told them to go down?   

**A:**  No, it was not that. He meant that he sent me to the top of the mountain pass, so I got separated.   

**Q:**  Jinda meant that it was his fault in sending you to the mountain pass, so you got separated, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he wrote it in his letter to the main regiment.   

**Q:**  When you look back to that event, if they hadn't sent you to the top of the mountain pass at that time, what do you think might have happened?   

**A:**  I think it was not wrong to send me to the mountain pass because if we hadn't seized the top of the mountain pass, the Chinese would have gotten on the mountain pass and then they could have done whatever they wanted.   

**Q:**  You think that it was right to send you to the mountain pass, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where did you hold the meetings for making the military rules more strict and making the military assignments [Tib. དམག་བགོད]? Was it at the Lukhang Ferry Site or in Chongye Riwodechen?   

**A:**  The meeting was held at the Lukhang Ferry Site. When I went to Lhagyari, we talked about the meeting.   

**Q:**  You got the weapons from Shang and you were supposed to get some weapons from Gyantse also, but you didn't get that. If you had gotten the weapons from both Shang and Gyantse, what was your military plan? How long were you planning to fight with the Chinese? Did you have a plan to hold places or did you have a plan to make guerrilla warfare? Or did you have a plan to fight in Kham?   

**A:**  We knew that there were weapons in Gyantse and at that time, Baba Gen Yeshe and those Khambas were coming from Kalimpong to Drigutang. They were told to try and get that weapon in Gyantse. Internally, all of the Tibetan government regiments liked us. So if we could get there, the Gyantse Regiment would give us the weapons secretly. This was the order from Andru Jinda. If we could get both of the weapons, we could recruit several thousands of militia. So we were planning to firmly hold the Lhoka area and fight guerrilla warfare everywhere. We didn't have a plan to go to Kham.   

**Q:**  You couldn't hold the places where you fought the guerrilla warfare, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In 1956, when the Dalai Lama was about to return to Lhasa from India, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> and the Khambas living in Kalimpong sent a messenger about making disturbances [Tib. ཟིང་ཆ] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and Lhasa. Were there any detailed plans for doing that?   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama were in India, the Tibetan people from the three provinces living in Kalimpong and Gangtok planned to attack the Chinese Regiment in Yadong. At that time, all of the guns [of the Khambas] were left in Gangtok since it was not allowed to take them to Kalimpong. The Tibetan regiments, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and the three great monasteries--Sera, Drepung and Ganden--all planned to attack the Chinese Regiments in Lhasa as soon as they attacked the regiment in Yadong. This was planned to stop the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama from coming back.   

**Q:**  When you went to Lhagyari, how many soldiers were there?   

**A:**  The main regiment had moved to Lhagyari. I can't tell the number of soldiers. Probably, there were about a thousand. All together we only had about 2,000 soldiers. About 1,000 soldiers went to the north.   

**Q:**  Did Litang Athar and Lotse come to the regiment in Lhoka?   

**A:**  Yes, they came to the regiment in Lhoka. They arrived in Lhasa in 1957. They were dropped on the sandy mountain pass [Tib. བྱེ་མ་ལ་ཁ] in Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས].   

**Q:**  Did they come to Drigu right away?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had not come to Lhoka then. They sent a messenger and told Andru Jinda secretly that they had arrived.   

**Q:**  Did two of them send the messenger?   

**A:**  They met some people from Litang who were going for pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  At that time, Andru Jinda was in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After making the connection with Andru, where did they go?   

**A:**  Then they went to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  They came to Lhasa for the first time, right?   

**A:**  For the first time, they came to Gangdö Jagtrag [Tib. གང་སྟོད་ལྕགས་སྤྲག], the estate of the Tibetan government lay official located on the east side of Lhasa. He was a very close friend of Andru Jinda. Two of them were left there. At that time, Andru Jinda asked the two of them what their plan was.   

**Q:**  Did they meet Jinda in that place?   

**A:**  Yes. Andru Jinda asked them what plan they had. Gyado Wangdü, Gyado Tsewang Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྡོ་རྗེ], the three of them, were dropped in Litang in 1957. The CIA dropped Athar and Lotse with the task of making relations with the Tibetan government. They were told that they should make relations with the Tibetan government and report to the CIA whatever they needed and whatever plan they had.   

**Q:**  Later on, they went with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was in 1958 when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> took them to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  They didn't go alone to Lhoka, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What relations did they have between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> in Drigu and Athar?   

**A:**  They were unable to make relation with the Tibetan government, but they had relations with the Drönyerchemmo [Phala]. It was very dangerous if the secret [of their presence] was revealed so the Tibetan government didn't take care of them and told Andru Jinda to do whatever he wanted to do with them. So Andru Jinda accepted Athar and Lotse and he told [the CIA] through Athar that it was difficult for the Tibetan government to make a connection with them so he requested [that the CIA] provide weapons support to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and told them they had set up their regiment in Drigu.   

**Q:**  Has the second book of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> come out?   

**A:**  Not yet.   

**Q:**  Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje was said to have gone to Dakpo to bring back Andru Jinda. But did they fight battles around Dapo?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. When they were in that place, they didn't fight battles. They just did some training. Later, we fought battles.   

**Q:**  At that time, the misers in Dakpo sent a petition to the main regiment complaining that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje caused sufferings for the misers. Do you have any details about what kind of suffering he caused to the misers? For example, in Chongye Riwodechen, the misers complained about their sufferings.   

**A:**  There were around 600-700 soldiers in Dakpo. If they had to stay in one place for a long time, they might have had to take food and clothing from the misers, which would cause suffering. If they didn't have a good discipline, probably, the soldiers might have insulted women also. But I don't have any proof. It was written in the petition "Please send the regiment somewhere else. If you leave them here for a long time, we would face hardships. We will support whatever food for the people and fodder for the horses of the main regiment."   

**Q:**  They didn't mention in detail about raping women, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the place in Dakpo where <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje stayed?   

**A:**  I don't know the name. I have never been there. It was the main place, like the capital in Dakpo.   

**Q:**  Where was Wölga Chöling located?   

**A:**  That was located on the other side of the river in Dakpo. It was one day journey on horseback.   

**Q:**  When you held the meeting in the Lukhang ferry Site, did all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> of the main regiment attend the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, they all did, except Kunga Samden [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་བསམ་གཏན] and Changri Lhagyel. The two of them were left to guard the Jagsam [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ] Ferry Site. All of the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> attended the meeting.   

**Q:**  Were there any other new contents of the meeting that you didn't mention last time? Did you have any plans in the resolution of the Lukhang meeting for holding places or did you have a plan to annoy the Chinese temporarily for just getting rid of them?   

**A:**  The content of the meeting was to fight guerrilla warfare everywhere. We were determined to fight battles. We didn't have any plans to hold places except the Lhoka area. It was written in the resolution that the main regiment would go to Lhagyari after the meeting. The Lukhang Ferry Site was just a small place so we left some guards in that place. Then military assignments were made for all of the magji.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had performed a longevity ritual, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a>, for the Dalai Lama. Did you offer the golden throne after the longevity ritual was performed?   

**A:**  No, both were done at the same time. In the beginning, the people of Ba, Litang and Gyeltang consulted about performing an elaborate longevity ritual for the Dalai Lama. Later it became more widespread and all of the Khambas and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> traders were involved. After that, it was said that we should ask the Dalai Lama to do the Kalachakra Initiation and the Lam rim Chenmo. When all of this was reported, all of them were accepted and then it was said that we should build a golden throne. So performing the longevity ritual, asking for a Kalachakra and the Lam rim Chenmo, and the building the golden throne was all done at the same time. At first the Lam rim Chenmo Graded Path teaching was given and then the Kalachakra Initiation. Then the longevity ritual was performed and then the golden throne was offered. The first ceremony for offering the golden throne was performed in the Potala Palace where a very big heap of fried cookies were piled up and people were allowed to grab it [Tib. སྟོན་ཆེན] like at the New Year's Ceremony. After that, the golden throne was brought to Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Did you know in detail the times when Athar and other Litang people came to Lhasa the first time? In some other interviews it was said that those people from Litang went to see Dratru Alo [Tib. གྲྭ་ཕྲུག་ཨ་བློ]. Did you ever hear about that? What was their reason for going to see Dratru Alo? Did Dratru Alo go back to Kham? After that, nothing was heard about Dratru Alo, why?   

**A:**  Dratru Tshang was a household in Litang. [the reincarnation of] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Jamyang Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ] was born in Dratru Tshang. So Dratru Alo was the brother of Jamyang Shepa. All of their family members went to Amdo Tashi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒོ་མང], [the monastery of Jamyang Shepa]. So all of the Amdo people regarded Dratru Alo like a lama and he was the Amdo's leader [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]. All of the people around Tashi Gomang were obedient to Dratru Alo. Dratru Alo came to Lhasa to attend the meeting of Tibet Autonomous Region. And the Chinese had given him a high title of Chairman [Tib. ཞུ་྾ཨི]. At that time, there wasn't any fighting in Litang. It was in 1955.   

**Q:**  The Tibet Autonomous Region was set up in 1956, right?   

**A:**  It was the beginning of 1956. Athar was not there. He had left for training.   

**Q:**  So the other people from Litang went to see Dratru Alo, right?   

**A:**  Lobsang Chamba, Aku Tsültrim [Tib. ཨ་ཁུ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས] and I went to see Dratru Alo.   

**Q:**  Why did you go to see him?   

**A:**  Because he was a famous person in Litang. So we went to give him a gift and khata. Dratru Alo said that he wantted to meet Andru Jinda and he came to see Andru Jinda.   

**Q:**  When your people went to see him, you just gave him a gift and you didn't talk about making war, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But the fighting in Litang had started and we told him about that. He said "I am thinking of going to Litang, but it is not alright. Now I am dead."   

**Q:**  What did he mean dead?   

**A:**  He meant that he had fallen behind [Tib. རྗེས་ལུས་ཐེབས] because the war had already taken place. But he said, "I will go down and see what methods should be taken." He also discussed with Andru Jinda regarding this matter.   

**Q:**  Was he living in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did he mean that he was going to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> or Litang?   

**A:**  He was going to Amdo.   

**Q:**  After that, did he go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  The Chinese regarded him as very precious.   

**Q:**  So he wasn't involved in the fighting, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When Litang Athar and some of the Litang people went to see Andru Jinda and asked what shall we do. Jinda told them that they should sacrifice their private benefit. At that time, how many people went to see him? What was the time? Did Jinda say that in 1956 or did he say that after that?   

**A:**  Actually, there were six of us from Litang; Gasitsang Dadrag [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང་ཟླ་གྲགས] who is living in Darjeeling, Bega Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན], he died in the war, Napo Tamdrin [Tib. སྣ་པོ་རྟ་མགྲིན], he also died, Nalobuga [Tib. ན་པོ་བུ་དགའ] died and Ragrag, died.   

**Q:**  Was Gasitsang involved in the Litang war or was he in Lhasa?   

**A:**  He was in the Litang war and then he came up to Lhasa. Six of us went to see Andru Jinda. In Litang, they were fighting. So we told Jinda that we could no longer stay like this. That We have to request for weapons support from the Tibetan government. All of the people of Litang are going to get united and recruit people from the age 18-60 and send them to Litang as reinforcements." We insisted on that. Jinda told us, "You shouldn't work for one's own benefit. I am glad to hear that you all have united together. You should have solidarity. I will think about a plan." After that, Ba, Litang and Gyeltang made the plan for performing the longevity ritual to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Andru Jinda sent 27 people to Kalimpong for training, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did he send those people to Kalimpong? Was it the same time when your younger brother was sent to Kham? Which of these two happened first? After your brother was sent to Kham where did he go in Kham? For what purpose he was sent to Kham?   

**A:**  I don't know the number of people sent to Kalimpong. Gyalo Thondup told Athar, Jangra Lekshey [Tib. ལྕང་ར་ལེགས་བཤད] and Tsewang Dorje, "You should get more people prepared. You guys are very enthusiastic." In the beginning, they were supposed to go to Taiwan. Gyalo told them that "You shouldn't go to a small country. I will arrange for you to go to a place better than that. You should keep the secret well." I was in Kalimpong and I went to Lhasa and reported to Andru Jinda. Then Andru sent some people and most of them were from Litang. They were sent in groups of 5-6 or ten some. Probably, the total might be 27.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  Probably, that was in the 9th or 10th month of 1956.   

**Q:**  When was your brother sent to Kham?   

**A:**  He was also sent in August or September of 1956.   

**Q:**  Which of these two happened first?   

**A:**  It was almost at the same time. I told my brother that he should go to America for the training. He said, "Now they are making war in Litang. If I go to America, I don't know English language. While we are getting the training, Litang will be completely destroyed. All of the Litang people who want to go to Litang should go to Litang and die together." So we asked the oracle of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤང་ལུང་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་མདའ] The protector deity Shungden.">Panglung Gyalchen</a> to go into a trance. The prophecy was given to send them to Litang. Therefore, we sent about 5-6 people to Litang. Andru Jinda sent letters to Markham Phurba Pön [Tib. ཕུར་པ་འཕྲིན་ལས] and Gyeltang Aku Lemar [Tib. ཨ་ཁུ་ཀླད་དམར] etc., and he wrote in the letters that we should launch the revolt in all places. If each place fights on their own, we will suffer a loss. At that time, messengers, like the ex-chandzö of Litang Monastery Aku Jimpa [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ], were coming from Litang where they were fighting battles and were requesting weapons from the Tibetan government. Later, we also sent Jangu Tsültrim to Litang with Aku Jimpa.   

**Q:**  Were they sent to Litang to fight?   

**A:**  Yes, we sent a message to Litang saying "You should be careful, and fight and hold on to the place. The people who were sent for training will come back soon." There was a plan that America would drop weapons when those trainees came back.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, you had a plan for getting arms from Taiwan, right?   

**A:**  It was not the plan of Chushigandru. It was planned by Baba Jangra Lekshey who had relations with Taiwan. He was in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Did you meet the 27 people in Kalimpong in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they stay in Kalimpong until 1957?   

**A:**  They were sent right away.   

**Q:**  They didn't even stay for a month?   

**A:**  They didn't. Athar and those people stayed for a while.   

**Q:**  Gyalo Thondup knew that Andru Jinda sent 27 people, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that also in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes, it was at the end of 1956.   

**Q:**  It was said that Guomindang dropped guns in Kham, is that true?   

**A:**  I never heard about this.   

**Q:**  When you sent people to Kham, you told them that we have foreign support, right?   

**A:**  We told the leaders secretly.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> offered the golden throne, was that a kind of method to make it convenient for holding meetings?   

**A:**  Yes. Asking for the teaching of the Lam rim Chenmo and performing the longevity ritual were also done at the same time. Those were kinds of methods for holding meetings.   

**Q:**  After you gathered in Lhoka, did you have the plan to fight in Kham?   

**A:**  No, we didn't.   

**Q:**  Where did you plan to fight? Was that in the Lhasa area?   

**A:**  We had the plan for holding firmly the Lhoka area and fight guerrilla warfare everywhere.   

**Q:**  Do you mean fighting around Lhasa also?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You didn't have a plan to fight in Kham, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the content of the oath [Tib. མནའ་གན]?   

**A:**  All of the people were enthusiastic and talking in the same way, saying that we were determined to revolt against the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Was that because there were disturbances in Kham?   

**A:**  Yes. The cause [Tib. རྐྱེན] was the revolt in Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, and it was also dangerous in the Lhasa area. Therefore, all people were united and thinking in the same way. The traders, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and chiefs [Tib. དཔོན] of all the regions [Tib. ལུང་ཚན] in Kham who were in Lhasa then held meetings with Andru Jinda. There were about 2-3 people from each place and they signed the oath saying that we had solidarity for revolting against the Chinese. The second was that we shall not be allowed to tell whatever we talked about in this meeting [to anyone], even to one's own wives and children. We were not trained. Therefore, when we fought guerrilla warfare, we should obey to the orders given by the chiefs of the each region, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> and jupön.   

**Q:**  Is this also one of the items in the oath?   

**A:**  Yes. Regarding the discipline, leave alone raping women. We were not allowed to have sexual relations with women willingly. In this case, whoever had sexual relation with women, he would be executed. We should benefit and help the monasteries and not allow harm to befall them. The Chinese were destroying the lamas and the monasteries and we are the guardians of the religion. There were about 5-6-7 points in the oath.   

**Q:**  Were there any other points?   

**A:**  Another point was that we shall be ready to depart with horses and guns the very next day from when we receive the order.   

**Q:**  Is it possible to get that written oath?   

**A:**  It was lost in Lhoka. Anyways, all of the names of the people were also written in it.   

**Q:**  When you and Lotse were told to go to Lhoka right away, did they tell you anything about if you don't leave, something would happen when the Dalai Lama would come to Lhoka?   

**A:**  No, the reason we had to leave soon was because the Chinese were making a lot of preparations in Lhoka. So the main regiment was in a very dangerous situation.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any talk about clearing the path for the Dalai Lama coming, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There was some confusion on the matter of clearing the path. When we were fighting battles in Tsetang, I received a letter from Norbulinga. It was written in the letter, "Gyawa Karmapa [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཀར་མ་པ] and Sakya Gongma [Tib. ས་སྐྱ་གོང་མ] are going to come to Lhoka. If you have guards for protecting them on their way, you should add some more people. If you don't have guards, you should send guards and protect them well." At that time, I knew that the Dalai Lama was coming to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Who sent this letter?   

**A:**  The letter was sent from the government in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> through Kelsang Dramdrü.   

**Q:**  Did they say the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> sent the letter?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  They didn't also talk about how the Kashag sent the letter, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that letter sent through Kelsang Dramdrü?   

**A:**  We thought for sure that it was sent through him.   

**Q:**  Actually, who delivered the letter to you?   

**A:**  My servant and Aku Tsültrim, who was a monk of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྔ་མཆོད] The Ganden Ngamjö holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ngamjö</a> [Tib. ལྔ་མཆོད] Monastery who was living in Tsetang, delivered the letter to me. They were my messengers sent to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When did you receive the letter?   

**A:**  It was on the 2-3rd of March in 1959.   

**Q:**  This was the letter regarding clearing the path, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Since then, the work for clearing the path started, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We gave the order for clearing the path from Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང] downwards through Jakyag Karpo [Tib. བྱ་སྐྱག་དཀར་པོ], [the mountain located on the other side of <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a>=Ferry=Site]. Alo Dawa and those people were supposed to go there, but they were unable to go. We gave the order for holding the places from the Ramagang Ferry Site downwards. We sent about 700-800 soldiers to the Jagsam Ferry Site and we also sent soldiers to Nyetang.   

**Q:**  Did you send those soldiers because of the letter from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>?   

**A:**  No. This military assignment was made when we were at the Lukhang Ferry Site.   

**Q:**  You just made the military assignment, but there wasn't any talk about the coming of the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  I knew that the Dalai Lama was going to come because they had told me that the Dalai Lama could not stay in Lhasa and they asked me what plan I had.   

**Q:**  They didn't mention in the letter that the Dalai Lama is coming, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was a kind of method by saying the Karmapa and Sakya Gongma are coming.   

**Q:**  Was the organization in Lhasa [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>] started after you six people from Litang met Dratru Alo, or did the people of Ba, Litang and Gyeltang already prepare for organizing the Chushigandru before that?   

**A:**  It was the plan made by Andru Jinda for the people of Ba, Litang and Gyeltang to perform the longevity ritual to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Was that plan made before you six people from Litang arrived?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't. The six people were insisting on requesting help only for Litang.   

**Q:**  So, that was the first, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that, the plan of Ba, Litang and Gyeltang came out, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you have any details to tell about how Jangra Lekshey was going to get weapons from Taiwan?   

**A:**  According to their plan, the Guomindang was the enemy of the Communists, so they hoped that the Guomindang would send planes and throw bombs.   

**Q:**  You didn't know about the details, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In 1957, the organization of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was set up, right?   

**A:**  It was set up in September of 1956.   

**Q:**  The main organization was set up in Lhasa. Before that, it was not called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> traders.   

**Q:**  Before the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was set up, what kind of movement did they have?   

**A:**  Before that, we performed the longevity ritual and offered the golden throne. Otherwise, there weren't any plans.   

**Q:**  Did you perform the longevity ritual before setting up the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>?   

**A:**  When we performed the longevity ritual, we already had got the name of Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  What did you do before you got the name?   

**A:**  Before that, we were just traders.   

**Q:**  You didn't have any organizations, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, the war in Litang had already started, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You were not opposing the Chinese in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I saw in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>'s book that in the beginning you people asked Shungden to go into a trance and Shungden gave the prophecy, "Do not get discouraged, and hold up the victory banner of religion" So you built the golden throne.   

**A:**  No. I didn't know about that. They made up some things in the book. At that time, I wasn't there.   

**Q:**  Did you get the name of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> before Shungden gave this prophecy?   

**A:**  I don't know about Shungden's prophecy. At that time, Andru Jinda was always asking the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤང་ལུང་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་མདའ] The protector deity Shungden.">Panglung Gyalchen</a> Shungden for a prophecy.   

**Q:**  Did the war in Litang start in the first month of 1956?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You were in Lhasa, so do you have any details to tell about the war in Litang?   

**A:**  Regarding the war in Litang, we are editing a book which will come out this year. It writes in detail about that. When Andru Jinda was alive, he had the materials that he got from interviewing many people regarding the war in Litang. It was written in 1961-1963. Nobody is doing this, so I am working on it. All of the materials were handed over to the Tashi Tsering [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང] of the Tibetan Library. He is trying to get it done this year.   

**Q:**  Before you got the name of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, all of you were just traders, right?   

**A:**  Yes, before that. All of the Litang traders gave up their trade and bought horses and guns, and we were show-offish in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  It was said that Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje went to bring back Andru Jinda. But outwardly it seems that he stayed separate from the main regiment. Was it really for bringing back Andru Jinda, or was there any other reasons for staying separate?   

**A:**  He himself put forward the idea that it was very important to go to bring back Andru Jinda. We got the weapons support from America through Gasi Lotse. At that time, Athar had left for India. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje told Lotse, "Please give those guns to the Derge group. We are going to bring Andru Jinda." Lotse told him, "I can't give you the guns. I will hand them over to the main regiment and they will divide the guns." Ngawang Dadrag is the brother of Lotse.   

**Q:**  How old is he?   

**A:**  He is younger than me.   

**Q:**  Do you think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje really meant to go to get Andru or were there any other reasons?   

**A:**  Actually, if he was going to receive Andru, he should have left right away. But he stayed many months in Dakpo. So the misers had to submit the petition. The main regiment wrote a letter to him saying, "You should either go to bring Andru or you should come back to the main regiment."   

**Q:**  How long did he stay in Dakpo?   

**A:**  They stayed about 2-3 months.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for staying separate?   

**A:**  Actually, he should have obeyed the order from the main regiment. That was written in the rules. But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje wrote in his answer, "I am going to bring back Andru Jinda. Maybe, we could bring Andru Jinda. Maybe we will get completely destroyed. Until then, I swear by the Three Jewels that we won't come back."   

**Q:**  At that time, you didn't know about any other reasons for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje to stay separate, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably he thought of leading many people and fighting.   

**Q:**  In the Litang war, Yönrupön was killed?   

**A:**  Not only him, but many other chiefs (pön) were killed.   

**Q:**  After Yönrupön was killed, did the situation calm down or did they fight battles continuously.   

**A:**  They fought battles continuously until 1959.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was here, in Litang they were fighting continuously, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The war in Litang was bigger than the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, as there were revolts in Kham everywhere, like in Tau [Tib. རྟའུ], Drango [Tib. བྲག་འགོ], Dargye Gomba, Ganzi, Gyeltang, Chantreng and Ba.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese came to collect guns in Ba, Chantreng and Litang, which place rose up and fought first?   

**A:**  Litang was the first. The next were Chantreng, Ba and Gyeltang.   

**Q:**  Was Chantreng included in Ba, Litang and Gyeltang?   

**A:**  Yes, Chantreng belonged to Litang.   

**Q:**  In an interview with a person called Lobsang Palden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན], he said that the 27 people sent to India acted as bodyguards for the Dalai Lama when he attended the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[hind. Buddha Jayanti] The 1956 celebration in India of the 2,500 anniversary of the death (nirvana) of the Buddha.">Buddha Jayanti</a>, and they wore uniforms of yellow shirts, brown chupas and boots. Was that correct?   

**A:**  Yes. They were bodyguards. Lobsang Palden was living in Kalimpong, later he died.   

**Q:**  At that time, did they act as bodyguards secretly?   

**A:**  Yes, otherwise, how could they act as real bodyguards because there were Indian guards. Lobsang Palden was one of our messengers.   

**Q:**  Did those 27 people meet you before they went on pilgrimage with the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, I met them before that. After that, they were sent to America right away.   

**Q:**  When they acted as bodyguards, their expenditures were paid for by the government.   

**A:**  They came out voluntarily and went as bodyguards.   

**Q:**  Dr. Goldstein had heard that at the beginning, the chiefs of Litang went to attend the Chinese meeting and then they were told that they were not allowed to go home and they were arrested. Later, the chiefs sent their servants home and the revolt rose up. He also heard in [the whole area of Litang] called Ngari Shingkham, Gapoga Sangbo [Tib. ?? bzang po] and Uthogpön [Tib. དབུ་ཐོག་དཔོན] were big nomads. And there were also farmers like Mogotho and Changpapön [Tib. བྱང་པ་དཔོན]. They united and made the war in Litang. Actually, did they unit and made the war in Litang? What was the cause of the Litang war in the beginning?   

**A:**  Probably, I can tell you clearly about this. From 1950, the Chinese appointed many leaders like county leaders [Ch. xian zhang] in many places in Litang. They were all the better people in the area. They had to go attend meetings frequently. In 1955, they called all of the leaders to a meeting in China. Then the Chinese told the people in the monastery and the farmers, "You should hand over the weapons to the Chinese government. We will pay you the cost of the guns. It was these weapons that cause the internal fighting among the people. We will be in charge of security and we will destroy the thieves and bandits." In Litang, some of the household had about 100 guns, some had 50-60 and some of them had 2-3 guns. Probably, there wasn't a single household who didn't have a gun. When all of the leaders were called, some of them didn't go. Yönrupön didn't go and he sent a representative.   

**Q:**  Yönrupön was also appointed by the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  He was appointed as the Vice Chairman [Tib. ཕུ༹་ཞུ྾ཨི] of Litang. He was the main leader of the Ngari Shingkham.   

**Q:**  Ngari Shingkham was the name of the place, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was the name of the whole area of Litang, including Chantreng. Uthogpön also didn't attend the meeting and sent a representative. Ngogo Dokyong [Tib. ?] and Degongpön [Tib. སྡེ་གོང་དཔོན] were also high leaders. All of them sent representatives. The Chinese insisted that they attend the meeting, but they didn't attend. After that, the leaders who didn't attend the Chinese meeting called all the leaders of Ngari Shingkham to attend a meeting in the monastery. At that meeting they discussed the Chinese wanting to collect the guns and discussed whether we should hand over the guns or not. All of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> in the monastery had many rifles and pistols. At the meeting, people talked about, "When we look at the Chinese conduct, it appears that they are going to implement liberation by force. The Chinese have already said that the lamas are bandits and the religion is poison. So it is definite that the Chinese will not leave us nicely. Anyways, we have to die whether we would act badly against them or we would obey them." All of them made the decision that we would never hand over the weapons. So the meeting decided that all of the people had to be careful and get well prepared with weapons. The Chinese knew about the meeting because there were many Chinese spies. When Yönrupön went back to the nomad's area, he had about 60 riders as his bodyguards with him. At that time, about 100 Chinese soldiers waited in ambush in a place called Dzodonga. When Yönrupön got there, they fought each other and killed about 70-80 Chinese soldiers. Yönrupön's servant [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] and another 15-20 people were killed. This was the starting point of the fighting in Litang. That was in January [1956].   

**Q:**  Were the leaders who were attending the Chinese meeting arrested?   

**A:**  No, they were under something like house arrest in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> and they didn't go back.   

**Q:**  Didn't they sent their servants to deliver messages?   

**A:**  No, that was a lie.   

**Q:**  Didn't Jagö Tomden send his servant back and tell them to launch the revolt?   

**A:**  No, I never heard about that.   

**Q:**  You mean the start of the Litang War was just as you mentioned, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Later, the Chinese said that it was not their plan to fight. So we would bear the misfortune for the death of the Chinese in that fighting. They would pay as much compensation was needed for killing the chiefs and servants of Yönrupön. At that time, the representative Lo was the Chinese leader of Ngari Shingkham. They said that it was a big mistaken done by Representative Lo.   

**Q:**  Was he the representative of the Chinese like Representative Zhang in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I am not sure, anyways, debai was his title. At that time, actually, when the monastery was getting prepared, the Chinese were preparing for war and on the 16th of the first month, the Chinese soldiers surrounded them from all over the place. Then the Litang monastery launched the revolt and all of the nomads and the farmers revolted against the Chinese at the same time.   

**Q:**  At that time, many farmers came inside the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did they get there?   

**A:**  They came to protect the monastery because the monastery is important. They thought that the monastery would be destroyed.   

**Q:** The Chinese put the farmers in a building and almost set them on fire, right?   

**A:**  That was at the time when the monastery was lost.   

**Q:**  Please tell me about Yönrupön again.   

**A:**  Yönrupön attended a meeting in China only once. After that, he didn't go to China whenever he was called and he always sent representatives.   

**Q:**  In what year did he attend that meeting?   

**A:**  Probably, that was in 1953-54.   

**Q:**  He was the highest leader among the nomads in Litang appointed by the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  No. He was a high nomad chief before that. When the Chinese appointed him the Vice Chairman, he didn't go to get the title. In Litang, Representative Lo called Yönrupön and set up a throne for him. Yönrupön said "I don't want the title" and he didn't come. The Chinese said that China had already appointed the title and they put the photo of Yönrupön on the throne and he offered <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and made the cadres offer khata to it [the photo].   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  This was also in 1954. From that time on, Yönrupön had already become a renegade [Tib. ལྟ་བ་ལོག]. They offered the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to the photo just to deceive people.   

**Q:**  So Yönrupön became the cause of the Litang War, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he became very famous.   

**Q:**  The other leaders who didn't attend the meeting were also appointed by the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Changpa Ngogopön was a chief of a thousand households. Uthogpön also had more than 1,000 households. In Litang, Yönrupön, Uthogpön and Degongpön were called three chiefs of the place called ['a]. Degongpön was a chief of nomads only. Ngogopön was a chief of both the nomads and farmers. Altogether, there were about thirty some chiefs(pön) in Litang.   

**Q:**  In the Litang area, the three of them were like the same as chiefs, but the Chinese appointed Yönrupön as the Vice Chairman, right?   

**A:**  That was because he was a very aggressive [Tib. ངར་པོ] and he had many weapons.   

**Q:**  He was also young, right?   

**A:**  He was 25-26 years old when he was killed. The subordinates made him marry twice, but he refused. His father was a religious practitioner who gave up his property and went for pilgrimage carrying his own things on his back. He went to India when his family was very prosperous. He ran away from his family several times. He was a Nyingma sect practitioner and received his teachings from Jamyang Khyentse [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ]. His main sponsor was Andrutsang. At that time, if Yönrupön didn't surrender, the Chinese were going to bomb the monastery. So all of them came out. Before that, Yönrupön had sworn at the front of the Shri Devi [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྷ་མོ] that he would never leave the monastery. So he didn't go out although all of the soldiers of Yönru told him to leave. After that, the Chinese shut the remaining monks in the Shiwa [Tib. ཞི་བ] Khamtsen [building]. At that time, there was a Chinese Regimental Commander nicknamed Chalagjan [Tib. བྱ་ལག་ཅན] which means his fingers were webbed like ducks. In the Litang War, the soldiers under his leadership were almost destroyed. Therefore, he felt angry and shut the monks in the Khamtsen and told people to bring kerosene oil and prepared to set them on fire. When Yönrupön heard about that, Yönrupön and his brother Gyagpön said that they were going to surrender. He told the Chinese "A leader should come to accept the surrender of a leader." At that point, the Regimental Commander Chalagjan was very glad to hear that and came down to accept the surrender before he gave the order of burning the monks. Yönrupön handed over his rifle and told the Chinese "I am a leader, so do not tie me. If you tie me and take me out, I will die right away. You can do whatever you want when I get to the prison." The Chinese said, "It is okay. We will not tie you and do as you said." Then they took Yönrupön and Gyagpön outside. When they reached a mountain range called Rirab Denpo, Yönrupön took out his [hidden] Canadian pistol and shot the Chinese leader and his attendant, and killed some other Chinese.   

**Q:**  He shot the Chinese when they took him on the road, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In another interview, it was said that Yönrupön shot the Chinese leader when he surrendered.   

**A:**  I didn't hear it like that. Yönrupön didn't get hit when he was shot because of his protective talisman. So he decided to die and took off his talisman and put it on a rock. He had killed many Chinese soldiers, so it was said that he could have run away. Then he put the blood of the killed Regimental Commander on his own face and then he fought with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  He intentionally made his talisman useless, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then Yönrupön was shot dead and Gyagpön was wounded and died after an hour in the hospital. Now, the Tibetan dance group has made a drama of Yönrupön.   

