# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0010.02: Tape 2  
##  : with Thubden Gyatso [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Jersey, United States  
**Date of Interview:** 2001  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Thubden Gyatso [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Gyatso [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a monk in Drepung Monastery who came from Tashikhyil Monastery in Qinghai. In this interview, he describes the various daily activities of the monks, including the monks' morning routine, going to the chöra, and the morning and afternoon prayer sessions at the monastery. He discusses going to the dharma grove, asking for leave, as well as doing the nyerpa position and how he was appointed to this position.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0010_02/M_0010_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:** The life style of the monastery wouldn’t be the same every day. For example, sometimes you had to go to fetch water, and sometimes you had to make a fire. And sometimes you had to go to class and the chöra. So there were many things going on so tell us something about the daily activities of the monks with examples?  

**A:** The ordinary monks should have gotten up early in the morning and have done the three prostrations. And they should have said "Please forgive me if I do anything wrong." Then they had to pray the taking refuge, the [Tib. སྐྱབ་འགྲོ]. In Sera, Drepung and in Ganden, they would pray the Ganden Lhagya [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལྷ་བརྒྱ] and from the Lam rim [Tib. ལམ་རིམ] they would pray the Yönden Shigyurma [Tib. ཡོན་ཏན་གཞི་གྱུར་མ]. This was the morning routine.  

**Q:** How long would it take?  

**A:** It would just take half an hour. If there was tsomja, then we should have gone to join the tsomja. If there was mangja in Drepung Tsogchen, then the young monks would shout a signal that there was mangja. If you went to mangja there was tea and tsampa served.  

**Q:** Was there tsomja before the mangja?  

**A:** I don’t think there was tsomja before mangja. After finishing the mangja, then the tsomja would begin. Sometimes, the tsomja could be carried on for the whole day and there were 3-4 sessions. When went go to tsomja you had to take your own tsampa, and you would get the tea in the assembly. You have to do whatever prayer [was] requested by the sponsor. Sometimes, there was also salary or alms given. In the [dharma grove] session time, in Lumbum [Tib. ཀླུ་འབུམ] Khamtsen, they would beat a big iron key like a gong. When they beat the key, all the new monks should have left [their] monk’s cloak [Tib. ཟླ་གམ] and hat, and the khamtsen gegen would come to check whether they had left the gown and the hat nicely.  

**Q:** You had to leave your gown when you went to chöra in the tratsang?  

**A:** Yes, you had to leave it in the courtyard of the common house, jikhang [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁང] in the khamtsen.  

**Q:** So who would look after the gown? Was it the khamtsen gegen?  

**A:** The khamtsen gegen would look after the gown if we went to the dharma grove in the morning. In Gomang, every semester, which is known as chöthog for the first three days, they had to read the shortest text of Pargyaparamita [Tib. བརྒྱད་སྟོང] in the morning session in the chöra.  

**Q:**  Was it read in the tratsang?  

**A:** Yes, then they would pray the text call Jambey Tsenjö [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་མཚན་བརྗོད] in the chöra every day.  

**Q:** You mean to say that they would pray the Jambey Tsenjö in the dharma grove?  

**A:** Yes, then they would pray the Sherab Nyingppo [Tib. ཤེས་རབ་སྙིང་པོ] also.  

**Q:** Was there enough time for praying Jambey Tsenjö?   

**A:** It would take a long time for the morning session and then the abbot would check the monks.   

**Q:** So at the morning session would the abbot check the monks?  

**A:** Sometimes he would and sometimes not. After that, the monks would pray some Droma prayer and when the morning session was over, the monks would start the debate in the grades. After that, if there was afternoon mangja in the tsogchen, then we had to go to get the mangja. For that we would get tsampa, salt and soda [Tib. བུལ་ཏོག].  

**Q:** There wasn’t any afternoon mangja except on the great summer session [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ], right?  

**A:**  Sometimes there was an afternoon mangja.  

**Q:** There was afternoon mangja on Ganden Ngamjö and Shimchö [Tib. བཞི་མཆོད], the Death Anniversary of Chamchen Chöje [Tib. བྱམས་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྗེ], who was the founder of the Sera Monastery. And also there was afternoon mangja on the religious rite, the rigdra, and the rigdra would be held on the great session break [Tib. ཆོས་མཚམས་ཆེན་མོ], right?  

**A:**  Yes, there was mangja in the afternoon on those occasions.  

**Q:** At the time of [the] rigdra, the dharma grove was not open in the tratsang, right?  

**A:** If there was mangja then we had to go to the mangja. In the morning chöra, we had to pray Jambey Tshanjö [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་མཚན་རྗོད], which is the root trantra of [the] Manjushri [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་དབྱང] text and Sherab Nyingppo [Tib. ཤེས་རབ་སྙིང་པོ], which is the shortest text of heart Sutra with Droma. The gegö would clap his hands, which indicated the morning session was over. After that, each and [every] individual class would start. From karam [Tib. bk’a ram] grade the two monks would come and ask question to each class. After that, if there was afternoon mangja, which is the second mangja in the tsogchen, they would go to join it. After that, if there was traja, then we would go to the traja and the tsomja. If there was a gap, we had to go to one's own teacher and get the teaching.  

**Q:** Was the custom in Gomang the same as Loseling where in order to get alms, you didn't have to go in and stand outside, which is called kelen, the monks who take share of alms?  

**A:**  In Gomang, there was the kelen. The kelen would receive their alms from [the] outside.  

**Q:** The monks who come to get the kelen would get the alms from the courtyard, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** In Loseling, the kelen would be given in the dharma grove?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** If you didn’t feel like going to the dharma grove, then you didn't have to go, right?  

**A:** If you didn't want to go to the dharma grove, you could pick [up] your gown and hat when the khamtsen gegen was going around. And you had to close your door from inside as if you went to the dharma grove. In Lumbum, the discipline was very strict. In other khamtsen, they didn't beat the key.  

**Q:**  In the Lumbum were there monks who didn't study tsenyi?  

**A:** Yes, there were many monks who didn't study tsenyi. Every monk should put [down] the cloak, dagam, whether you studied tsenyi or not.  

**Q:** What do you mean by dagam?  

**A:** The dagam is like an gown without sleeves. The monks who were good in tsenyi had to go to receive the teaching. In the afternoon, we had to go to the dharma grove.  

**Q:** Did you make fire in the morning or not?  

**A:** If there was no mangja or tsomja, then we had to make a fire in the shag and make tea. If there was mangja, then we didn’t have to make a fire in the shag.  

**Q:** Where did you get the fuel? Did you have to buy the fuel?  

**A:** We had to buy the cow dung for the fuel. After finishing the afternoon dharma grove, [then you would go to] the nyinchö, which was the more elaborated than the morning session shogchö, where you go to individual debates by the individual monks, and they combine together and say few prayers. After that, we would have a group meeting that we called thamja, which was [when] the senior ones would debate with [the] junior ones. When the evening session started with the prayer session, we had to pray Droma [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ], which is the Tara Puja. [In] The beginning of the semester we would do the prayer 21 Tara Puja, and after that it would increase to 12 Droma Puja every day. And at the end of the month, an additional 16 Tara Puja would go and on top of that, we had to pray the short Heart Sutra and the prayer of lion faced dakini, the [Tib. སེང་གདོང་མ]. After that, we had to debate. We had to remain in the dharma grove until 9-10 p.m.  

**Q:** If there was tsomja, when would they hold it?  

**A:** Normally if there was tsomja, that would come after the afternoon session. Sometimes, if there were important rituals, like somebody specifically requested to do it, then the khamtsen would inform [us] to come to tsomja right after the kurim, which was the evening prayer. So in that case, after the general meeting, the kurim, they would also skip the debate and they would have the tsomja.  

**Q:** If you had to go to visit your friends and relatives in Lhasa, did you have to ask for leave or could you just leave and go?   

**A:** If you had to go to Lhasa, then you had to take down your sen and ask for leave. You were not allowed to go without asking for leave.  

**Q:** You had to ask for leave if you were a new monk right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** If you were a senior monk, then you had to tell the khamtsen gegen that you were going, right?  

**A:** If you were a senior monk, you just had to tell the khamtsen gegen that you were going to Lhasa.  

**Q:**  When you were saying the senior monks didn't need to ask for leave to go to Lhasa, that meant that you were the meeting members or the khamtsen gegen, right?  

**A:**  Mostly, with one's turn for the khamtsen gegen, you could do it by yourself, or if you wanted to skip doing the khamtsen gegen, you could then pay some money to the other monks to do the khamtsen gegen.  

**Q:**  Could you ask for leave from doing the nyerpa?  

**A:**  You definitely didn't have to do the nyerpa. You could also buy the nyerpa.  

**Q:**  They didn't have to do the nyerpa?  

**A:**  Yes. They could buy the nyerpa because it was not compulsory for every monk to do the nyerpa.  

**Q:**  How did you know whether or not you had to do the nyerpa so long as everyone did not need to do the nyerpa?  

**A:**  This was like, if you were not capable of doing the nyerpa, and if you were sick, then you didn't have to do the nyerpa. I think they would get leave from the meeting.  

**Q:**  You didn't have to ask for leave from doing nyerpa?  

**A:**  No, you didn't have to ask for leave.  

**Q:**  How did they appoint the nyerpa? Did they say this and that monks have to do the nyerpa, or how did they appoint the nyerpa?  

**A:**  Normally, it went by order of monks, and as for the monks who didn't want to be the nyerpa, when their turn came for the nyerpa, the monk would disappear for a year and would come back when the period was over.  

**Q:**  Did some people want to be the nyerpa and some people not want to be the nyerpa?  

**A:**  Yes, they were people like that.  

**Q:**  What was the difference? Why would some people want to be the nyerpa?  

**A:**  Because if there were meetings, they had to cook in the khamtsen, so the nyerpa would get the same food as the meeting members. Therefore they wanted to do the nyerpa.  

**Q:**  Were these people also hoping for a high post in the monastery, like the [senior] [Tib. བགྲེས་པ]?  

**A:**  Yes, they probably were hoping to get a high post. First, they had to do the nyerpa and the doma [Tib. མདོ་མ]. After that, you then became the meeting member and if you did well, then you would become the chandzö of the khamtsen. When you become the chandzö, then you had to keep many keys and you were in charge of the tea and butter in the storeroom.  

**Q:**  How many chandzös were there?  

**A:**  In the Lumbum Khamtsen, there was only one chandzö. The khamtsen gegen and the nyerpa would become like a leader [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]. The khamtsen gegen would look after the discipline and the chandzö would check whether the monks would go to the dharma grove or not.   

**Q:**  How did they appoint the chandzö?  

**A:**  I think the chandzö was appointed by the senior monks through their discussion among the meeting members.  

**Q:**  The chandzö was for one year or was it unlimited?  

**A:**  The chandzö was for two or three years. When the nyerpa was using the butter, the chandzö would stand there watching and the chandzö would make a mark on the butter in order to prevent the nyerpa from cutting more butter. For the tsampa they would put a seal on the sack.  

**Q:**  If they touched it or moved it, then they were finished?  

**A:**  Yes [laughter].  

**Q:**  So during these first years before you were in Labrang, did you stay in the monastery the whole time or did you go somewhere else?  

**A:**  I had to stay in the monastery the whole time because I had to look after the young lama. I thought of going for a pilgrimage to Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] but I couldn't go.  

**Q:**  No, what I meant to say was before the lama came?  

**A:**  I couldn't go either before or after the lama came. I stayed in Drepung the whole time.  

**Q:**  You were staying in the monastery the whole time?  

**A:**  I went to the dharma grove to join the class, so I felt happy.  

**Q:**  You were a single monk, so how did you manage yourself, like fetching water, milling the tsampa etc?  

**A:**  I could buy ready-made tsampa, flour, butter, and tea. We would buy the things when we got alms and salary from the tratsang.  

**Q:**  What about the water?  

**A:**  I would go myself to fetch the water and after the first few times, I had broken the clay water bucket. Later, there were junior people coming and I asked them to help me fetch the water.  

**Q:**  Did you eat a lot of meat in the first year or just a little?  

**A:**  I am crazy for meat. But I couldn't afford to buy meat because for one trangga garpo, we would get a very small piece of meat. But I bought a lot of square lumps of blood. And I put blood in tsampa and made soup. Also there were already cooked heads and feet of animals which we were not allowed to buy according to the rule. This rule was just for not losing money. When we bought the head and feet of the animals which I mentioned above, we had to go through the back door of the khamtsen. If we went through the normal door, the khamtsen gegen would see us and he would beat us up.  

**Q:**  Why were you not allowed to eat the feet and head? Was there any reason?  

**A:**  Because if we bought these things, we would lose the money.  

**Q:**  What about the butter?  

**A:**  The butter was very expensive.  

**Q:**  Between, the meat and butter, which was more expensive?  

**A:**  The butter was the most expensive. For the first year, I never had butter tea unless some one gave it to me.  

**Q:**  In that case, why didn't more monks go to the mangja and traja where they would get butter in tea?  

**A:**  That was because in the morning the monks felt more lazy and to get up was very difficult. Therefore, the monks were going late for the mangja. Even though they would call the monks to go to the mangja and traja, and they would hit them with the key, only some of them would go. I would go to the mangja. Except the dharma grove, they didn't need to leave the gown there and it was not compulsory to go to the mangja. So they didn't move. [455] [END OF THE SIDE A]   

