# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0010.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Thubden Gyatso [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New Jersey, United States  
**Date of Interview:** 1990  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Thubden Gyatso [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Gyatso [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was a monk in Drepung Monastery who came from Tashikhyil Monastery in Qinghai. In this interview, he describes coming from Qinghai to Drepung as well as the organization of his Lumbum khamtsen and the shöndre work obligations of young monks.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0010_01/M_0010_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Gelek Rimpoche's note: Tagkhare [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ] was a very wealthy shagtsang in Gomang. He was from Washü [Tib. ཝ་ཤུལ] Mitsen, so anyone who wanted to join Washü went to him. One had to do a lot of work like cleaning and serving when one went to his household, but you didn’t need to worry about your future livelihood.  

**Q:** We heard that in Gomang there was a famous incident where some people in the monastery said that the pechawa were doing this good work, so the monastery should treat them specially). But some people said they didn’t need to be treated specially because they were in the tratsang and studying pecha was their job. There was this kind of trouble.   

**A:**  I don’t know whether the pechawa said that they wanted to be treated specially, but there was big trouble.   

**Q:**  Were you there in the monastery at that time?  

**A:**  Yes. The big trouble was because of the Mongolian abbot, Khen Rimpoche called Ngawang [Tib. ངག་དབང] something. This Mongolian Khembo said that all the monks in Gomang must come to the chöra. In Gomang, there were about, more than 4,000 monks. [There was a big traja served in the tratsang and the assembly hall couldn’t hold them, and many of them had to sit outside.] However, in the chöra, there would [normally] only be about 100-200-300-400 monks. So the Khembo said that there was a small number of monks in the chöra, so all the monks must come to the chöra. And to please give alms [Tib. འགྱེད] in the chöra rather than giving alms in the tratsang courtyard (the tratsang gomchor) [as usual], with the monks [who] didn’t need to go to the chöra. They would stand in line [Tib. ཤར་བཀག་བཏང] there. Khen Rimpoche gave a speech in the assembly [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ] saying, “From tomorrow, we are going to give alms like one sang or two sang in the chöra. If all the monks don’t come to the chöra, they will get no share of alms.” Since then, they gave the alms in the chöra. Even the lagyüba, the non-pechawa monks, also attended the chöra, so the chöra became quite big. However, many monks didn’t go to the chöra when they heard that the alms would be given in the chöra. As a result, gradually, the pechawa and the lagyüba became two groups and a big kind of law case arose.   

**Q:**  Khen Rimpoche said they had to come to the chöra. Did he mean the monks just had to go to the chöra physically and get the alms but didn’t need to study, or did he mean they had to come to the chöra and study?   

**A:**  He didn’t say that they had to study, but he said that they had to go the chöra physically. He said, "Please come to the chöra because there are only a very few monks there."   

**Q:**  Then what happened?  

**A:**  Then Jiso Tagkhare [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ], who was standing on the side of the lagyüba [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Was Jiso Tagkhare involved in this?  

**A:**  I heard that Jiso Tagkhare was kind of the main person and all the lagyüba stood on his side. I heard that many lagyüba monk gathered together. And on the pechawa side, the main person was Khen Rimpoche and his manager, the chandzö, and probably the tsondu members of the tratsang. Gradually, there was a dispute between them and they submitted a petition to the government.  

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  It was probably in 1958.   

**Q:**  It should be earlier than that.   

**A:**  It might have been 1957-58.   

**Q:**  When you people went for the chöthog, where you go from place to place to debate and study religion, who was the abbot of Gomang? Was he the Mongolian?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They didn’t change the abbot, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but the karam gyüpa [?] was changed and he was told that he was not allowed to stay in the tratsang. This should have been in 1958.   

**Q:**  Gelek Rimpoche: No. When I took the fourth geshe exam [Tib. སྐབས་བཞི་པའི་དམ་བཅའ], the abbot was Drangchen [Tib. དྲང་ཆེན] Khembo. Did he (the Mongolian) become the abbot after Drangchen Khembo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It should have been in 1954-55-56-57.   

**A:**  After that, not long ago, the war took place.  

**Q:**  At that time, you were there. What did you think about that? What did you hear about from both sides, the lagyüba and the pechawa might have had reasons. Otherwise, there would not have been trouble.   

**A:**  [laughing] People like me didn’t hear anything about the reasons. The main thing was that they were saying it was not okay to give a salary [Tib. ཕོགས] in the chöra, and it should be given in the gomchor as they did before.   

**Q:**  Was it the salary [Tib. ཕོགས] or the alms, [Tib. འགྱེད] or both?  

**A:**  It should have been the salary. Otherwise, I didn’t know much about this. When I was in the khamtsen, the monks gathered together and were going up and down to the assembly. And I heard Jiso Tagkhare saying, “You must bring a lawsuit in whatever way you like, and I will stand behind you and take care of the expenses that are necessary.”   

**Q:**  Was it the abbot’s idea that it was better if the monks came to the chöra and studied?   

**A:**  The abbot might have thought that if the monks didn’t come to the assembly and the chöra and took their salary, they could not purify their negativity. And if they came to the assembly and the chöra, they could purify their negativity. He was mainly saying that there was a small number of monks coming to the chöra, so they should come to the chöra.   

**Q:**  The abbot might have thought that they should come to the chöra regularly, not only when there was a salary, right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably. I didn’t hear much, but I heard the main speaker was the abbot’s chandzö.   

**Q:**  How was it decided later on?   

**A:**  One night, when we were in Lumbum [Tib. ཀླུ་འབུམ] Khamtsen, Jiso Tagkhare and those people were coming carrying 5-6-7-8 kerosene oil lamps, and the monks also had short sticks and false keys (used for hitting) hanging on their [monks’] skirts. They were very aggressive. Lumbum Khamtsen and the tratsang were side by side and we saw that they were going to the roof of the tratsang. There were more than 400-500 monks gathered there.   

**Q:**  They were going to fight with the abbot, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When I watched from the khamtsen, I swear by the Lama and Three Jewels [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་ཅོག], the small alley was filled with about 500-600 monks. Then when they went up, the tratsang might have been holding a meeting with several seniors (Tib. དྲེཔ [Tib. བགྲེས་པ]), like Hamdong Drepa [Tib. ཧར་གདོང་བགྲེས་པ], Gungru Drepa, Lumbum Drepa, Badi Drepa [Tib. སྦྲ་སྡི་བགྲེས་པ], Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ] Drepa, etc., and the tratsang prayer leader [Tib. ཏྲཙང་ཆེམམོ], gegö and the chandzö. All of them were attending the meeting. I heard that when the large meeting was assembled, all the khamtsen gegen also attended. I heard that all of them had assembled. At this time, all the monks rushed in, and Khen Rimpoche was just staying there and he didn’t have anything to do.   

**Q:**  He didn’t even know they were coming, right?   

**A:** Yes. I heard that some of the dobdo went in and slapped Khen Rimpoche once, and they came down and tied the hands of the chandzö. The prayer leader was also there.  

**Q:** Was he the one with the small head who later became the tsogchen chemmo?  

**A:** Not that one. They tied the chandzö’s hands and tied him to a pillar by lifting up his skirt and putting his bare bottom on the cold floor for the whole night, and they beat him severely. Many others were also beaten.  

**Q:** Was it winter?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** How many chandzö were there?  

**A:** There was the labrang chandzö. I don’t know how many chandzö were there.  

**Q:** There were also the chabu, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** How many chabu were usually there?  

**A:** There were about 4 of them. I have never been to the tsondu.  

**Q:** The khamtsen gegen were also there, right?  

**A:** When they held elaborate (larger) meetings, they would be there.  

**Q:** At this meeting, they were talking about that issue, right?  

**A:** Could be.  

**Q:** The monks fled, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** They left the chemmo there, right?  

**A:** Yes. They also left the chandzö there tied up. Some others were tied up as well.   

**Q:** Why did they tie them up?  

**A:** Gelek Rimpoche: Maybe because they were the main ones.  

**Q:** The other monks didn’t go there, right?  

**A:** Yes, because the dobdo might have been guarding them. The other people went there only the next morning. Then they reported it to the government.  

**Q:** After that, they reported it to the government, right?  

**A:** Yes. I heard that they told the government, but I don’t think [answer not finished]  

**Q:** The government didn’t do much, right?  

**A:** They reported it to the government and many monks were dismissed.  

**Q:** How many monks were dismissed ?  

**A:** About 17-18 monks from the lagyüba were dismissed, as well as the prayer leader, the tratsang chemmo, and the karam gyüpa. And from the pechawa, some of them were also dismissed. And the remaining 100-200 Gomang monks had to go to Norbulinga to prostrate for a month. At that time, my teacher was a Mongolian called Jimpa La [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ་ལགས], who said, “We are monks from far away, so we will not know what they are doing. I am sure you are not planning to go. You are not allowed to go and you don’t need to go there because we came to study pecha and not to bring a lawsuit.” So we didn’t go. From Lumbum Khamtsen, only one monk went and he had to go prostrate. But because he was first on the register of names and he was old, some younger monks were sent as shöndre to prostrate on his behalf. So when his name was called, the younger ones went to prostrate.   

**Q:** This old monk was on the side of lagyüba or pechawa?  

**A:** He was on the side of lagyüba.   

**Q:** What does lagyüba mean?   

**A:** Lagyüba means the monks who study lamrim, and pechawa means the ones who study the five key set of texts used by the monks in their studies of Buddhist dialectics [that is, the scholar monks].  

**Q:** Did somebody come to call you people to join them?   

**A:** When we finished the chöra, the Amdo monk called Tsültrim [answer not finished]  

**Q:** You mean Tsültrim with the beard?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** Was he involved in this?   

**A:** He was on the pechawa side. There was a servant of a monk called Tsültrim who was a great geshe. I don’t know whether he was the white Tsültrim or the black Tsültrim. He called me many times. Usually, I would go home quickly. Otherwise, if I didn’t come back from the chöra for some time, our khamtsen gegen would ask me, “Where did you go? Did you wander around while the other monks stayed here?”  

**Q:** It sounds like the government punished both sides?  

**A:** Yes. Both sides were punished and monks were dismissed from both sides.  

**Q:** What about the salary payment?  

**A:** It was decided to give it from the gomchor as in the old system, not from the chöra.  

**Q:** As an American, it seems like the monks who were studying Buddhist dialectics should get better salary than the monks who were not. So making more monks go to the chöra was a good idea. I don’t know why there was so much opposition.  

**A:** There were monks who were not that intelligent, and just started to study and didn’t know much pecha. And some didn’t have time to study pecha, and some would wander around and enjoy their lives. Since people have different levels of faith, there were not many who studied pecha. That’s why those things happened. This might also have been a karmic sign that the Chinese Communists were coming and they were going to attack.  

**Q:** What was your feeling when you came to Lhasa, and what are your impressions of the differences of when you first came from Tashikhyil Monastery many years ago? Did you feel comfortable and did the monks interact the same? Or was there a little bit that was not right?  

**A:** When we came from Tashikhyil to Lhasa, Lhasa was a sacred place, which was called the pure realm [Tib. དག་པའི་ཞིང] and the realm of the dharma [Tib. ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཞིང]. When I saw Lhasa and saw the Buddha’s statue [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ], and I used the butter I brought from [my] homeland and offered the butter lamp in the golden lamp container, and when I could also see the great monastic seats, I felt very happy. When I got to the chöra, I found that there were only 200-300 monks. Whereas in Tashikhyil, we had a very big chöra. I was wondering what was going on and why there was only such a small amount of monks in the chöra. When they served the tea in the tratsang, there were so many lamas and monks, but not in the chöra. So I thought this was strange. In general, I saw everything was good and I had deep faith towards the religion. So even if I didn’t have tsampa to eat, mentally, I was very happy.   

**Q:** In Tashikhyil, were most of the monks pechawa?   

**A:** In Tashikhyil, there were many pechawa, but there were also non-pechawa. Among them, there were 80 monks said to be the servants of the Jamyang Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ]. And there were many non-pechawa who would work on printing scriptures. There were probably 200-300 people carving wood printing blocks, and some non-pechawa would have to dance the religious dance, like Milarepa [Tib. མི་ལ་རས་པ] and Gombo Dorje [Tib. མགོན་པོ་རྡོར་རྗེ].  

**Q:** Was the level of studying pecha the same as in Drepung?  

**A:** I think Gomang Tratsang was more deep [Tib. གཏིང་ཟབ་པོ] regarding studies. In Tashikhyil, there was not much study on Namdrel [Tib. རྣམ་འགྲེལ], the study of logic. In Drepung, we had the full range of study.  

**Q:** Did the monks in Tashikhyil have better conditions, like with respect to salary and alms and that stuff?  

**A:** In Tashikhyil, the conditions were very good. The salary and alms we got from the tsogchen and tratsang would be almost enough for us [to subsist] for each semester.  

**Q:** You said it was almost enough. In case it was not enough, what would you do?  

**A:** In case it was not enough, if we took a loan and bought the things needed, when we got some big alms, we would repay the loan.  

**Q:** You said that there were just a few hundred monks attending the chöra. Did the other monks who did not attend the chöra but came to collect their alms live in the monastery, or did they stay in the town and villages?  

**A:** Most would probably stay in the monastery. Some of them had work in the villages, so they would probably go back and forth.  

**Q:** They knew when there were alms and salary, right?  

**A:** Yes. They would send messages to each other. (Gelek Rimpoche: We would receive a message from Radö [Tib. ར་སྟོད] Monastery when there were alms and salary in Loseling. As soon as Nyare [Tib. ཉག་དབྲེ] Khamtsen knew, they would send a monk to Radö.  

**Q:** Radö is located not near, right?  

**A:** Yes, it is a long distance.   

**A:** Gelek Rimpoche: They would come even at night. Drepung Nyare and Radö Nyare were regarded as one, and they got salary from Drepung. When there was a big alms and grain salary in Radö, they would call Drepung. But Radö probably didn’t have much.  

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama took the geshe exam, there were so many monks that the assembly hall was full and the outside was also full.   

**Q:** Did all the monks of Radö go?  

**A:** Gelek Rimpoche: No. Only the Nyare ones.  

**Q:** In Mönlam, would the Radö monks come?  

**A:** Gelek Rimpoche: They came, but they would assemble separately.   

**Q:** How did you come to Tibet?  

**A:** I was born in Kokonor, which the Chinese call Qinghai. It was the place called Gome [Tib. མགུ་སྨད྄] located near the birth place of Tsongkapa. I was born in 1925. In that place, there was a small branch monastery with about 300 monks and I became a monk there. When I was small, I was sick for a long time. Our lama was called Gönkyab [Tib. མགོན་སྐྱབས] Rimpoche and he was one of the better pechawa under Jamyang Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ]. The lama was told that this child was seriously sick, and his eyes had gotten stuck and his bottom had sores. The lama told my mother that your child will die soon. Then she asked what shall we do? And the Lama said, “If you don’t want your son to be dead, then you have to make him a monk. Otherwise, he will die tomorrow or the day after tomorrow.” So I became a monk and in that monastery, they taught me starting from the alphabet and all the prayers to be recited in the monastery. Then some of our monks came back from Lhasa and they said it would be good to go to Tashikhyil because there were many monks there. So two or three of us ran away to Tashikhyil and stayed there.  

**Q:** What year was that? How old are you now?  

**A:** I am 66. Tashikhyil was a very big monastery founded by Jamyang Shepa, where there were about 3,000-4,000 monks and I had no choice but to study dialects. The teachers were harsh and there was one called shengo and one called teacher, gegen. The discipline was very strict and we could not move freely, and it was hard for me to stay there. Then I went through the motions of studying tsenyi dialectics. We had to take many memory exams, like yearly exams. In each month, we had to take memory exams of 30-40 pages. If you couldn’t pass the exam, they would punish us. I stayed in Tashikhyil for 17 years. When I reached the higher grades, I got a higher seat in the tsogchen and it was very nice. When I reached the grade of dzö wogma [Tib. མཛོད་འོག་མ], the monastery would teach us Tibetan astrology. I came to Tashikhyil when I was 13 and stayed there for 17 years. At that time, the Communists came and they did not treat us well. Many people were fleeing and just before I fled, I sold my house and the miscellaneous things, and I thought it would be good to flee to Lhasa. So when I was 31, I fled to Lhasa. At that time, Lhasa was very happy because the Communists had not come. We belonged to Drepung Gomang Tratsang, and if I had gone to Ganden, I would have belonged to Ganden Lumbum. I joined Drepung Lumbum, which is known to be the Tsongkapa’s khamtsen, and there was Tsongkapa’s throne, which is said he used when he took his exams. I stayed in Gomang for 4-5 years. And I also continued my studies, but I didn’t need to take any exams, so it was relaxing and happy.   

**Q:** In the beginning, how did you join the khamtsen?  

**A:** When I came to Lhasa, I heard that I belonged to Lumbum Khamtsen because I was born in Kokonor, and that I was not allowed to go to any other khamtsen. They told me that I had to come to Lumbum Khamtsen and the monks of the khamtsen took me to Drepung, and they had a kind of reception for me.  

**Q:** How did you go to Lumbum Khamtsen the first time? Did you just decide to go to Drepung, or did somebody tell you that it would be good to go to Drepung? Or did you have a relative in Drepung?  

**A:** When I reached Lhasa, there was a house of Lumbum Khamtsen. When I asked people where Lumbum Khamtsen was, I would reach the house where there were Lumbum Drepa and some monks. On the next day, they took me to Drepung.  

**Q:** When you reached Gomang, where did you go? You had to go to the khamtsen gegen or who?  

**A:** When I reached Lumbum Khamtsen, which had a very strict discipline, first I had to go to the khamtsen gegen and he would arrange the new monks to the senior monks to keep as their pupil, gidru. When the khamtsen gegen told me, you belong to this gegen, then the Khangnyer took me to the senior monk and told him that he was my gidru. Then this gegen gave me tsampa and tea for three days and taught me all the discipline in the khamtsen.  

**Q:** At that time, did you have to stay with the gegen?  

**A:** Yes. We came wearing chupa made from felt, so the gegen supplied the monk’s shawl, the vest and the skirt [Tib. གཟན་གཤམ་སྟོད་འགག], and later when we got some alms, we had to repay the cost of the clothing. So he taught us the discipline. This gegen was called the jigen gegen, or the worldly teacher. After three days, we had to bow down in front of the khamtsen gegen and [I had to] pull my shawl down from my shoulders. He asked, "Did the jigen gegen give you enough food to be full for three days?" And I say yes.  

**Q:** Even [though] you were not full, you had to say yes, right?  

**A:** Yes. The monks were poor and they only had tsampa and black tea, and didn’t have other foods.  

**Q:** There was no butter and milk and those things, right?  

**A:** Yes. Because we were newcomers. The khamtsen gegen told us how to attend the tshog and chöra, and how we were not allowed to make fire and fetch water during the prayer sessions. And how we were not allowed to buy bread and cooked animals heads and hooves from the market on the stairs [where merchants came]. And we had to repeat what the Khamtsen gegen said. There were about 12-13 prohibitions. He also said that we had to call the seniors gegen and call the juniors by their dharma names [Tib. ཆོས་མིང], and it was not allowed to call them different names. After this, the khamtsen gegen gave me a room with an inferior cushion. We had to clean the room. After that, we had to buy everything and eat by ourselves.  

**Q:** Was the room for one person?  

**A:** Yes. But when there were many monks, two or three people had to stay together. In the beginning, I got a shag for myself. When I was staying there, I didn’t have much tsampa to eat and I couldn’t buy much tsampa because I didn’t have much money. So I had a very hard time. At that time, a small (young) lama came from the same branch monastery in our homeland and I received a letter saying that I had to take care of him and be his teacher, and that he was coming to me. Later, the lama came and he had a chandzö. The lama might have been very wealthy and they brought a lot of butter. The khamtsen gave the lama a better room.   

**Q:** When you first joined Lumbum Khamtsen, did you have to work for shöndre?  

**A:** Yes, I had to.   

**Q:** Even though you were a senior monk in Tashikhyil?  

**A:** No matter whether I was a senior or not, I had to do the shöndre. Lumbum and Trehor [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] had the most strict discipline that was like the lama gyüpa discipline. We had to bow down by pulling our shawls from our shoulders [Tib. གཟན་སྐྱུར་ཕབ] when we went to the main khamtsen. However, when we reached the pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན] grade, then we didn’t need to pull down our shawls from our shoulders.  

**Q:** Even if you were a senior monk in Tashikhyil, you had to do the same, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** Can you explain about what you had to do for shöndre?  

**A:** Sometimes, the tratsang would tell each khamtsen to send 5-10 monks and we had to go to the tratsang to do the shöndre. Sometimes, we had to carry many loads of butter and rice from Lhasa for the khamtsen. When many guests came from Amdo, we had to go to Lhasa and carry their loads. From Lhasa, they would hand over a list of contents of the loads one by one and we had to deliver it to Drepung one by one. Sometimes, the Khamtsen Gegen would come to Lhasa and provide tsampa and tea. And sometimes there was no tsampa and tea, but we had to carry the loads right away. Sometimes we had to do white washing and black polishing in the khamtsen. At that time, there were many jobs to do, like sweeping the courtyard.   

**Q:** When there was tsomja in the khamtsen, did you have to serve the tea [Tib. ཕྱག་བདེ་རྒྱུགས]?  

**A:** We had to go and serve tea.  

**Q:** Did you have to go to the tratsang and do the same?  

**A:** Yes. But we felt it was not right to go [Tib. འགྲོ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མི་འདུག] [laughing] to serve tea. Only the younger ones could go. When there was traja tea, it was mostly when there was a tonggo, like the geshe tonggo. Normally, there weren’t many small traja.   

**Q:** Gomang didn’t have many traja, right?  

**A:** There were probably not many traja unless there was a tonggo. (Gelek Rimpoche: In Loseling we had traja all the time.) Maybe those were small traja and all the monks didn’t need to go. [laughing] Unless there was a big tonggo and you were strong enough, people like us could not go because if we went, we might have gotten killed because of too much pushing.  

**Q:** Did you have to do the shöndre in the tsogchen (the monastery as a whole)?  

**A:** Yes, we had to. But I didn’t go much because it was very hard since the road was not even and people said that their legs would get broken.  

**Q:** Did you have to do the shöndre every day?  

**A:** No, only sometimes.  

**Q:** Who was in charge of that? Would the khamtsen gegen or the nyerpa call you?  

**A:** The khamtsen gegen and the two nyerpa were in charge. They had a name list of monks who did the shöndre and the names of the ones who were yet to be done. Normally, in the khamtsen if you were pechawa, you got an exemption. As for the non-pechawa, two or three people had to do the shöndre all the time.  

**Q:** What was the structure of the khamtsen? Like the highest were the tsondu members, and did you have the official called jigen?  

**A:** In Lumbum Khamtsen, the main one was the senior, Lumbum drepa [Tib. བགྲེས་པ]. Whatever orders he gave had to be obeyed.   

**Q:** There was one Lumbum drepa, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** How did the Lumbum drepa come about?  

**A:** The first one on the name list of monks became the drepa (“elder”). If the drepa was too old or incapable, they would make the next one on the list as the new drepa.  

**Q:** Supposing the first one was incapable and the second and the third were also incapable, and the fourth one was sick or something like that, how long would you go down the list like this?  

**A:** There was no limit.  

**Q:** When the drepa stepped down, would you called him ex-drepa (Tib. དྲེཔ་སུརཔ [བགྲེས་པ་ཟུར་པ])?  

**A:** They didn’t call him surpa, but he became a drepa surpa when they were told to. When I was there, there were some who were the very first on the name list, but they were not told to be the drepa because they were incapable. The Lumbum drepa named Palden Lhundrup [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྷུན་གྲུབ] was very clever and smart, and he was always staying in Lhasa. If you were not smart and couldn’t take care of the visitors coming from Amdo, you would lose a lot of territory in the homeland. So the Lumbum drepa should be a very capable one.  

**Q:** What do you mean territories?  

**A:** Gelek Rimpoche: The areas where there were people who had relations with the khamtsen and made donations.  

**Q:** Palden Lhundrup was the drepa, right?  

**A:** Yes. There were also two nyerpa and two doma, which means staying in the outer room and was like a junior nyerpa. These five people were in charge of the khamtsen and the house in Lhasa, with the decision maker being the drepa.  

**Q:** The drepa stayed in Lhasa and the khamtsen gegen stayed in the monastery, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** What about the nyerpa?  

**A:** One nyerpa and one doma stayed in Lhasa and one nyerpa and one doma stayed in Drepung.  

**Q:** The most powerful was the drepa, right?  

**A:** Yes. If the drepa didn’t give the order, the khamtsen gegen was not allowed to do anything.  

**Q:** Was there a kind of tsondu?  

**A:** There was a tsondu which consisted of the drepa. It was above the khamtsen gegen.  

**Q:** How did the nyerpa and doma come to be selected?  

**A:** They came according the name list of monks. The first name became the khamtsen gegen and the next became the nyerpa and the one below that became the doma.   

**Q:** Would all the monks have to become the khamtsen gegen and nyerpa in turns?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** They did it for one year, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** So if one became doma this year, he would become the nyerpa next year, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** And the next year, the senior nyerpa.   

**A:** He becomes the khamtsen gegen.  

**Q:** That means all the monks had to work for three years. One year to be the doma, one year to be the nyerpa and one year to be the khamtsen gegen, right?  

**A:** Yes.  

**Q:** How about doma?  

**A:** They were the younger ones who could work hard.  

**Q:** Who made them work?  

**A:** The tsondu probably made them work.   

**Q:** Were there monks going to pursue grain loans and be cashiers?  

**A:** When I was there, there was no cashier in the khamtsen, and all the decisions were made by the tsondu regarding pursuing loans and all of those kinds of things. And all the accounting was made by the tsondu.  

**Q:** Did the Lumbum Drepa keep (physically) the money?  

**A:** He didn’t. All the money was kept in the khamtsen tsondu. When the lumbum drepa said that he wanted such and such amount of money, the tsondu would send the money down. Unless, the khamtsen held the tsondu, they could not get money. The khamtsen gegen and the nyerpa didn’t have anything to do with money.   

**Q:** I heard that in some khamtsen, there was [a custom] called shöndre tig tig where they had to get their body measured. Have you ever heard of that?  

**A:** No. [laughing]   

**A:**  Gelek Rimpoche: I have never heard about this. Only when we took a novice vow [Tib. getsül] would they measure whether you were tall enough.  

**Q:** A monk from Tsangpa Khamtsen said that.  

**A:** Maybe he said that as a joke. As for the shöndre, when they wanted 10 people, they would send them according to the name list. There was nothing like measuring.  

**Q:** How did you fetch water in the khamtsen?  

**A:** The doma would fetch the water. When there was tea served in the khamtsen, the doma had to fetch a lot of water, so they would ask some younger monks to help them fetch the water.  

**Q:** Did the doma carry wooden water containers when they fetched water?  

**A:** They carried the clay water containers.  

**Q:** How many monks were there in the khamtsen?  

**A:** When I was there, there were about 120-130 monks. I heard that they said that this was a small number of monks.  

**Q:** The doma would hire people, right?   

**Q:** Gelek Rimpoche: In the monastery, they didn’t have a system of paying money, right?   

**A:** Yes. They just said, “Please.”  

**Q:** In the monastery, when you made your shawls and the skirt, did you hire tailors?  

**A:** When the khamtsen had to make dresses for the icons or when some lamas were coming, they would hire tailors. Otherwise, the ordinary monks would sew their own things, which were inferior ones. If someone didn’t know sewing, they would ask somebody saying, “Please sew this for me,” and they didn’t pay for it.  

**Q:** How did you subsist then? Would the salary and alms from the tratsang and khamtsen be enough?  

**A:** Sometimes, we got alms in the tsogchen and the tratsang and tsomja in the khamtsen. This was almost enough. And the tratsang would give the grain salary, and also some grain salary was given to us from the tsogchen jiso. So it would be almost enough [Tib. ལྡང་གྲབས་ལྡང་གྲབས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡོད་རེད]. And sometimes when this was not enough, we bought tsampa with the alms that we had saved. And the non-pechawa would go to villages to exchange tsampa with things like incense, tea and those small things. As for me, I had to go through hardships for about year, but since I had that lama, I didn’t have any problems and I had butter tea to drink. Otherwise, the new monks could not drink butter tea. Sometimes, however, we pooled [together] money when we wanted to drink butter tea. We didn’t have a tea churn so we had to borrow one. And sometimes we didn’t have cow dung to make a fire, so we had to eat tsampa with cold water.   

**Q:** At first, you only had the salary and alms, right?  

**A:** I was different than the others because I had some (money) because I had a house in Tashikhyil.  

**Q:** You brought some money, right?  

**A:** Yes. I sold my house in my homeland for 800 silver dayan and I had many other things. So when I displayed them in the market, people bought them right away and I had about 700-800 dayan, so I didn’t have many problems. As for the other monks, if they stayed in the monastery all the time and didn’t go out to find tsampa, it was very difficult for them.  

**Q:** Some monks thought that if they didn’t go to work for other big shagtsang it would be difficult. Were there such monks?  

**A:** Yes, there were many monks who went to work for the big shagtsang and made fire, fetched water and did sweeping, etc. [as a servant], where in return, they got shawls and skirts, and tsampa also.  

**Q:** You mean they didn’t join the shagtsang, right?  

**A:** Yes, and some would stay there permanently as their servants. Like Jiso Tagkhare, who had such people.  

**Q:** Tagkhare was in Lumbum, right?  

**A:** No, he was in Washü Mitsen.  

**Q:** He was in Hamdong (College), right?  

**A:** Yes. In Washü Mitsen, many new monks came and they went to Tagkhare and served him. They had to do a lot of things like cleaning because he was very wealthy. They worked for him and got tea and tsampa, and all kinds of other things, like shawls and skirts.  

