# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0029.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Abo Rabgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་རྒྱས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 29 August 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Abo Rabgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་རྒྱས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 65  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1927  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Abo Rabgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་རྒྱས] was a Khamba from Markham who was a tsondzin in Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses how the Chinese came to Kham and the initial Chinese policy of helping the peasants and giving positions to the wealthy, the chiefs, and the lamas. He also discusses how things got worse when reforms were implemented and how the revolt in Sichuan took place. He comments on Chushigandru's battles and on the tension in Lhasa in 1957 and 1958.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0029_02/H_0029_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I already have the information about your birth place in Markham and about coming to Lhasa at the age of 21 and the trading. These were before 1950, so it wasn't that important. I asked you that even when you were in Lhasa, you might have met many people in Lhasa who were from your homeland. I also asked you about the Chinese policy in Kham when they first came. You said that there were people from your homeland coming to Lhasa. At the beginning, the Chinese policy was exceptionally good and they didn't stay in houses. Did they stay outside?   

**A:**  Yes, they put up tents and stayed outside.   

**Q:**  Did they stay on the open ground?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they carry their own tents?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they also help the people in the countryside?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**A:**  They were saying that they came to serve the people, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, they were very nice and they helped the traders to transport their goods, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard about that.   

**Q:**  Did they transport the goods in their trucks?   

**A:**  They didn't help people in transporting the goods in the trucks. But, for example, when it was said that there were thieves or bandits, they helped them to transport the goods to prevent them from getting robbed.   

**Q:**  Did they keep the things for them?   

**A:**  They helped them on the way when they transported the goods, [so that they would not be robbed].   

**Q:**  Did they come together with the traders?   

**A:**  Yes, they came with the traders and helped them pass the places where there were bandits.   

**Q:**  They also helped the farmers, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, they helped the farmers in the harvesting.   

**Q:**  They also helped people fetching water, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I also asked you whether the chiefs [Tib. དཔོན], lamas and the better off people in Markham had to work with the Chinese? You said, "At the beginning, they had to and the Chinese paid their salary." At that time, did the Chinese gave jobs to the better off people?   

**A:**  Yes. They gave them the jobs because they were the heads of that place and they paid them salary and they were Committee Members or uyön.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the Chinese set up their offices?   

**A:**  Yes, they set up offices where the uyön met.   

**Q:**  There were only the better-off [Tib. དྲག་པ] people in there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, only the chiefs and the Lamas were given these jobs.   

**Q:**  After that, as time passed by they said that they were going to implement democratic reforms and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> said that they don't want the reforms, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There was trouble because they didn't get along well on this matter, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Later, did they implement the reforms?   

**A:**  Our people said that they don't want the reforms.   

**Q:**  Because of this they fought, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You said that in 1956 war occurred in Litang, Ba ['ba'], Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་འཁྲེང] and Markham, and in other places the battles took place. Where else did the battles take place?   

**A:**  The battle also took place in Jü [Tib. འཇུས]. At that time, there wasn't any place where the battles didn't take place.   

**Q:**  In the years 1956-57-58, where did the most large-scale battles take place?   

**A:**  The biggest, large-scale battle took place in Litang in 1956.   

**Q:**  These battles took place before there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  One of the reasons was because the Chinese said that they are going to implement the reforms, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that, did the Chinese arrest the chiefs?   

**A:**  Yes. They arrested the chiefs and the lamas by going through the motions of saying that they are going to hold meetings. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> didn't let them do this and fought with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  When they fought the battles, how many people were there?   

**A:**  They were just militias from the local places and there were about 200-300-500 people. But there were many Chinese, so they [the Khambas] were fighting while running. Otherwise, they didn't have a chance to fight a real battle. Normally, if they could seize this place today, they would run away on the day after.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the Chinese throw bombs from planes?   

**A:**  Yes, they bombed and fired guns from the planes. They didn't bomb very much, but they always fired machine guns from the planes.   

**Q:**  How did the battle start?   

**A:**  The Chinese started the battle against us. We didn't fight against them.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, the Chinese fought the battle, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Later, the Chinese said that they are going to implement the reforms saying that it is the Chinese Communist system and the Tibetans said that they don't want it, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I asked you about 1951 when the Chinese came and signed the 17-Point Agreement and the Dalai Lama was in Yadong. After that, many Chinese came to Lhasa. I asked you how was the situation in Lhasa at that time? You told me a name of a place called Shetsongon. Where is it located?   

**A:**  This was on the border between Ba and Markham and the place was called Bong.   

**Q:**  Another place was called Tsowa Drukha, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was the place where the battle took place and it was called the Tsowa ferry site.   

**Q:**  There was another place called Shetsongon, was that a monastery?   

**A:**  No, this was a name of a household and it was located on the other side of the river. Bong was on this side of the river.   

**Q:**  Did you say that the Tibetan soldiers came to this place?   

**A:**  Yes, the border guards [Tib. ས་སྲུང] were stationed in Shetsongon and the Chinese came from Ba and fought a battle. So the Tibetan soldiers ran away from Bong.   

**Q:**  You said that after the battle took place in Chamdo in 1950, people gradually came up to Lhasa. Since then, did they build houses and stay in Lhasa?   

**A:**  There were people from Litang and Tau who came to Lhasa at that time and did trading and stayed in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Didn't they stay in Lhasa long before that?   

**A:**  Many of them came to Lhasa after the battle took place in Kham. Before that, there were just a few of them.   

**Q:**  They started coming up in 1950, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at the time, the trade was good in Lhasa because the Chinese were paying <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> silver coins. They fought a battle and then did the trading and then fought a battle again and then ran away.   

**Q:**  When the people came up from Kham from 1951-1956, did the Chinese keep a lookout over them?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. The Chinese didn't say anything even when they saw the Khambas they pretended that they didn't see them.   

**Q:**  When did the Chinese sent the Guomindang blue Chinese back?   

**A:**  The Guomindang Chinese were sent back before the Communist came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Didn't they say that they are going to send the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> people and Khambas back?   

**A:**  That was in 1958.   

**Q:**  When did the situation became deteriorated in Lhasa?   

**A:**  This was from 1957-58.   

**Q:**  Why did it deteriorate in 1957?   

**A:**  In 1957, the Chinese were suspicious and they built bunkers and prepared for battle and in 1958 they did the target shooting.   

**Q:**  Did they do the target shooting in their own regiment area?   

**A:**  Yes, they did the canon target shooting from their regiment to the mountain Bumbari [Tib. བུམ་པ་རི]. They also did the target shooting from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Gungtang [Tib. ཚལ་གུང་ཐང] to the mountain near by. They did the gun target shooting day and night.   

**Q:**  Where did they do this?   

**A:**  They did this from their regiment to Trip Tsecholing. And they filled up sacks with sand and built bunkers on their houses.   

**Q:**  Did they do that inside Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, they built bunkers [Tib. འཛིང་ར] on all of their houses.   

**Q:**  Did you think that from that time, the Chinese had the thought of fighting a battle?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they build bunkers in all of their offices and houses?   

**A:**  Yes. They built bunkers on all the roofs of their houses.   

**A:**  Did they also build the bunkers outside the houses?   

**A:**  Yes, they built it on the top of the gates.   

**A:**  When did this start?   

**A:**  They started doing this a little bit from 1957 and then in 1958 they built a lot.   

**Q:**  In 1956, the Dalai Lama went to India for the Buddha Jayanti. At that time, the Chinese leader told him that the democratic reforms are not that important. It was all right to delay it for 7-8 years, right?   

**A:**  Probably he said that, but I don't know that.   

**Q:**  Actually, in 1957, their policy become benign, right?   

**A:**  They just said that, but they were building the bunkers right at that time in 1957 and in 1958. The bunkers were well built and the battle took place in 1959.   

