# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0029.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Abo Rabgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་རྒྱས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 29 August 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Abo Rabgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་རྒྱས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 65  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1927  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Abo Rabgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་རྒྱས] was a Khamba from Markham who was a tsondzin in Chushigandru. In this interview, he discusses his family and life in the old society and then the Chinese reforms and the Khamba revolt. He discusses the origin, structure, officers and the early meetings of Chushigandru. He also discusses his trip to Drigutang, the battle at Nyemo Dokarsumdo and subsequent battles. He also describes the views of Samjola and Namseling and how 30 Khambas attacked a Chinese regiment in Kongpo Gyashing with little success. Finally, he interviewee describes the American airdrop in 1958.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0029_01/H_0029_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  As we talked about a little yesterday, I am writing a history book and...   

**A:**  Is the tape on already?   

**Q:**  Yes, but don't worry about it since it's long. Anyway I want to ask you about the 1950-59 period. However, tell me where you were born, your parent's village.   

**A:**  I'm from Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས].   

**Q:**  What did your parents do in Markham?   

**A:**  My parents were agriculturalists. They had fields and many cows and dzomo. And if you go to the nomad area, we were agropasturals and had many yaks, sheep, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི] A female yak.">dri</a>, etc.   

**Q:**  When did you go to Lhasa?   

**A:**  When I was 21.   

**Q:**  Before that, what were you doing?   

**A:**  I stayed at home looking after the animals, doing agricultural work, and doing things like getting firewood.   

**Q:**  Then you came to Lhasa, right? Why?   

**A:**  I came to trade at Lhasa and then I stayed and didn't go back.   

**Q:**  Was the business a household venture?   

**A:**  Yes. It was supposed to be that when I first came. Then when I was 30, I went home once. I went down to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> and then I returned to Lhasa and stayed for good.   

**Q:**  During this time what were you trading in?   

**A:**  I came to India and got various things and took them to Tibet. In the Northern areas [Tib. ཆང] we bought wool and [yak] tails and brought these to India.   

**Q:**  So you didn't trade with your home area?   

**A:**  I went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> once and that was it. All the trade was with Chang and Lhasa.   

**Q:**  I see. In 1949-50, where were you?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa. I can't tell you the year, but I was trading at Nagchuka [Tib. ནག་ཆུ་ཁ] when the Chinese first came there [to Nagchuka].   

**Q:**  So you were there?   

**A:**  Yes. When the Chinese first came there they were marching in formation and the Tibetan soldiers went to receive them in Nagchuka. The Tibetan soldiers were holding the Tibetan flag and they tilted the flag down.   

**Q:**  Even though you were at Lhasa, you must have known many people from your homeland who were trading. So when the Chinese first came there, what was said about what they did? What did people say their policy was like?   

**A:**  Yes. There were many people from our birthplace. At first the policy of the Chinese was exceptionally good. They never came and stayed in people's houses; they stayed separately. Then they used to help the villages, saying that they have come to help. They were very nice. For the traders they would help transport their things. If some things were left on the roadside they would say that you better take it or the robbers might get it.   

**Q:**  So, they helped a lot?   

**A:**  Yes, in the beginning.   

**A:**  In the house and in the fields too?   

**A:**  Even the fields, yes, they would help. They were doing a lot of good things. They said that the People's Liberation Army has come to help the miser.   

**Q:**  Then at Markham, the chiefs and those from the monasteries, did they have to go to work with the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes. At first they worked and the chiefs, elites and lamas were given a salary by the Chinese ... . Then as time went by, they said that they wanted democratic reforms and our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> said that they don't want it and so we didn't get along and it didn't work out.   

**Q:**  Did they do democratic reforms later?   

**A:**  At first they had a discussion and we Tibetans said we don't want the reforms. They said that it had to be done. Then they brought war and the fighting broke out. In 1956, there was fighting in Litang, Ba [Tib. འབའ], Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲེང], Markham and everywhere. So we said we don't want democratic reforms and the fighting began and we didn't get along.   

**Q:**  So if you were to describe it in a little more detail, when they first came they were being very nice right? Then how did the situation deteriorate?   

**A:**  At first they are being good saying that there were there to help the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>. They were doing all kinds of chores and then this talk about democratic reforms came about and things began to deteriorate and they took things from the miser and did a lot of things like that. Then the war began and they destroyed the miser and all the arms and ammunition were taken.   

**Q:**  Why did the war first start?   

**A:**  They said that they were going to start democratic reforms so we Tibetans said we don't want to do that. They said we had to since the in the Chinese Communist system there has to be democratic reforms. So that's the reason the war started. So when they started the democratic reforms they destroyed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and equalized them [in wealth], and they destroyed the lamas and the monks, and arrested some of the leaders and others among the better off people and imprisoned others, while still others were killed. The way it began was they said we should have meetings and during the meetings the leaders, both the lamas and the lay people, were arrested. Then they told the miser to hand in all their arms and ammunition. Those who did not were arrested or killed. So they became desperate [the people].   

**Q:**  So during this time you were not there right?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa, but that's the way it happened.   

**Q:**  So during 1951 the Chinese came to Lhasa, right? In 1951 the 17-Point Agreement had to be implemented. His Holiness was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> [Yadong] and then he came to Lhasa, right? Then after that a lot of Chinese came. So during this time, how was it in Lhasa?   

**A:**  When the Chinese first came, the Tibetan army were in our land [i.e. in Kham]. They were at Tsoba Drukha or something, at Shesonggön at the border in Batang. So when the Chinese invaded, we Tibetans lost and ran away. And so when the Tibetans ran ... Ngabö at that time was at Chamdo. Then they [the PLA} went to Chamdo and crushed them. So all the <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> surrendered and the Chinese were nice to them, made them carry goods and paid them good fees and helped them in the fields. So that was the first reason. After the invasion was completed, they were good to the miser. Then they started talking about democratic reforms. The miser said no. Then when they said to hold meetings, the elites, lamas and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a> were arrested and taken to attend study sessions. So when the miser said no, they said that the democratic reforms must begin. They said to hand in your arms and ammunition. When they said they won't hand them in, and that's how the fighting started.   

**Q:**  So gradually, when did people from Dome [Tib. མདོ་སྨད] and Kham start coming to Lhasa?   

**A:**  When the Tibetan government started fighting at Chamdo, then they gradually started coming, by 1950 and '51.   

**Q:**  They already had come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. they gradually came. They got places [to live] in Lhasa and started building houses. So at that time they started talking about starting democratic reforms. Then it's already 1956. Didn't His Holiness come to India in 1958?   

**Q:**  In 1956. He came back in 1957.   

**A:**  At about that time, all the fighting started in Kham. They used cannons and Bren-guns were shot and all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> were destroyed. It was at this time that the miser were either arrested or killed. So this was 1956 and since then the fighting began and it never ceased.   

**Q:**  At Lhasa, there were a lot of people from Kham who had come around 1956. So there were a lot of fighters and did the Chinese say anything, like send the police to check up, etc?   

**A:**  They must have been keeping watch, but they did not say anything. A lot of them had escaped and come and they may have been saying something to the government, but they did not say anything to the miser.   

**Q:**  The beginning of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> in Lhasa, how did it start?   

**A:**  Well, they were fighting down in Kham and there was a lot of talk about the killing of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> in Kham and generally how bad the Chinese were. Then when they came to Lhasa, there was all this talk of democratic reforms and the people met and had many meetings at which it was said that "the first thing is the safety of His Holiness' life, and secondly that Tibet cannot be a part of China. So at first a golden throne was offered to His Holiness for which donations from all the miser, monks, Khambas, Phöba, all the people from 3 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོལ་ཁ་གསུམ] The traditional three regions/provinces that comprised all of Tibet: Central-Western Tibet, Amdo and Kham (tib. དབུས་གཙང, མདོ་མེད, མདོ་སྟོད).">chökasum</a> and they started opposing the Chinese. In 1957, the Chinese arrested the Chinese who were wearing the blue clothing [civilians] and said that they must go back to Kham and after that the Amdowas and Khambas would be sent home. Because there was talk like that, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was formed. The question of going to Drigutang was agreed.   

**Q:**  Now the people discussed things at Lhasa right? How did they meet to discuss? It is said that Drönyerchemmo Phala [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ་ཕ་ལ] knew about these things. So how were the meetings begun?   

**A:**  There were no specific meetings or places, [but people talked while] gambling and during informal talks. No specific meeting were held where one can go in and out since the Chinese will not allow that. So everything was done under cover.   

**Q:**  So what specifically were you doing at this time, trading?   

**A:**  I was trading. And in Chushigandru...   

**Q:**  Did you do work for the Markham group?   

**A:**  Yes, I was a leader [Tib. འགོ་འཛིན] of Markham and was doing some work for Markham.   

**Q:**  Doing what work?   

**A:**  Well, we had given the golden throne, right? Whatever rituals had to be done we did. Then we were talking about taking to the hills.   

**Q:**  The hills?   

**A:**  Yes, to Drigutang? So we said if we have to fight at Lhasa then it will not be good, so it's best to go somewhere outside.   

**Q:**  What would happen if you stayed in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Then the Chinese will destroy the whole of Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was there any danger of a fight starting in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese were having shooting practice day and night in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What did you say they were doing at Lhasa?   

**A:**  Target practice with guns.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  The Chinese. You know they had machine guns, and they were doing target practice. Practicing with cannons. The Blue Chinese that they had captured were sent down to China. Then there was talk that the Amdowas and Khambas were also going to be sent down and there was a lot of commotion.   

**Q:**  Were the Chinese saying that they were going to send the Amdowas and Khambas?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. Then there was a lot of commotion and the Chinese started to talk about democratic reforms in Lhasa. Then we said that if the Khambas stay and fight in Lhasa the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> Temple and the Potala would be destroyed and so it was decided that we would go to Drigutang.   

**Q:**  How was it decided whether to stay at Lhasa or go outside?   

**A:**  The way we decided was by [consulting] all of Tibet's protective deities and lamas. All were consulted and asked to do divination and give prophecies as to whether we should stay or go. [They did this] In front of all the deities [lha], like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> [Tib. གནས་ཆུང], Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང], the statue of Buddha called Jo Rimpoche [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ], the statue of the Avalokitsevara called Thuje Chemmo [Tib. ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ] and all the other deities in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and the 3 monasteries. They did the divine lottery [Tib. བརྟག་རིལ]. Then all the learned lamas did divination. The answer was that it was better to go.   

**Q:**  So when you went, how did you decide which areas the different units were going to go to, etc?   

**A:**  Now, we had to start a base, right? So we said that it was better to do it at Drigutang. So we all gathered there. We said [we should] gradually go there and start.   

**Q:**  During this time you went there also?   

**A:**  I went there in 1958 in the 5 month, 19th day.   

**Q:**  When did the base start?   

**A:**  On the 6th month, 15th day. About the 15th it started and there was a ceremony.   

**Q:**  Was Andru Jinda [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་སྦྱིན་བདག] [Gombo Tashi] the leader?   

**A:**  Yes. He was the leader of us all.   

**Q:**  So how many groups were there?   

**A:**  All were there. When we first started, there were 24 groups.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  So, I'm one from the Markham group, right? Then there were the groups from Gaba [Tib. སྒ་པ], Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ], Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ], Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ], and Tsawarongba [Tib. ཚ་བ་རོང་པ]. like these there were 21 groups.   

**Q:**  There were 24 groups, right?   

**Q:**  Yes 24. Then it gradually increased to 30 groups.   

**Q:**  Then within this [question not finished]   

**A:**  Within this the overall head was Andru Gombo Tashi [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. Then in each group there was a Magji or commander and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན] who were appointed. The larger groups had about 2 tsondzin and 2 magji. The smaller ones had about one. And also there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> or the leader of a unit of a hundred who were appointed. And the first plan for war was begun.   

**Q:**  So you were at Lhasa, trading and so how did you decide to go there?   

**A:**  I was trading and we had all decided to work together.   

**Q:**  Did you Markham people meet?   

**A:**  Yes. The Markham meeting met and on after discussing what should be done, all agreed that it was better to go.   

**Q:**  So when you Markham people were meeting who was there, who were the leaders?   

**A:**  Oh, there were so many.   

**Q:**  About how many?   

**A:**  So many, around 100 or so. Then when we met and we said it was better to go, so then we asked for prophecies from the Markham deities. They told us that its better to go than stay.   

**Q:**  I see, you asked deities.   

**A:**  The ones who said to go were the deities, since we people cannot make that decision. So all the judgments pointed to us going.   

**Q:**  So let me ask you something more personal. When you got there, what did you do?   

**A:**  When we got to Drigutang, there were 2 Markham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> and I was one.   

**Q:**  Markham what?   

**A:**  Tsondzin. One was Gen Gudrag [Tib. རྒན་གུར་དྲག], I was the other. We had 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>: Pha Lotse [Tib. ཕ་བློ་ཚེ] and Tempel [Tib. བསྟན་འཕེལ]. So then we were about 654 people.   

**Q:**  People? How many?   

**A:**  Not Markham, but all together. About 654 went to the Northern Plains [Tib. བྱང] [to get the guns at Shang Ganden Chöngor]. We went via the Nyabsog [Tib. ཉ་སྲབ] ferry site to Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ].   

**Q:**  Why did you go to the North?   

**A:**  To look inspect [Tib. ས་སྐོར] and see. So the reason why we went for inspection was that we had no arms and ammunition. The arms and ammunitions of 500 soldiers of the Tibetan Government were kept at the monastery of Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. ཤང་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. So we went to get that. When we went the Chinese were waiting at Nyemo Dokarsumdo [Tib. རྡོ་མཁར་སུམ་མདོ] and then the fighting started.   

**Q:**  You had a fight with who?   

**A:**  With the Chinese at Nyemo. At Dokarsumdo. They were waiting there. It was a fierce battle and probably over 100 of our people were killed. We killed many Chinese.   

**Q:**  About 100 were killed.   

**A:**  No. It was more than that, probably about 500 to 600. We finally managed to get to Shang Ganden Chöngor and took a lot of arms. Then we came back.   

**Q:**  Now the government had already told the monastery to give the arms and ammunitions, isn't it?   

**A:**  We went to the monastery and took it by force. There were only monks in the monastery and so when the fighters said they want it, they had no choice, right?   

**Q:**  So earlier the Government used to keep the arms at the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. There were weapons for 500 soldiers.   

**Q:**  Does Ganden Chöngor have to provide soldiers?   

**A:**  It was for the Tibetan Government's soldiers. It was for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> [Tib. ག་དང] regiment or something like that. The arms and ammunition for the 500 soldiers were left there.   

**Q:**  So before you went there what kind of arms and ammunition did you have at Drigutang?   

**A:**  Some had only 2 or 3 rifles. A lot of the people had only sticks and stones. Those who were in front had arms. Out of 50 only 10-15 had arms.   

**Q:**  I see only some had?   

**A:**  Yes if there were 100, about 50 had arms. So that's how we went.   

**Q:**  When you got there, how were the arms and ammunition?   

**A:**  We got a lot. We got the arms for the 500 soldiers. We got 300 English 305 carbines [Tib. དབྱིན་ཇི་ཁ་ཐུང].   

**Q:**  Is it Inji khathung?   

**A:**  Yes, and there were 2 long cannons, 10 Bren-guns, 12 Sten-guns, and about 70 loads of bullets. So these were distributed among the soldiers and some of them had to carry two weapons because they already had one. Then we came down and encountered them [the Chinese] again at Nyemo.   

**Q:**  You got the arms and then went where?   

**A:**  We came down to Nyemo [trying to return to Drigutang].   

**Q:**  To Nyemo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So when you went from Lhasa to Drigutang, how long did you stay there?   

**A:**  About a month.   

**Q:**  When did you say you left Lhasa?   

**A:**  I left on the 8th month, 19th day.   

**Q:**  So then you went in the 9th month?   

**A:**  6th month something, 6th month 15th day, and then stayed for a little over a month and then went.   

**Q:**  When you went to Shang Ganden Chöngor, how long did you stay there?   

**A:**  Oh, we didn't stay long, only about 10 days and nights. Just to get the ammunition.   

**Q:**  Just a little, not even one day?   

**A:**  No. More than one day, about 8-10 days. You had to get the arms and ammunition and then distribute them. About 7-8 days, I can't say for sure.   

**Q:**  Then you went down to Nyemo.   

**A:**  Yes. Then we went to Nyemo again, but the Chinese were waiting for us.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  The Chinese. When we got to place called Dokarsumdo, the place where we had previously fought, they thought we would come back that way and they were coming from Kargang [Tib. བཀར་ཁང], Batanggodi [Tib. bar thang go gri ?], and Sagatroso. We were coming down from Dokarsumdo and they put us right in the middle and squeezed us.   

**Q:**  So they came from 3 directions?   

**A:**  More than that, four or five.   

**Q:**  So you were surrounded?   

**A:**  Yes, completely.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  So we fought in various directions. The fighting began around 5 in the evening and continued the next day. We killed many Chinese. They killed also many of us. Then when it got dark in the evening we went through the jagged hills and escaped.   

**Q:**  So you all escaped together?   

**A:**  Yes together. We had to. Those who were killed and wounded were left.   

**Q:**  How many people did you say you all were?   

**A:**  About 650 odd people. And many were killed on the way up too. At Nyemo also.   

**Q:**  Then you didn't have many left?   

**A:**  About less than 500 because 150-60 were killed.   

**Q:**  So you went through the hills and then what happened?   

**A:**  So we climbed the hill and came to Kargang. From there when we got to Chang Yangpajen [Tib. བྱང་ཡངས་པ་ཅན] the Chinese were waiting there. Once we crossed the road [the motor road] we came to Namtsokha [Tib. རྣམ་མཚོ་ཁ]. So then we circled the hill and came around to Dam [Tib. འདམ] and then to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> and then we passed Yangrigang [Tib. ཡང་རི་སྒང] and went down to Kham.   

**Q:**  Down to Kham?   

**A:**  Yes, Oh! We had a lot of clashes.   

**Q:**  Like where?   

**A:**  When we were coming down, at Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ], at Wuyug Dzomtang [Tib. འོད་ཡུག་འཛོམས་ཐང], then coming down, at Kargang, at the mountain pass in Dam and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> and we were going that way, what's that place called, in the Drigung area, the Chinese fired cannons and Bren-guns and attacked us. Then we escaped, and not many were killed, and then we crossed the mountain and went down to Kham.   

**Q:**  So did you all go together or did you go in two different groups? Where was Andru Jinda?   

**A:**  We all went together. Andru Jinda was there, but he was wounded by cannon shells. We were separated because there were 10-15 cannon shells and we got separated. Then we went down towards Kham.   

**Q:**  Did you also go down to Kham?   

**A:**  No, I did not go because I was wounded at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> and so were two others. Since they could not go on, we stayed in the hills in Drigung and then came to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Where in Lhoka, in Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ]?   

**A:**  At Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི]. The main base was at Lhagyari.   

**Q:**  Why was the main base begun at Lhagyari?   

**A:**  That's where the fight against the Chinese began.   

**Q:**  No, why was it begun at this place?   

**A:**  It has good houses and secondly it's easy to move about. So from Drigu the main base was moved to Lhagyari.   

**Q:**  During this time Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང] were sent by the government to talk, right? So where were you when they came?   

**A:**  I was at Drigutang. So when they came they were from the government and we were the same [in our thinking] so they couldn't do anything. Nobody liked the Chinese. Even if they came, we were not two separate forces. We were one [Tib. གཅིག་མ་གཏོགས་གཉིས་ཡོད་མ་རེད], so that's the truth.   

**Q:**  So what did they say?   

**A:**  They just went through the motions of saying, "Don't do these things. It is better to go to the Chinese." There wasn't anything to say except what was in the edict. Obviously they would be happy if we did what they wanted.   

**Q:**  So they were asked by the Kashag to go and they went, right? Did they say, don't fight, leave it?   

**A:**  They were saying that we should not fight since it's not good. They said to go back and there would be no repercussions and that they will be treated well.   

**Q:**  So when they came did you all meet?   

**A:**  A number of us people went to see them and they said those things. Later <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> did not go back.   

**Q:**  So they stayed and did what?   

**A:**  I don't know what they did, but they stayed at, what's it called, I don't remember but there was a place below Lhagyari. I don't know what he did since we all went to the North (byang).   

**Q:**  So when you guys were there at Lhagyari then you went to the north?   

**A:**  Yes, we went from Drigu. When we went up that way they moved [the base] to Lhagyari. When we were at Drigu, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola came.   

**Q:**  I see. When you were at Lhagyari did you engage in battles?   

**A:**  At Lhagyari there were a lot of battles. From Lhagyari about one base went away there was a battle at the Lukhang [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང] ferry site.   

**Q:**  What's the name of the place?   

**A:**  Lukhang ferry site. There we fought and the Chinese retreated to Gangpu at Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང]. There we fought. When I got there, Andru Jinda had retreated to Kham. We went to Kongpo and I was back at Lhagyari and 100 soldiers went to Kongpo Gyajin. It was on the 1st day of the Tibetan New Year that we fought. We fought and 30 volunteers [Tib. ཁས་ལེན་པ] went to storm a house. The Chinese killed 17 of us volunteers. We were not able to kill anyone in the house and we suffered a great loss.   

**Q:**  What was this! I didn't understand properly. What was that about the house?   

**A:**  The Chinese were in the house right? To destroy them there were 30 Khelenpa (volunteers). Khelenpa means the ones who volunteered go inside the house to kill the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did you suffer some casualties?   

**A:**  17 were killed and 5 were wounded, altogether 22 were eliminated.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese were killed?   

**A:**  None. Not even one was killed. The Chinese were in the House, right? There were machine gunning us.   

**Q:**  So you couldn't take them out?   

**A:**  No, not at all. We tried for 7 days.   

**Q:**  Seven days?   

**A:**  Yes, and after seven days we were unsuccessful.   

**Q:**  During this time did you have only rifles?   

**A:**  We had only rifles. We hand some grenades, but they didn't work. We had no cannons. We had Sten-guns, but they wouldn't work.   

**Q:**  During this time, did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> have some associations with people in Kalimpong, in India?   

**A:**  There must be some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> people but no one was working there.   

**Q:**  Later with the help of the US some arms were dropped, how did that work out? Did they drop a lot? Were they useful or were they of no use?   

**A:**  The first drop was very helpful.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  I don't remember the date.   

**Q:**  Was it in 1958 or 1959?   

**A:**  It was 1958. When we got to Lhagyari the arms had already arrived. The first drop was in 1958 and they distributed the weapons.   

**Q:**  Did they drop a lot?   

**A:**  I don't know since it was already distributed and we were not there then. It was very helpful. When they dropped the second shipment since Andru Jinda had not arrived they didn't distribute it and so it was not helpful. I heard when His Holiness came and when they [Chushigandru] came to E Chundogyang [Tib. ཨེ་ཆུ་མདོ་ཀྱང], then the weapons were given. There were no Chinese there and the fighting had already started [in Lhasa].   

**Q:**  Was there only 1 drop?   

**A:**  Two drops.   

**Q:**  The second time what did you say happened? That Andru Jinda had not arrived?   

**A:**  The second time, they said that if Andru Jinda did not come, they won't dare to distribute the weapons and they did not distribute them.   

**Q:**  They said that if Andru Jinda does not come then the supplies will not be given, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't distribute them. It was stopped by those people who worked with the weapons. Later when His Holiness was coming they said that at E Chundo Dzong it was distributed to the soldiers. I wasn't there.   

**Q:**  When His Holiness came to this side?   

**A:**  Yes, he had already left.   

**Q:**  Had already left, in 1959...   

**A:**  So they didn't give it. If they did give it before then, it would have been useful.   

**Q:**  So when did you come here [to India]?   

**A:**  After His Holiness came. I came with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. We fought for hardly one year, not more than that. Then in 1959 after His Holiness left we came. We were sent down to Kongpo again. We went to place called Nyintri [Tib. ཉི་ཁྲི], then at, what's the name of the place, Chabnag [Tib. ཆབ་ནག], lots of soldiers came and then the fight started. Then we fought and retreated, fought and retreated and then we came to... what's the name... there's the Dakpo Kotsa [dwags po ko tsha ?]. Then at this place Chushigandru, the government soldiers and everybody ran away since Lhasa was lost. We were left behind. Then we left Dakpo Kotsa and went. Thinking we could go to that side we came to Sangnga Chöling [Tib. གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་གླིང]. Then we came to India. So that's how we fled.   

**Q:**  After His Holiness came to this side [India] how long after did you all arrive?   

**A:**  When we came it was quite late. When we got to Missamari everybody had arrived. I came at the tail end. I had to go through Loyul [Tib. ཀློ་ཡུལ] a lot. It took one month and four days carrying the load...   

**Q:**  So when you all were fighting were you able to unite quite well or were you all scattered?   

**A:**  When we were fighting we were united and discussed everything. But there was no way we could match the Chinese so we had to run. So today we would run, stay for a while and then challenge the next day. So that's how we went, running and fighting, running and fighting. Then once the fight was on, some 5-6 of us would get separated. Those who were killed were killed, the wounded were left with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  The air-drop of supplies by the US who was working on it.   

**A:**  Mainly it was Litang Athar [Tib. ལི་ཐང་ཨ་དར] and Gasitsang Lotse [Tib. ག་གཟི་ཚང་བློ་ཚེ]. They were the ones who did the talking and had the arms.   

**Q:**  Where is he?   

**A:**  He was in Darjeeling, but now he's dead.   

**Q:**  He's dead?   

**A:**  He's died. Litang Athar is still in Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  Were these two the only wireless people?   

**A:**  Yes, those two were the only ones. Otherwise, none are left.   

**Q:**  So in India Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] [Gyalo Thondup] was working?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I want to ask you this. Let's forget about your place of birth and so forth, but tell me how did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> first start and about the battles you fought and the places you went to up to 1959. Could you tell me again in a proper sequence?   

**A:**  The reason why the fight started in the first place was that the Chinese destroyed the religion and politics and destroyed the people. That is common knowledge, right? The reason <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> first started was that His Holiness was being offered the golden throne. This was just an excuse for us to get together secretly. Then when all were working for this throne we used to meet in the parks since we could not get together and meet in the houses on account of the Chinese suspicions. So the leaders met in the parks and gambled when there were people [listening] and talked when there were no people and disbanded the meeting when we felt we were being watched and then resumed again. Later in 1957 in every place in Lhasa the Chinese were doing target practice and had built battlements. Then they made the people apprehensive by saying that democratic reforms have to be done and if not they will forcefully do it. Then they were saying that when the Blue Chinese (civilians) were sent to China they were saying that the Khambas and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>was were going to be sent down also. So while such talks were going on, Chushigandru requested to the deities and lamas to do the divination and give a prophecy about whether they should stay in [Lhasa]or go outside. The divine lottery said that we should go out. We consulted and discussed whether we should go to Tö, Chang or to Drigu. Then the divinations, the prophecies and the divine lottery was cast for Drigu, so we all went to Drigu. The fighters from the various groups left for Drigutang. First Andru Jinda left and then the others left and we started the base there [in Drigu]. So when we started the base, there were 24 groups. We were preparing for war and at that time the government said not to fight and sent Samjola and Namseling. So we said that it won't help to listen to them since the Chinese said that they were going to do democratic reforms. We had made up our minds and so we didn't listen to them. Then in the 6th month, something like the 1st day, 556 or 656 fighters, I have forgotten the correct number, decided to go to Shang Ganden Chöngor monastery to get weapons. We said we were going for a inspection trip [Tib. ས་སྐོར] but the actual reason was to go and get the guns. When we left, two Chinese youngsters, Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and Tempa Targye [Tib. བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས], came to surrender to us. Then when we passed the Nyabsog ferry site and went over the pass since there were summer rains we could not go over to the other side. So we used ropes and crossed over [the river], but Tempa Targye ran away to Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར]. The next day, what's the name of the place, near Yangpajen? At that place there were a lot of traders who had about ten horses-mules. So the next day we were thinking about going to Dokarsumdo, but the Chinese were waiting there. Then we fought and we killed a lot of Chinese and a lot of us were killed too. We fought for about 2-3 days and nights. If we fought today at 9 am then we fought till tomorrow about 5 pm. So when we killed the Chinese we were able to get a lot of their arms. Then we retreated and went by the northern route to Shang Ganden Chöngor. At the monastery, there were arms and ammunition for 500 government soldiers. There were 305-English Carbine rifles, cannons, Bren-guns, Sten-guns, machine guns. They were all distributed to the different groups. Then we came down and at Nyemo Dokarsumdo, where we previously fought, we stayed there for the night and the next day we reached Nyemo. Then, of those who went earlier, one group went to Batang and others went to Sakatrosa. We arrived late in the evening at the base in Nyemo. Then there was so much gunfire from those who went to Sakatrosa and Batang that we were feeling restless. That evening we stayed and then divided the soldiers into those who were going to Sakatrosa and those to Batang. We from Markham were to go to Dokarsumdo. That evening we stayed there. The next day the Chinese came in formation. Our helpers were the Tsawarongpa [fighters]. We fought and killed many Chinese. We also suffered some dead and wounded. About 5 Markham fighters were killed and I don’t think any Tsawarongpa were killed. There were about 3 wounded and 5 dead from Markham. At about 12, then our fighters came to support us. Then the Chinese were in a house and we set fire to the house. All the Chinese that were there, if there were many Chinese, all were destroyed. So all day we fought and in the evening since all the roads were blocked we escaped through the mountains and reached, what's it called, a place near Yangpajen. I had 2 wounded with me and the soldiers were chasing me. I went towards the Nyabso ferry site from where we had come. However, they [the other groups] couldn't come towards the Nyabso ferry site, and perhaps they went towards Yangpajen. So I could not go to Namtsokha and I was left with two wounded men. Then they went towards Namtsokha and they fought at the Dam Jogtse la [Tib. འདམ་ལྕོག་རྩེ་ལ] Pass and killed many people. Andru Jinda was wounded by a cannon fire and then he went down to Kham and came fighting from there. While Andru Jinda was [in Kham], we arrived at Lhagyari. There we said that we have to send 100 mounted fighters to bring Andru Jinda back. The Chamdo commander Pema Wangchuk [Tib. པད་མ་དབང་ཕྱུག], and, from among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>, myself and Chamdo Londzin [Tib. བློ་འཛིན] were assigned 100 fighters and we were sent to Kongpo. When we went to Kongpo, it was the 1st of the New Year. We surrounded the Chinese base at Kongpo Gyashing [Tib. རྒྱ་ཤིང]. The next day, around 8 in the morning we surrounded the [Chinese] regiment. Then we got 30 volunteers who went into the house while we waited outside. At about 8 the next day the Chinese came. Then at 9, someone among the volunteers tried to get into the house. The Chinese had machine guns mounted so the volunteers could not get in. They were stuck in the courtyard. So 16 of the volunteers were killed and 5 were wounded. So nothing was left from the 30, right? So we fought for a while and we were unable to get to them in the house. They killed many of us. So we could not manage and we asked a Lama to do divination and he said it would be better to withdraw. So we withdrew and came to Lhagyari. So those Chushigandru who were fighting at Tsetang were fighting there. When we came to Lhagyari we said we had to go to Kongpo; that we had to fight at Kongpo. So Chamdo Dortse [Tib. རྡོ་ཚེ] and myself and 12 fighters went down to Kongpo to conscript soldiers [Tib. དམག་འཕྱགས]. When we were conscripting soldiers in Kongpo, the Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ] regiment and the Amdo regiment were there. We let the Derge regiment stay there at Kongpo and the Amdo regiment came up [with us]. So we could not meet Andru Jinda. We conscripted 300 soldiers from Kongpo, 30 soldiers from Mardzo Sasum [Tib. སྨར་མཛོ་ས་གསུམ]; Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས], Dzogang [Tib. མཛོ་སྒང] and Sangan [Tib. ས་ངན] and 15 soldiers from Chamdo. Then we were staying at this place called Chamnag [Tib. ཆབ་ནག] or something like that. Then there were reports that the Chinese had come to Kongpo Tsela Dzong [Tib. རྩེ་ལ་རྫོང]. There were clashes with our patrols, but there weren't any casualties om either side. The next day, when we woke up at Kongpo Chamnag, the place was full of Chinese trucks and Chinese. So some of us said that the Chinese were fighting at Lhasa and they are now running away. We decided to attack from 3 directions using the soldiers that were conscripted. I was assigned to the upper side. Bachung Pön [Tib. སྦ་ཆུང་དཔོན] was assigned on that side and Ngawang Sherab [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཤེས་རབ] was assigned at the lower part. So we approached closer and closer. Then there were some monks. All the Chinese were washing their clothes and taking it easy. Some of the monks were there and we fired at some of the Chinese on the river bank and we killed many. Then the monks started firing at us. The Chinese had put on monk's robes. The fighting lasted from 10 or 11 in the morning to about 5 in the evening. We obviously couldn't match the Chinese strength and we retreated around 5 in the evening. So we fought and retreated in Kongpo and arrived at Ngachenphang [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན་འཕྲང]. This place was flat and we waited for the Chinese and then the fight began and we killed many Chinese. Even then it wasn't useful since they were too powerful. Then we came to, what's it called, Dakpo Kotsa. There were a few monks there who said they heard from Lhasa that His Holiness and the Tibetan army and Chushingandru have left and there is no road for you to go on. Thinking that there was no way to go, we went to a place in Dakpo and ended up in Sangnga Chöling. They said that there is a road from there that goes to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>, but since the Chinese were there we could not go because we were being chased by planes. We were chased by planes and were hiding. Some of the fighters fought the Chinese, while others tried to escape, and in this manner we ended up in the place called Ne [Tib. གནས] where we met women and children who were herding some yaks. They said there is no place for you to go since all the Chushigandru people, the government troops and other people have all left. Then we came to Sangnga Chöling. That night some stayed and some went up. Then the Chinese came and we fought at the pass. Since we couldn't match them we came down to Sangnga Chöling. From there it was a day's journey to the Indian border, and so that is how we escaped. When we came down we were in the Lo [Tib. གློ] area. The journey was arduous.   

