# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0206.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Lungshar, Changchub [Tib. ལུང་ཤར, བྱང་འཆུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Lungshar, Changchub [Tib. ལུང་ཤར, བྱང་འཆུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 59  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lungshar, Changchub [Tib. ལུང་ཤར, བྱང་འཆུབ] was a lay official in the traditional Tibetan government and the son of the famous Tsipa Lungshar. In this interview, he continues to discuss his father.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0206_03/H_0206_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  It was well known during that time that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་དཔོན] The mayor of Lhasa during the traditional era. The head of the Nangtsesha Office [tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤར].">mipön</a> [his elder brother] was said to have done something while Reting Rimpoche was in prison. There was much talk about that.   

**A:**  No. That was not true. It was a plain lie. At that time I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] The position of aide to the Kashag that was filled by lay aristocratic officials.">gandrön</a> so I had to go to the prison as the representative of the Kashag. I had great faith in Reting Rimpoche so I didn't dare to go inside. After the decision of the Tsondu gyendzom was made, Reting Rimpoche's health deteriorated.   

**Q:**  What was Reting Rimpoche's illness?   

**A:**  We heard that his headache worsened and I was asked to see him. I went with the tseja, but I did not go inside the room. I stood outside the door. My elder brother, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was inside the room. The Regent used to be good to him as well. At that time I was too young and my only feeling was that I would be very happy if Reting Rimpoche would not have to stay in jail.   

**Q:**  When you said that Regent was good to your elder brother, are you referring to the Regent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. It was Taktra. Then I went down and I heard that Reting Rimpoche usually was suffering from yadrib [Tib. ཡ་གྲིབ] [a kind of stroke caused by sinuses]. I also heard that he was taking some foreign medicine known as Zenasprin.   

**Q:**  was that aspirin?   

**A:**  I don't know whether it was the same as aspirin or not. However, it was said that he used to get well after taking that medicine. Then later, the best Tibetan Doctor, Khyenrab Norbu [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ་ནོར་བུ], diagnosed his illness as yadrib and the doctor further said that his sickness was very serious and he offered him medicine. The prison guard at that time was Tsidrung Phepola [Tib. བལ་པོ་ལགས]. My brother was not there. In addition to that, 50 armed men were posted there. So this was only a rumor created by others. Otherwise there was no reason why my brother, the mayor, should have any bad intentions against Reting Rimpoche. These things were very clear from the beginning. Even one of the personal attendants of Reting Rimpoche and my brother the mayor were on very good terms. At that time, I was too young so I do not remember who this Personal Attendant [Tib. söpön la] of Reting Rimpoche was. I was very young and I did not take notice of these happenings. However, even at that young age, within about two months, I was able to have the "New Audience" [Tib. སརྗེལ] for getting admitted to government service.   

**Q:**  How did you get that?   

**A:**  It was all done through my own efforts. To explain how it was done, the judgement passed by the Tsondu gyendzom which was instigated by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> pronounced that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s future generations should not be allowed to be in government service and not allowed to "sit above 3 persons." Because of this judgement, I had resolved to take to religion rather than to involve myself in politics. These things I had mentioned in my family history. However, I will tell you briefly here. Since I had the necessary facilities, I was determined to live my life practicing religion. That was my only feeling at that time. However, many of my relatives told me that it was not becoming for a young man to practice religion and be neither perfect in religion nor a proper layman. Doing such a thing would be very shameful. They further told me that our situation was not same as others, as our family has received official punishment. Hence, we cannot stay just like that, although to practice religion is very good. This advice of my relatives further aroused my emotions and reminded me of the tortures done to my father and I realized that I cannot just stay like a woman unable to take revenge. It further aroused my anger. Then, I immediately started my plans. We even sent 17 people in high authority for this purpose and the expenses were tremendous. I even sent my own guru and finally I also contacted the Regent. But even the Regent could not do anything. Phünkang [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was a very stubborn person and I even agreed to take his daughter, Kelsang Dekyi [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་བདེ་སྐྱིད], as my wife on the condition that I would be admitted to government service.   

**Q:**  Was it Phünkang who was causing obstacles for you?   

**A:**  Yes, it was Phünkang. In the Kashag it was only Phünkang who was responsible for creating problems for me. It was very strange that although there was no enmity between us, yet Phünkang behaved in this way. Although at that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Tempa Jamyang [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] were strongly supporting my cause, Phünkang still acted so stubborn. When they pressed him further, he used to leave the Kashag in anger. So later Bönshö and Kalön Lama Tempa Jamyang told me that they were helpless since Phünkang was firm in his decision, and even left Kashag angrily. Now things seem to be very hard for you.   

**Q:**  I heard Phünkang had such a personality.   

**A:**  Since there was no alternative for us, later Phünkang Geshe filed a case against Phünkang. Dathang Lhajam Gusho [Tib. མདའ་ཐང་ལྷ་ལྕམ་སྐུ་ཞབས] was related to us. At that time, I was too busy meeting different people, but our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> told me one day that these days you seem to be very busy, but you are too young to understand anything. It is better for you to concentrate your mind on education. It would be better for you if you tackle these matters when you become more mature in age. You should not waste the wealth amassed by your late father. The reason why our nyerpa told me this was because I kept this secret from him and from everybody for six months. My brother, Tsipön, was not yet commissioned at that time. We used to meet quite often and consult each other outside the Lhalu house.   

**Q:**  Didn't Lhalu Lhajam deny that Lhalu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was the son of your late father. She said that he was the son of Shelkar Lingpa [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་གླིང་པ]. She was a very resourceful lady.   

**A:**  These things had already happened. However, my brother was quite influential and our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> suspected we were meeting often at secret places and told me one day, why are you two meeting often like this? You have so many servants who can do the job for you. But I told him that although we have so many servants, none of them can do the job. Later, when Phünkang was toppled, my brother was appointed shape just 5 days after that. 4 days after he was appointed shape, he had the "New Audience" for his appointed as katsab. It was done very quickly.   

**Q:**  How was he appointed shape and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a> so soon?   

**A:**  When he received the letter appointing him shape, automatically it made him a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a>. He then only had to have the New Audience. The post of katsab carried the same authority as that of shape. I then started employing every possible means and plans to become a government official. However, it was a very difficult task to change the decisions already passed by the Tsondu gyendzom. Even the Regent (Taktra), he was hard put to change the decision already passed by the Tsondu. Even the Regent (Taktra) was hard put to change the Tsondu gyendzom's draft decision when it was sent for his approval. My brother was a shape by then, but he approached the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> and told him everything. When every other means and approaches seemed useless, we approached the Regent (Taktra) himself. The Regent finally took a drastic step by changing the Tsondu gyendzom's decision. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was one of the shape at the time of submitting the draft and at that time we made the report through [the gadrung] Malampa [Tib. སྨར་ལམ་པ]. Kapshöba internally gave instructions to Malampa who was writing the Tsondu gyendzom's decision to do as dictated by him. But Malampa sensed danger in changing the [content of the] draft passed by the Tsondu gyendzom, so he just put the wording of the Tsondu gyendzom' draft and wrote "please decide whether to keep the Tsondu gyendzom' decision or to give the permission to [Lungshar] to become a government official. Furthermore, Malampa could not do Kapshöba's bidding because we had sought favor [Tib. སྐྱབས་འཇུག་ཞུས] from Malampa. Later, when I was commissioned as a government official, I saw the documents related to these matters. Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> told me that the Regent was the only person who could do it. Otherwise, there was no other way out.   

**Q:**  Was Malampa the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the gadrung.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> might have instructed him?   

**A:**  Yes, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> had instructed Malampa, so that was why all those obstacles had cropped up. However, later the order [Tib. བཀའ་སྒུར] for my appointment came out quickly.   

**Q:**  So your appointment to government service came through only by amending the Tsondu gyendzom's decision by the Regent.   

**A:**  Yes. It was through amending [Tib. བཀའ་ཆོས] the Tsondu gyendzom's decision. Soon thereafter, I became a tsitrug [Tib. རྩིས་ཕྲུག] [a preliminary period, during which the appointee in the govt. service had to go through a sort of training, before he was given any portfolio]. Soon after the completion of being a tsitrug, I was commissioned as a government official and barely 15 days after that, I was appointed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] The position of aide to the Kashag that was filled by lay aristocratic officials.">gandrön</a> in the Kashag. Although I had no inclinations to take the post of gandrön, the Regent insisted I take the post. At that time, it had been already decided to send my brother Lhalu to Chamdo and I was going to be sent to Chamdo. However, Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> and Simbü [Tib. གཟོམ་ཕུས] Gusung Depön who were my best friends, requested to the Regent through the Chandzö Chemmo not to send me to Chamdo. But the Regent said, "You must go this time, as there was no other way out because Lhalu needs a reliable partner. But I will give you the assurance that after the completion of your term in Chamdo, you will be given any portfolio you desire." So with this assurance, I was sent to Chamdo. At that time, when I was appointed like that, I became kind of popular.   

**Q:**  It was ridiculous for Phünkang to act so headstrong even when the Regent himself had spoken in your favor.   

**A:**  Yes, it was definitely stupid on his part. We even sought Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche's help and he also insistently exerted his influence. Since this too did not help much, the Regent himself gave his order. But Phünkang was still unmoved and adamant. This was ridiculous. Even if he did not agree with the idea, he should have said 'Yes'. Later, Reting Rimpoche was very good to me. He told me to come to Reting many times. Then the Kashag received a wireless message from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a> inviting Reting Rimpoche to China. The Kashag replied to the message saying that at that moment Reting Rimpoche was being treated by Tibet's most prominent doctor Khyenrab Norbu so we can not say whether his health will improve or not. Then we had to attend the Tsondu gyendzom. It was not an easy task. Shölkang was the tseja. I had great faith and respect for Reting Rimpoche. He was believed to be the reincarnation of Lhasey Mutri Tsenpo [Tib. ལྷ་སྲས་མུ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ]. Whatever it may be, he was undoubtedly a Bodhisattva.   

**Q:**  Even Bodhisattvas are sometimes helpless due to the power of their fate or karma. It is said that Mongol Putra [Tib. མོན་གལ་བུ], who was the greatest among the Buddha's disciples, in performing the "miracle-transformation" [Tib. རྫུ་འཕྲུལ], could not perform any miracles and was severely beaten by the non-Buddhist.   

**A:**  That is true. To perform the miracle transformations, the inner craving or desire should arise to transform yourself. But if the desire does not arise at all, there can not be transformation.   

**Q:**  Thanks.   

