# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0117.02: Tape 2  
##  : with Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 48  
**Date of Birth:** 1944  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར] was from a Lhasa middle class family. In this interview, he discusses how residence cards were obtained in Lhasa and how he supported his family by privately driving a cart. He describes the cart coop that was set up in Lhasa and the financial details of the organization. He also describes how the Cultural Revolution started and how its two major groups, Gyenlo and Nyamdre, supported Zhou Renshan and Zhang Guohua. Additionally, he explains how he became involved in the Cultural Revolution as a member of the Gyenlo faction.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0117_02/H_0117_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You don't need to talk about the 1959 uprising, but tell me about what happened when you came back from Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ].   

**A:**  It was in the twelfth month of 1962 that I came from Nangkartse to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did you seek permission when you came to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I asked for a leave. I left my bedding in Nangkartse, but I didn't go back there.   

**Q:**  When you came to Lhasa, did they give you any sort of letter?   

**A:**  No. I didn't need to get a letter. I told them that my father was sick.   

**Q:**  You just asked for a temporary leave, right?   

**A:**  I asked for a vacation. Otherwise, I would have needed a letter. When I told them like that . In 1963, I was told to work as an assistant to a cart driver and to cut grass.   

**Q:**  When you came to Lhasa, did you ask the Neighborhood Committee for a permanent residence card?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. I stayed for one year in Lhasa without a permanent residence card [Tib. ཐེམ་ཐོ]. There was another boy with me who also didn't have a permanent residence card. My former borax mining work unit was then located at the front of the Drepung Monastery. It was called the Production Department of the Tibetan Military Headquarters [Tib. བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང་གི་ཐོན་སྐྱེད་བུའུ; Ch. xi zang jun qu sheng chan bu]. I heard that the former Chinese head of the borax operation had became the leader of that work unit. So one day, my friend and I went to see him [and asked for an introduction letter for getting a permanent residence in Lhasa]. He gave us some food and said, "First, you should go to your Neighborhood Committee and ask them what kind of introduction letter you need for getting a permanent residence card, as well as a ration card and other things. Then come back here and I will write the letter." We went to the Neighborhood Committee and asked them what kind of introduction letter we needed. They said "You need to get an introduction letter that recommends issuing a permanent residence and ration card." The next day, we went down to our old office and the leader again gave us some food and wrote the introduction letter at once. Because of this, we got our permanent residence ration cards in one year.   

**Q:**  How did you manage your livelihood during that one year period?   

**A:**  I had fourteen family members at home. They [were in transportation and] had a cart pulled by two horses or mules. The household's magba was driving the cart. My mother and I cut grass to feed the horses from the area in the front of Drepung Monastery. At that time, the fees for hiring the cart were not bad so our family's livelihood was so-so. The next year, in 1963, our family got divided into two parts. Each household had seven members. The other household contained my elder sister, her magba [in marrying groom] and their five children. Our part contained my parents and five of their children [including me]. We divided all the family's property equally into two parts. We had two houses that belonged to the government, so it was easy to live separately.   

**Q:**  Did you also divide the house?   

**A:**  Since the house belonged to the government, we couldn't divide it, but we stayed separately. I had a cart pulled by one horse. Later, I changed it into a cart that was pulled by two horses [or mules].   

**Q:**  Why did you change?   

**A:**  I did this because the carts pulled by two horses could take more load.   

**Q:**  Did you have to buy the horses by yourself?   

**A:**  We had to buy the horses. At that time, mules were very expensive. I got two mules and I paid 2,000 yuan for one mule.   

**Q:**  How much did you get for transporting things?   

**A:**  When we transported bricks, we got five fen for one brick. When we transported stones, the fee was nine maotse for transporting one cubic meter of stone the distance of one kilometer. A cart pulled by one horse or mule could hold one cubic meter of stone whereas a cart pulled by two mules could hold two cubic meters of stone.   

**Q:**  Did you need to find the jobs by yourself?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to find the work. When we transported stones, they would calculate the distance. Supposing if the distance was ten kilometers, we would get nine yuan for a cubic meter of stones.   

**Q:**  At that point, were you allowed to sell and buy the horses as you wished?   

**A:**  Yes. We were allowed to do that. There was no problem.   

**Q:**  You had to sell the stones and bricks to the work units of the government, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In those days, there were many work units doing construction work. We would go to find jobs wherever the work was good. At that point, the taxes were not fixed. If a person was rich, they would have to pay more taxes. It was not dependent on the amount of work that was done. The poor people would pay less taxes. We were paying the average amount of tax. Some people were made into beggars because of paying (high) taxes. That was not for doing the business, but was for driving the cart. They would collect higher taxes when people had more wealth. I was working privately until the year 1970. I was not in a cooperative unit [Tib. མཉམས་ལས]. After 1970, we were formed into a cooperative, but although we had that name, actually we were not functioning as a cooperative. We would just pay the Cooperative three percent of our income. And also we had to pay the taxes.   

**Q:**  You had to find the jobs by yourself, right?   

**A:**  We had to find the work by ourselves. When a work unit hired us, they would provide fodder for our horses or mules. They would give four jin of fodder for each horse. We had to buy more fodder in addition to that. The animal cart cooperative was officially established on the nineteenth of July in 1970.   

**Q:**  Was your pay given according to work points [ Tib. skar ma]?   

**A:**  After the cooperative was established, I became its accountant. I did that until 1985.   

**Q:**  What kind of Cooperative was it?   

**A:**  It was a Cooperative of Carts [Tib. ཐེར་གེའི་མཉམ་ལས]. In the Coop, the work was arranged by the Coop and the cart drivers were paid according to a percentage. For example, if the cart pulled by one mule got [earned] 100 yuan per month, the cart driver would be paid 26 yuan. If a cart pulled by two mules got 100 yuan per month, the cart driver would get 22.5 yuan, and if a cart pulled by three mules got 100 yuan per month, the driver would get 20 yuan.   

**Q:**  The expenditures were paid by the Coop, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The cart drivers would show the Coop the receipts for the fees that they got from the work units and they would calculate and pay the percentage to the cart drivers.   

**Q:**  Did the Coop get some profit?   

**A:**  Yes. They still have money. I was wondering what they were going to do with that money.   

**Q:**  How much salary did you get?   

**A:**  In the beginning, I earned 60 yuan a month.   

**Q:**  At that point, it was not bad, right?   

**A:**  It was okay for that time. Later, I was paid 70 yuan, and then 90 and 150 yuan.   

**Q:**  That was in the year 1985, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the year 1984-85, we got a bonus distribution based on the Coop's profit sharing [Tib. ཐོབ་ཆ].   

**Q:**  Was that the distribution of the profit?   

**A:**  Yes, when I was there, we distributed 5,000 yuan per year to each member. After I left, I heard that they distributed about 10,000 yuan per year for each member. That was why they became rich. Before that they were not so rich.   

**Q:**  In what year did the profit sharing distribution start?   

**A:**  That was started in 1981, after Hu Yaobang came to visit Lhasa. At that time, if we could find jobs, the income was great.   

**Q:**  That was because they distributed all the money, right?   

**A:**  For example, if the income of the year was 200,000 yuan, we would take out the following amount of money: 100,000 yuan for expenses, taxes, a percentage to be paid to the government; and twelve percent for "general accumulation fund" [Tib. སྤྱི་གསོག] was kept in the Coop. After subtracting these, the rest of the money would be distributed to the members of the Coop. There were three brigades in our Coop: the Eastern, Southern and the Northern. Later [after he left], I heard that they merged the three brigades together and stopped driving carts, and instead took contracts to build motorable roads and the underground sewage lines in Lhasa City. I heard they made a great profit from doing that. At that point, they distributed [as profit sharing] 10,000 yuan per year for each member. I was not there then.   

**Q:**  When you came to Lhasa in the year 1962, were they holding struggle sessions?   

**A:**  In 1962, they were holding struggle sessions. Generally speaking they were for the trerim [the class enemies] [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  Were you a trerim?   

**A:**  I was classified as a Middle Trader. Whenever a campaign would take place, there would be a struggle session. For example, these occurred during the campaigns such as the "The Three Great Educations" {Tib. slob gso chen po gsum], the gyarshib [reevaluation] and the "Cultural Revolution." The worst campaign was the one called "Destroy One and Oppose Three" [Tib. གཅིག་གཏོར་གསུམ་རྒོལ].   

**Q:**  Did they hold struggle sessions continuously from 1962 to the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  Yes. They didn't stop the struggle sessions.   

**Q:**  When they were holding the struggle sessions, did they beat people or were they just asking questions?   

**A:**  They were beating people. But they didn't beat the people up like the people who got beaten in the monasteries. At that point, it was little bit better in the city. I saw some people getting beaten, but they were [not being] beaten severely. Struggle sessions were held frequently.   

**Q:**  Did they hold one to two struggle sessions in a week?   

**A:**  During a campaign, generally speaking, they would hold struggle sessions every night. When there was no campaign, it was a little bit better. From the time of the Cultural Revolution, the members of the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས] were handed [Tib. རྩིས་སྤྲད] over to the Neighborhood Committees [Tib. ས་ཁུལ].   

**Q:**  Were they trerim?   

**A:**  Yes. Except for Ngabö who was taken to China, all the other ones were handed over to the Neighborhood Committees. People like Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] were all handed over to the Neighborhood Committees. Their salaries were paid by the government, but the Neighborhood Committee would send them to work, summon them to the meetings at night and hold struggle session against them. The government didn't interfere at all.   

**Q:**  At that point, the work unit didn't have power, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Neighborhood Committee had the power.   

**Q:**  When the Cultural Revolution started, how did you hear about that?   

**A:**  In the beginning, we didn't know anything. Then Chairman Mao brought out a "big character poster" [Tib. ཡིག་ཆེན་ཚགས་པར] saying, "Bombard the headquarters" [Tib. སི་ལིང་བུ་ལ་མེ་སྒྱོགས་རྒྱག་དགོས] on 5 August 1966].   

**Q:**  Did you hear that on the radio?   

**A:**  No. There was a big poster stuck up in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was the poster the same as the posters stuck up in China?   

**A:**  Yes, it was the same.   

**Q:**  When you saw that, did you talk to other people about what the poster meant?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether the masses understood that or not. But we knew that they were talking about refuting [Tib. དགག་པ་རྒྱག] and opposing the people in power in the party who were going on the path of capitalism. And we knew that referred to Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. The main mobilizing force were the students who came from China to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1966-67. Tashi Tsering [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང] also came [from the Tibetan school in Xianyang]. Before that, there were no groups in Lhasa. When the Cultural Revolution started, in the beginning they criticized Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. After that, they started to refute the leaders of the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

**Q:**  Did they become like Red Guards?   

**A:**  They didn't become Red Guards. First of all, the Red Guards came from China. After the two groups arose, then the Red Guards came into existence [in Lhasa rather than from outside].   

**Q:**  How did the two groups arise?   

**A:**  I am not sure how it became two groups. In the work units some people became Nyamdre and some people became Gyenlo.   

**Q:**  Were there two groups among the people who came from the interior [inland China]?   

**A:**  Yes, there were two groups, but most of them were Gyenlo.   

**Q:**  Were they Red Guards?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they come from Sichuan?   

**A:**  Most of them were from Beijing.   

**Q:**  Were there airlines in Tibet and did they come by air?   

**A:**  Yes, there was air travel before the revolt of 1959, but they didn't come by air. Probably they came by road in vehicles. Some people came from Chengdu and most of them were Gyenlo. After that, there were two groups in Lhasa, the Nyamdre and the Gyenlo. Generally speaking, the people who could understand the situation a little bit were those in Gyenlo. Most of the people who kept silent and liked the Communist Party, and were not willing to do the Cultural Revolution, they became Nyamdre. In the Lhasa area, most of the farmers, nomads and the Public Security [Ch. gong an] were Nyamdre. The majority of the workers were Gyenlo. Before that, the trerim in the society were called the "Monsters and Demons" [Tib. ལྷ་འདྲེ་གདོན་བགེགས], and they were paraded around the street from Drepung to Lhasa. And they held struggle session against them.   

**Q:**  Was that before the Red Guards came?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time there were no groups. After the people came from China, they formed into groups.   

**Q:**  Were the people led by the Party when they paraded those people around the street?   

**A:**  Yes. They were led by the Party. They were led by the Neighborhood Committees. The ornaments and the statues of the old society that belonged to the homes of the people were destroyed. They were not allowed to keep a single item.   

**Q:**  Was that in the year 1965?   

**A:**  Yes, that was at the end of 1965. At that point, the people had to sell their golden utensils and silverware to the bank. The other items should be sold to a work unit called the "Work unit of Rags" [Tib. དིག་ཚལ་ལས་ཁུངས]. The clay statues were thrown out and the gilded copper statues were sold [probably to the government shop located in Dalitang (Tib. ད་ལི་ཐང) in front of the Potala].   

**Q:**  At that point, were the people working continuously?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that the people who came from China, had come to link up [Ch. chuan lian; Tib. འབྲེལ་གཏུགས]. That meant to contact people individually so that they could work together. Those people knew about Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. They were saying that in China the biggest people in power in the Party were Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. Similarly, in Tibet there were people in power in the Party who were going along the path of capitalism. After that, the two groups, the Nyamdre and the Gyenlo came into existence. The Gyenlo were saying that they wanted to overthrow Zhang Guohua. The Nyamdre were saying that they were going to protect Zhang Guohua instead of overthrowing him. They wanted to overthrow Zhou Renshan. He was one of the main leaders of the Autonomous Region. They were arguing about that matter.   

**Q:**  At that time, how many Chinese came from Beijing and other places?   

**A:**  People came from Qinghai, Chengdu, and Beijing. Probably all together 400-500 people came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Were those people wearing the red armbands?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. The people from Qinghai were called "818," the people from Sichuan were called "826," and the people from Beijing were called Beida (Beijing University).   

**Q:**  Beida was Beijing University, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were several groups from Beijing. At first, the Gyenlo group seized and took over the Tibet Daily Newspaper [Tib. ཚགས་པར་ལས་ཁུངས]. They were saying that the main leader of the Daily Newspaper was going along the path of capitalism. Three days after they seized power, soldiers surrounded the office and took control over the Daily Newspaper. The soldiers seized some people of Gyenlo and shut them up in the jail. And they expelled some people. Later, they were released. After that, the groups became more and more widespread.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were in the Cooperative, right?   

**A:**  We were in the Gyenlo.   

**Q:**  No, I mean were you in the Cooperative called the Coop of the Carts?   

**A:**  The Coop had not yet been set up. When they were shooting guns outside, I couldn't go out. I hired a person to drive the cart. Later, the situation became worse.   

**Q:**  How did you decide to join the Gyenlo? Did they come to tell you to join them?   

**A:**  They didn't come. I myself just listened to the talk from both sides and when I thought that one of the groups seemed better, I joined that group. The trerim were not allowed to join the groups. Later, on the seventh of June, 1967, Gyenlo occupied the Jokhang.   

**Q:**  When Gyenlo seized the Newspaper Office, they were surrounded by the soldiers. What happened after that? Did the soldiers support Nyamdre?   

**A:**  Outwardly, the soldiers were mediating, but actually they were taking the side of Nyamdre. The only regiment that was taking the side of Gyenlo was the 11th Division [Ch. shi yi shi]. The other soldiers were taking the side of Nyamdre. Later, the situation became more and more worse. At first, they were arguing. They were saying that this was the, "Free airing of views" [Tib. རྒྱས་བཤད་རྒྱས་གླེང], which meant that people should express their views without reservation. And they talked about the "Big debate" [Tib. རྩོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ], and they started sticking up big character posters. Both of the groups were saying that their own group was correct.   

**Q:**  In those days, was it the case that in a neighborhood area some of the people belonged to Gyenlo and some people belonged to Nyamdre?   

**A:**  Some of the work units had only one group among the people of the work unit, but in most of the work units, there were two groups. For example, in the Shöl area, all people were Nyamdre. Otherwise, in all the neighborhood areas there were both groups. In all of the work units there were two groups. While they were arguing, militant or violent struggles [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་འཐབ་རྩོད] took place. At first, they started to shoot slingshots.   

**Q:**  Did the term "militant struggle" came from China or was that a Tibetan term?   

**A:**  When people were shooting slingshots in Tibet, they were shooting guns and using tanks in China.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  Probably, that was in 1967. The worst period occurred in the years 1967-68-69. At that time, I didn't go to work. The two groups were occupying their own places. Both of the groups were driving out the other group. Later each of their places became sort of confirmed.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  It was 1967. Tashi Tsering-la probably came to Lhasa in 1966.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering was trerim, right?   

**A:**  No, probably he came as a Red Guard.   

**Q:**  Later, he got into trouble, right?   

**A:**  Yes, later on, he got into trouble.   

