# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0117.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 48  
**Date of Birth:** 1944  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར] was from a Lhasa middle class family. In this interview, he discusses in detail how he became involved in the Cultural Revolution as a member of the Gyenlo faction. He describes the June 7th Jokhang incident, and how most of the soldiers supported the Nyamdre faction and supplied them with their weapons whereas the Gyenlo faction made their own weapons in large factories. He also describes, in detail, the fighting between the two factions and how the Nyamdre took power. Finally, he talks about the start of the "Revolutionary Committees."   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0117_03/H_0117_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What were you doing when the Cultural Revolution started?   

**A:**  I was driving a private cart.   

**Q:**  How did the Cultural Revolution start in the beginning?   

**A:**  In August of 1966 [August 5th], Chairman Mao brought out a big character poster saying, "Bombard the headquarters" [Ch. Tib. སི་ལིང་བུ་ལ་མེ་སྒྱོགས་རྒྱག་དགོས]. He was saying that we should fire cannons at the people in power in the Party who were going along the path of capitalism. It referred to Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping both of whom were in the Central Committee (Zhongyang). The slogan was, "There is no crime to making revolution, there is a reason to rebel" [Tib. གསར་བརྗེ་བྱེད་པར་ནག་ཉེས་མེད, གྱེན་ལོག་བྱེད་པར་རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཡོད]. Chairman Mao was saying, "Marxism-Leninism has tens of thousands of content [Tib. གནས་ཚུལ], but in the final analysis it says that it is right to rebel."   

**Q:**  He didn't say the reason clearly, right?   

**A:**  The reason was to rebel against the people in the Party who were going along the path of capitalism.   

**Q:**  Did they write it in the Tibetan newspaper?   

**A:**  The big character poster of Chairman Mao was 4 x 5 feet long and it was stuck up on the wall. At that point, people studied it a great deal.   

**Q:**  How did you study that?   

**A:**  The first point was that there were people in power in the Party who were going on the path of capitalist [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  Did the people in the neighborhood area gather together in the evening?   

**A:**  After work was finished, meetings were held in the Neighborhood Committees. At the meetings, people had to study [things] about the poster. And in the small teams that we were divided into [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆུང] people had to discuss about that every evening, except Sunday evening.   

**Q:**  At that point, what did you think?   

**A:**  I didn't understand it.   

**Q:**  There were two groups, right?   

**A:**  The two groups didn't come into existence at once. At first, the groups were together. They were refuting [Tib. དགག་པ] religion, the Monsters and the Demons. After the people who were doing religious practices were put down, the Red Guards took on the ngadag (feudal lords), the ngatsab (the representatives of the lords) and the labeled persons -- who were said to be Monsters and the Demons in the society -- and paraded them around the street while beating drums. Among them, some people had some problems [Tib. གནས་ཚུལ], and some people didn't have any problems.   

**Q:**  That was after the Red Guards came into existence, right?   

**A:**  At that time, the Red Guards didn't have much [effect], only a few people were Red Guards.   

**Q:**  How was the livelihood of the people in Lhasa then?   

**A:**  The livelihood was not bad. In the beginning, while we were studying, we took those people around the street and criticized them. And struggle sessions were held against them. Then, it was said, that we had to refute the people in the Autonomous Region [government] who were going along the path of capitalism. At first, they destroyed [Tib. གཏོར] the newspaper reporter called Jinsha [Ch. jin sha]. It was said that he had reported some bad things, like bourgeois ideology in the the newspaper.   

**Q:**  That was after the big character poster came out, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was it after one month, or just few days?   

**A:**  I don't remember that. After Jinsha was put down in the Newspaper Work Unit [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  Was he shut up in jail?   

**A:**  They made him stop working and held struggle sessions against him. He was made to feed pigs. [laughter] After that, they were saying that we had to ferret out the people in the Autonomous Region who were going along the path of capitalist. Some people were saying that they were going to overthrow Zhang Guohua. And some people were saying they were going to overthrow Zhou Renshan.   

**Q:**  What were their positions?   

**A:**  Zhang Guohua was the First Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji; Tib. དང་པོ] of the Autonomous Region. Zhou Renshan was probably the third person in the Autonomous Region. In this way, two groups formed. Some people supported Zhang Guohua and some people supported Zhou Renshan. After that, the work units and the Neighborhood Committee people naturally became two groups. Some people joined the "General Headquarters of the Revolutionary Gyenlo of Lhasa" [Tib. ལྷ་ས་གསར་བརྗེའི་གྱེན་ལོག་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་པུ], and some people joined the "General Headquarter of the Nyamdre" [Tib. མཉམ་འབྲེལ་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་བཀོད་འདོམས་པུའུ].   

**Q:**  What was the difference between the two Chinese leaders? Did you think they were the same or not at that point? Did the masses know about their thoughts and their plans?   

**A:**  At that time, the masses didn't understand about that, except regarding the high ranking cadres.   

**Q:**  What did the cadres say?   

**A:**  The cadres were divided into two groups.   

**Q:**  How did they know who was the better one?   

**A:**  When they overthrew Zhang Guohua, they enumerated what kind of capitalist working lines that Zhang Guohua had practiced when he was working in Tibet. It was reported that Zhang Guohua was the person who put Ngabö in the Party. They were also criticizing Ngabö, but Ngabö ran away to China [Beijing]. At that point, Phagpalha and those people were handed over to the society [Neighborhood Committee]. Both sides of the road were filled with big character posters,and they drew ugly drawings. The Nyamdre would write that Zhou Renshan had done bad things. The Gyenlo would write on their posters that Zhang Guohua had done this and that bad thing.   

**Q:**  Were those posters written in Chinese or Tibetan?   

**A:**  Most of them were written in Chinese, but some were written in Tibet. When the two groups came into existence, I joined the Gyenlo.   

**Q:**  Why did you join the Gyenlo?   

**A:**  In the beginning, Gyenlo was supposed to be the good one. Later, Nyamdre became the good one. At first, Gyenlo went to seize the power of the Daily Newspaper. When we were seizing the power of the newspaper, some people [Red Guards] came from Qinghai Province. They were called "818." They mobilized the people saying that we should first put down the Newspaper Office. The people of Gyenlo went inside the Newspaper Office and held a hunger strike for three days. After that, they were surrounded and seized by the soldiers. That was the first time that they put down the Gyenlo group.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in the beginning of 1967. After Gyenlo was put down, I heard that the soldiers beat them up very severely. I was not there. After that, Nyamdre became more powerful and the Gyenlo became less powerful. At that point, it became like the Gyenlo didn't get along well with the soldiers, whereas the Nyamdre got along well with them.   

**Q:**  Did most of the leaders, like Zhang Guohua, get into trouble?   

**A:**  Most of the leaders were sort of holding the ideology of the Nyamdre.   

**Q:**  Did Zhang Guohua and those people suffer struggle sessions?   

**A:**  Zhou Renshan suffered a small struggle session. Zhang Guohua went to China.   

**Q:**  Zhang Guohua was Nyamdre, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Nyamdre supported him. Zhou Renshan was supported by Gyenlo. The Gyenlo were saying that they want to overthrow Zhang Guohua and the Nyamdre were saying that they want to overthrow Zhou Renshan. Later, the situation became worse and worse, and people in each group were staying together rather than staying at home. We were staying in Shide Monastery [the building]. Our opponent, the Nyamdre, was staying in Ramoche. At that point, the superiors were selling us some food and cigarettes.   

**Q:**  You were staying together for a couple of days, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the daytime we would go to work; in the evening, we would gather together and speak through the loudspeaker, and explain that the Gyenlo view was correct and the Nyamdre would explain that they were correct. After speaking through the loudspeaker, we would shoot slingshots. [unclear recording sentence.]   

**Q:**  Were they speaking to the masses or they were they speaking to each other?   

**A:**  They were speaking to the masses, but the masses couldn't hear it because there were too many loudspeakers. From our Gyenlo side, there were four loudspeakers. Nyamdre had six loudspeakers.   

**Q:**  Did the people carry the loudspeakers in their hands?   

**A:**  No, the loudspeakers were put on the roof of the houses. After that, the two groups started shooting slingshots at each other. Later, we made swords and spears.   

**Q:**  Was that also in the year 1967?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that in summer or autumn?   

**A:**  Probably, that was in summer. After the fighting started, they didn't stop it regardless of the four seasons. Later, the two groups were seizing places [locations] from each other. The Gyenlo were seizing the places where there were only a small number of people from Nyamdre. Similarly, Nyamdre was seizing the places where not many people from Gyenlo were living. A few people from both sides were killed.   

**Q:**  At that point, were most people in the two groups Tibetan or Chinese?   

**A:**  Most of the people were Tibetans.   

**Q:**  Were the leaders Chinese?   

**A:**  Among the leaders, some of them were Chinese and some of them were Tibetans. Most of them were Chinese. At that point, it was said that there were 500,000 people in Nyamdre and 200,000 people in Gyenlo. When the people in Lhasa divided into two groups, similarly, the people in Shigatse, Nagchu, and Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ] also split into two groups. Later, the soldiers gave weapons to Nyamdre. At that point, the Jokhang was occupied by Gyenlo who were speaking through the loudspeaker in the early morning at dawn. On June 7th, I heard that the soldiers came to the Jokhang and they surrounded it. When the people of Gyenlo learned that the soldiers had come, they waved the quotation book of Chairman Mao and started shouting the slogan, "Long live the Chairman Mao. We pay respects [Tib. གུས་འདུད་ཞུ] to the People's Liberation Army." Below the Jokhang, two soldiers were killed. They were not killed by the Gyenlo. I heard the soldiers fired machine guns at the loudspeaker just after that. And then they started firing machine guns at the people who were in the Jokhang. Thirteen people were killed.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1967?   

**A:**  Yes, that was on June 7th, 1967.   

**Q:**  Then the soldiers occupied the Jokhang and expelled Gyenlo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Gyenlo were expelled and they ran away. The corpses were brought to the Tibetan Medical Astrological Institute, the Mentsigang. The people killed in the Jokhang were from the Gyenlo group on the eastern area [of Lhasa]. They were not from our area. The Gyenlo of the eastern area were staying in the Jokhang. We were staying in Shide.   

**Q:**  Inside Gyenlo, were there different groups?   

**A:**  No. There were no different groups, but there were different parts [Tib. ཚན་པ] of Gyenlo from different areas. On that day some of the elderly people went to Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག]. All of a sudden the soldiers came and said that some elderly people had come to rob the soldiers' guns. I was not there, but some of our people were seized there. After that, the soldiers shot them. Three of our elderly people were injured. And a boy was shot dead by the soldiers. After the situation calmed down, Chairman Mao issued an instruction saying we had to do the "Great Revolutionary Alliance" [Tib. གསར་བརྗེའི་མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ཆེན་པོ]. Chairman Mao said, "Under the proletariat dictatorship, among the workers' class, there is no reason for harming each other over conflicts of interest." He was saying the war between the two groups was a contradiction among the people [Tib. མི་དམངས་ནང་ཁུལ་གྱི་གནད་དོན]. Therefore, the two groups should unite together and set up the Great Revolutionary Alliance. Then the Revolutionary Committee [Tib. གསར་བརྗེ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] was established. The leaders of the Revolutionary Committee were soldiers.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  Probably, that was in the year 1968. At that time, the leader of the military headquarters was Zeng Yongya. When he took the position of the Director [Tib. ཞུ་རེན] of the Revolutionary Committee of the Autonomous Region, he was holding the ideology of Gyenlo. Therefore, he gave positions to the people of Gyenlo who were in the work unit. He reported to the Central Committee about the June 7th incident. He reported that the soldiers had done such a bad thing. At that point, Chairman Mao and Lin Biao wrote two letters. In Chairman Mao's letter it was written, "The leader of the Army did not conceal the bad conduct done by the soldiers. Instead, they represented and spoke for the masses. That was a symbol of the development of the country." In Lin Biao's letter it was written, "The instruction of the Chairman [Mao] is very important. In the future, all the different levels should set strict demands on oneself and prevent such incidents occurring." After that, compensation was paid to the families of the people who were killed. The people who were injured were paid 80 yuan salary every six months. When they would get sick, they were allowed to go to the Army's Hospital. Even nowadays, they are getting that [privilege].   

**Q:**  Before that, when you gathered together, did you talk about taking back the Jokhang and attacking them [Nyamdre]?   

**A:**  At that point, we were studying two newspapers, the newspaper of Nyamdre and the newspaper of Gyenlo. The newspaper of the Gyenlo was called "The Red Newspaper of Gyenlo" [Tib. དམར་པོའི་གྱེན་ལོག་ཚགས་པར]. The Newspaper of Nyamdre was called "The Thunder Storm Urgent Newspaper" [Tib. ཐོག་རླུང་ཛ་དྲག་ཚགས་པར]. We had to study those newspapers. And there were many documents coming down from the Central Committee. There were also documents from inside Nyamdre and Gyenlo. We had to study all of those documents. Nyamdre was holding struggle sessions against the trerim and similarly, Gyenlo was also holding struggle sessions against the trerim. In our Neighborhood Committee, there were about forty some trerim. They had to go to the Nyamdre for one evening, and then to Gyenlo for the next evening to receive struggle sessions. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Did they have Gyenlo and Nyamdre in inland China [Tib. ནང་ས], like Tibet?   

**A:**  In the interior, they had different names, but there were two groups. Most of the student groups in Beijing were the same as the Gyenlo group in Lhasa. And the Beida [Beijing University], the "126" of Sichuan, and the "818" of Qinghai were all Gyenlo groups. When the groups were fighting, the soldiers gave weapons (guns) to the Nyamdre. The Gyenlo didn't have weapons. The weapons and artillery they got were made in the big factories. The shells of the artillery were so long. And the Mauser pistols were so long that they could kill a person at a distance of 50 meters. And they had various kinds of bombs. Some of the bombs would explode one minute after they were thrown from the corner of a wall.   

**Q:**  Were those made in the year 1967?   

**A:**  Yes, they were making the weapons. At that point, people were not working in the work units.   

**Q:**  What they were doing?   

**A:**  Most of the factories were making weapons. Some people were working. I didn't go out for a year or so in 1967-68 when they were fighting.   

**Q:**  What do you mean going out?   

**A:**  I didn't go out of the house because they were shooting at each other. The Tromsigang market would be open until noon. After that, they would start shooting guns and keep on shooting until midnight.   

**Q:**  There was no fighting in the morning, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in the morning people would do their shopping. We were sleeping in the morning, because we would stay up very late at night. At that time, the rice, tsamba and butter were supplied free by the government.   

**Q:**  Was that supplied free for both groups?   

**A:**  Yes, that was supplied for the people who were fighting, but the common people didn't get the supply. Generally speaking, there were 50-60 people who were fighting. When the farmers would come to deliver the tsamba which was ordered by the government to be ground, we would rob them on their way to Lhasa. That was the way of getting the tsamba free.   

**Q:**  That was really outrageous, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I didn't know how they got the butter. They gave a truck full of butter to four Neighborhood Committees. The source of the rice was that they robbed a storeroom in Tramo [Tib. སྤྲ་མོག] so we had as much rice as we wanted to eat. We would go outside and slaughter the pigs belonging to the work units, and we used the wood in the pig sties for fuel. We would use vegetables wherever we could find them.   

**Q:**  Was that also in 1967?   

**A:**  That was in 1967-68.   

**Q:**  Were the schools open?   

**A:**  The schools were closed. And some of the Middle School students went to China walking all the way to link up and make contact [Tib. འབྲེལ་གཏུགས] with the other schools. Some of the work units were working, but in the area where I lived, no one was working. The work unit for making movies was also not working. We had some contact with that work unit.   

**Q:**  Were the doctors going to hospital to work?   

**A:**  The doctors were working regularly. The People's Hospital was Gyenlo. The hospital in Lhasa City, the Tibetan Hospital Mentsigang, the Military Hospital and the Workers' Hospital were Nyamdre. At that point, the hospitals were not treating ordinary patients. They were treating the injured people. After that, it was said that Zeng Yongya made a mistake and they refuted him.   

**Q:**  Who refuted him?   

**A:**  The Central Committee [Ch. zhongyang] refuted him regarding the piece "On the bourgeois having multi-centers or no centers" [Tib. འབྱོར་ལྡན་གྲལ་རིམ་གྱི་ལྟེ་བ་མང་པོ་སྟེ་ལྟེ་བ་མེད་པའི་བཤད་པ]. Zeng Yongya was called back to China and Ren Rong was appointed in his place. Ren Rong was Nyamdre.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1968?   

**A:**  Yes. At the time when Ren Rong was the leader, he converted all of the leaders to Nyamdre. Even the dütrang of the farmers were converted into people of Nyamdre.   

**Q:**  Ren Rong was a military leader [Tib. དྲག་དཔོན], right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was a military leader and the Director of the Revolutionary Committee. He appointed all the leaders of the counties, like Shigatse and so on, from Nyamdre. Even now, they are still the leaders. For example, the leaders of the Autonomous Region, like Reti [Tib. རག་ཏི], Tenzin [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན], Pasang [Tib. པ་སངས], Dorje Tseden [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་བརྟན], Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང], all of them were Nyamdre. And Gyentsen Nyima [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཉི་མ] came later. There was only one Gyenlo called Lobsang Tsültrim [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས] who died just after he came to Tibet. In the Neighborhood area, most of the leaders were Nyamdre. Our Neighborhood area was also like that. If all of the people in the work unit would be Gyenlo, they would not have any choice but to appoint the leader from Gyenlo. After that, they [Gyenlo] were not able to overthrow Ren Rong. Ren Rong held his post until 1970 [actually 1980]. At that time, Lin Biao had died and the Cultural Revolution had ended. When we were studying, the Gyenlo and the Nyamdre would sit together. They were appointing the first leader from Nyamdre, the second from Gyenlo, the third from Nyamdre, and the fourth from Gyenlo. In the municipal Government most of the leaders were Nyamdre. After that, Ren Rong was the leader. When Lin Biao died, we were not called to the meeting, and first the poor people were called to the meeting and they said, "Lin Biao ran away to the Soviet Union, so we shelled him. He was a bad person." After that, the people were doing the campaign, "Refute Lin Biao and Confucius" [Tib. ལིན་དགག་ཁུང་དགག] for a couple of years. They were refuting Confucius, a Chinese sort of Lama 2,000 years earlier who talked about "Self control and restore the customs" [Ch. ke ji fu li; Tib. རང་གཅུན་ལུགས་གསོ]. I heard that in Japan they have his statues and he was regarded as a lama.   

**Q:**  At that time, they didn't have any ideology, right?   

**A:**  There was no ideology. [Translator Note: The following audio on this tape is the end of a monastery interview like the tape 0046.02.]   

