# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0117.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 48  
**Date of Birth:** 1944  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Trindor [Tib. འཕྲིན་རྡོར] was from a Lhasa middle class family. In this interview, he discusses what happened to him during and after the 1959 Lhasa revolt. He describes how he was classified as non-involved in the revolt and then was sent to work at the Ngachen Power Plant construction project. He also talks about how in 1961, he was sent to the borax mining site in northern Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0117_01/H_0117_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  It was during lunchtime on the thirteenth of the second Tibetan month. We had already fled and were not staying in our house in Ramoche because it was said that the Chinese would fire their cannons there. Our houses were left empty. In fact, my house in Ramoche was very close to the Chinese soldiers' fortifications. It was about one hundred meters from my window to their fortifications.   

**Q:**  Were there people left in Ramoche?   

**A:**  Within Ramoche Monastery, there were the Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> monks, Tibetan policemen and some lay volunteers. They had built many fortifications made from wool loads on the roof of the Ramoche monastery and [on] other house roofs like Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར], including my house. But on the eleventh, nothing happened in our place except that both sides just exchanged a little bit of gunfire, and the Chinese soldiers mainly fired cannons at the Potala palace. The Tibetan policemen were able to fire their cannon for one or two shots against the Chinese bunkers. We left our house on the night of the eleventh because they were saying that tomorrow the Chinese would fire their cannons into our area so it was not safe to stay there.   

**Q:**  Who said that?   

**A:**  I don't know who had distributed this message, but we saw several men who looked like Khambas and were carrying guns and they brought the message to us. That night we stayed in another person's house that was located just outside of the Ramoche area at a distance of 5-6 kilometers. The next morning around 12:00 p.m., the Chinese soldiers fired their cannons at the Ramoche Temple. Even though the place where we stayed was not in the fire zone, three cannon shells fell in our courtyard and all of the animals, such as cows, oxen and horses, that were kept in the courtyard, were killed. My mother was wounded too. It was quite difficult to escape. In my mind, I was hoping that the Chinese soldiers would come to our area soon because if they came there they would not kill us. Otherwise, it was not safe since they were firing the cannons aimlessly. However, we were able to escape to another place called Ganden Khangsar, which was south of my house. Later, when the Chinese soldiers came, they asked us to raise both of our hands and we did. They took all of the adult men away and left all of the women and children behind. When the Chinese soldiers entered the house, they told everyone to leave their rooms and gather in the center of the courtyard and raise both of our hands. Otherwise, they said that they would kill anyone who remained in their rooms. After we were out of the rooms, they opened the doors and fired bren-guns into the rooms. If someone had stayed in the rooms, he or she would have been killed. That night we were unable to stay in the same place, so we moved to a place called Ganden Khangsar. On that night, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> temple was not occupied by the Chinese. The Chinese soldiers pulled down the phone lines. On the other side, in the Ramoche area, the firewood stores for the Prayer Assembly [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] were burned by the Chinese soldiers. Although it was far away from the place where we stayed, we felt that the fire was just beside the house where we were staying. On this side, the roof of the Ramoche monastery was burned by the Chinese, so we were in the middle of two big fires and we all got very nervous. Since now we were in the place where the Chinese soldiers were, we felt a little safer. On the night of the twelfth, we had to stay in another person's house. There also were many people who fled into our area. When we moved to Ganden Khangsar, the Chinese soldiers lined the road holding guns in their hands. We had to step on the soldiers' bodies and move into Ganden Khangsar. After midnight, the Chinese soldiers moved toward the Jokhang temple.   

**Q:**  Where were the men at that time?   

**A:**  When they took all the adult males away, I was left with my mother because I was a kid [He was 15 years old]. On the thirteenth, a woman who was our neighbor came to us. She told us that she went to my house where Chinese soldiers had come and an interpreter had arrived there. The Chinese asked her to bring the owner of my house. My first floor was used for storage. Since it was very dark, the Chinese soldiers were afraid to go in. I guess they fired their guns inside a lot. They wanted to search the rooms that were on the first floor, so I went to my house. They wanted me to enter the room first and they would go after me holding their guns. There was nothing inside the room. They also searched all over my house and they did not find anything. After that, they asked me to attend a meeting which later was a study session. Some people suggested to me that I should not attend the meeting. I did not know that attending a meeting would cause a problem. In fact, I thought I could simply came back after listening to whatever they said in the meeting. When I got into the yard of the Ramoche monastery, there were already many people there. This was the second time that they gathered people together. Most people in the yard were teenagers. I said I wanted to go back to my house and put on more clothing, so one of the teenagers and I went back home and added some additional clothing. There were no Chinese who asked us to return back to the Ramoche monastery and no one cared that we left, but we went back to the courtyard. That afternoon they took us to the Simpü [Tib. གཟོམ་ཕུད] house. Around four o'clock we were taken to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> [Tib. བོན་ཤོད] house.   

**Q:**  Did they give you food?   

**A:**  There was no food or bedding there. We had to spend the night there. There were many people in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> house. There were also many wounded Tibetans who were screaming because of their pain. A Tibetan soldier from Gyantse had gotten shot in his shoulder. He screamed the whole night, so much that we were unable to sleep.   

**Q:**  Did you get water to drink?   

**A:**  No, and we were not allowed to go outside. The courtyard was so crowded with people that I had no space to stretch my legs. I had to sit there. This was the night of the thirteenth.   

**Q:**  You were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> on the 14th, right?   

**A:**  We stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> on the night of the 13th. The next morning we were lined up and taken to on the lawn called Wusi Naga [Tib. དབུ་བསིལ་ན་ག], which was said to be the place where the Chinese Princess Wencheng used to wash her head. When they took us from the yard of the Ramoche monastery, we were six teenagers. When we arrived in Wusi Naga, there were about 500 to 600 people there.   

**Q:**  Were most of them children?   

**A:** , No, mostly were adults. When we were taken to the courtyard, there were about 6 children. Among them, some were from the soldiers of the Gyantse regiment, some were monks of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> Monastery and others were monks from other places. The Chinese solders surrounded us holding guns and we were in the middle. Since there was no interpreter, people were very scared about what would happen to us. A person next to me told me that we should close our eyes, some said that we should fight with them and some asked me whether I had blessed pills. They were afraid because near our house we saw that many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> people were gathering all the dead bodies and putting them into a big mud pit. They piled approximately 100 dead bodies there. Those bodies were moved by carts by Khambas who were wearing the white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> usually worn by the people who learn prayers by heart to become Lama Gyüpa. Everyone was standing in the courtyard. It was quite difficult to find an interpreter. Baba Lobsang [Tib. འབའ་པ་བློ་བཟང], who was also a prisoner with us, had to interpret. Through him they told us that we did not need to be afraid and that since the place that we stayed in was not safe, they would move all of us to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>. After this, everyone calmed down. We were placed in four lines and marched toward Norbulinga. On the way there, we saw that the Barshi Legung [Tib. བར་གཞིས་ལས་ཁུངས], which was located near <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a>, was completely burned down. Even though they had cleaned up the dead bodies, we could still see dead bodies among the trees and in the streams. They did not take us to Norbulinga, but rather they placed us in the Gusung Magar [adjacent to Norbulinga]. There they declared that the State Council had ordered that from today [on], the Kashag government was abolished and the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region would replace it and would take full responsibility. So we had to study the documents provided by the Chinese government. These said that from now on, the millions of liberated agricultural serfs would become the masters of the country.   

**Q:**  Where did they bring the food?   

**A:**  During the daytime we had to study the documents. During the mealtimes, we were provided food from Norbulinga. We had to sit in the yard day and night. They selected some among us to be the cooks. Since we did not have bowls, we had to use tins and bottles to eat and drink. Some Nepalese prisoners were very smart. They knew how to make bottles into glasses. They used a rope to wrap the bottle in the middle, and then moved the rope fast so that it would make heat in the middle of the bottle. Then, they put cold water in the bottle, and it would split the bottle from the middle making it into a glass.   

**Q:**  All of you were men, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They first separated the Nepalese who mostly were businessmen from us and let them return to their homes. Then they separated all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> people from us. About 270 of them were sent to China. The rest of us were Gyantse Regiment soldiers, monks from Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a>, and ordinary people like us. There were no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> among us. They let some of us do farming and others were sent to Ngachen [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན] [the hydroelectric power station that was under construction]. After farming for five to six days, they sent us to Ngachen to build a hydroelectric station. It was the third Tibetan calendar month. It was on the 31th of August when they told me that I was a labor camp member [Tib. ལས་མི་རུཁག].   

**Q:**  Did you think that you were a prisoner? Did they tell you that you were a prisoner?   

**A:**  I already knew I was a prisoner. In fact, they told us we were prisoners. They requested each of us to write a personal history starting from age eight to the present. In this history, one had to write what he did during the uprising, what he thought during that time, and what his opinion was of the present situation, et cetera. They frequently asked us to write this and that.   

**Q:**  Most people did not know how to write, right?   

**A:** . Yes. I was one of the people who knew how to write best. Since some of us did not have any problems [in our background and history], they classified us as Singme [Tib. ཟིང་མེད] or "non involved in the revolt." "Singme" is an abbreviation of "sing khrug nang med pa" [Tib. ཟིང་ཕྲུག་ནང་མེད་པ]. On August 31 [1959], they changed all the Singme people's prisoner status into that of labor camp members. Those people who committed serious crimes were transferred to a place close to Ngachen where they had very tight security. We worked on the hydroelectric construction for two months. Then they picked those of us who were able-bodied and healthy from the construction team and sent us to dig white borax. I was among these. Those weak and unhealthy people and the older people were sent to Kongpo.   

**Q:**  You stayed 2 years in the borax mining site, right?   

**A:**  I stayed in the borax mining camp until September or October of 1962. The place where the white borax was mined was a very empty area and we did not see anything.   

**Q:**  Did they pay you the salary?   

**A:**  They first provided 35 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> as a monthly salary for us, and then they provided over 40 and later over 50 yuan. I learned later that even though we were classified as formal workers [Tib. བཟོ་པ], they did not give us a fair salary and made us to suffer a great loss. The borax was sold from one agent to another. It was quite expensive. I heard that the Production Supporting Bureau of the Tibet Military Headquarters [Tib. བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང་གི་ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རྒྱབ་སྐྱོར་བུའུ] took the main responsibility for the borax mining site and still had money left to spend from selling the borax. [laughter] They were unable to spend all the money from selling the borax. But they provided a poor salary to us. Nobody had a clear opinion about this. When they told us that our country had paid off the debt to the Soviet Union, the borax mining was stopped. They put workers and prisoners into trucks and sent them away as soon as possible. It was like a losing battle that everyone fled away from. On the construction site there were many prisoners and Chinese people. I did not know where those prisoners and Chinese people were sent, but they transferred us into Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] county. A month after we arrived there, the Sino-India War started in December, 1962. After the war ended, I asked for a leave and came back to Lhasa.   

