# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0000.01   
##  : Jimpa Legtsog [Tib. སྤྱིན་པ་ལེགས་ཚོགས]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China (Tibet Autonomous Region)  
**Date of Interview:** 19 June 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Jimpa Legtsog [Tib. སྤྱིན་པ་ལེགས་ཚོགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 53  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jimpa Legtsog [Tib. སྤྱིན་པ་ལེགས་ཚོགས] was a monk from Drepung Monastery. In this interview, he discusses the regional composition of the various khamtsen in Loseling College and his personal history regarding how he joined the monastery. He discusses the initial duties when entering the monastery, including whether to participate as a chöndze or do the shöndre work tax. He also discusses being in the monastery during the artillery shelling of Norbulinga in the 1959 uprising and the monks' perceptions of this. And he discusses the monastic officials who were running things, the Work Team, and how monks earned a living. He talks in detail about the state of Drepung Monastery in 1959 and the stages it went through from then until the Cultural Revolution. He also talks about the effects of the Cultural Revolution on the monastery and how monks left the monastery to live in the community. Finally, he details the re-admission of monks to the monastery after 1980, including the procedures for re-admittance, and details of the livelihood in the monastery after 1980.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0000_01/M_0000_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When did you first become a monk?   

**A:**  I was about 10.   

**Q:**  Where are you from?   

**A:**  I am from Tölung Dechen [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་བདེ་ཆེན] County, Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར] Xiang.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am 53 now.   

**Q:**  You became a monk around 1956 [actually around 1949], right? Which tratsang were you in?   

**A:**  I am from Loseling College and Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Were all of the monks in Tsetang Khamtsen Böpa?   

**A:**  Yes. It consisted entirely of Böpa. There were no Amdowas or Khambas. In general, [people from] the Lhoka Tsetang area were supposed to belong to Tsetang Khamtsen, but internally, they were mixed [Tib. ནང་གསེས་འདྲ་མི་འདྲ].   

**Q:**  Were the monks in Tsetang Khamtsen mostly tragyün or were they sarshug?   

**A:**  We were not tragyün since we were nyekhora. Therefore we were not allowed to join some of the khamtsen like Tshawa, Amdo, Khamba and Minyag [Tib. མི་ཉག].   

**Q:**  In Loseling, what were the other khamtsens where all the monks were Böpa?   

**A:**  These were Tsetang, Kongpo, Tsangpa and Gya Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Which Böpa were there in Gya Khamtsen?   

**A:**  There were nyekhora in Gya Khamtsen and they were entirely Böpa. I heard that in very early times it used to be entirely Chinese, but later it switched and became all Böpa because it [China] was located very far away.   

**Q:**  How about Tsha Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Tsha Khamtsen had various types of monks, both Khambas and Böpa. Some khamtsen had both Khambas and Böpa. There were also entirely Khamba khamtsen and entirely Böpa khamtsen.   

**Q:**  In Tsetang Khamtsen, if a Böpa came and didn't know anyone, was there a rule that the khamtsen had to find him a gegen?   

**A:**  Basically, whichever khamtsen you joined, they would take care of you.   

**Q:**  Would the khamtsen find you a gegen?   

**A:**  Yes. We were all nyekhora and our parents knew many people, so it was easy to find a gegen. When somebody came from far away, they would help him to find a gegen.   

**Q:**  In Tsetang Khamtsen, didn't you have this kind of rule? In some khamtsen, if the new monk didn't know anybody, they'd assign the gegen by turns. Did you do that in Tsetang Khamtsen?   

**A:**  In Lhoka, there was a monastery called Sungrabling [Tib. གསུང་རབ་གླིང]. The monks from there would come to Drepung to study pecha in Tsetang Khamtsen and they knew some people. These monks also got their share of gye and phog from their branch monastery [in Lhoka], and they could find a gegen through these connections.   

**Q:**  What did you do when you first became a monk?   

**A:**  In the khamtsen, if you don't become a Khamtsen Chöndze, then you have to do the shöndre. For example, when you are young, you have to bring tea to the lamas who don't come to the tsog. When you get older, you have to work for the khamtsen, like carrying things from Lhasa. Then when you became even older, you become a Khamtsen gegen and then the nyerpa. If you become a khamtsen chöndze, then you don't have to do any of these shöndre or the "lower garment tax" (Tib. ཤམཏྲེ [གཤམ་ཁྲའི]). To do the khamtsen chöndze, you have to serve tea and droma dresi and give gye for two tsog. Sometime [after the first] you have to do it again, you have to give gye and serve rice gruel (Tib. thukpa mingtag [ming btags] for all of the monks during the two tsog.   

**Q:**  Is there a limit to the number of years one had to do the shöndre obligation?   

**A:**  There was a limit. It was probably about 10 years. In our khamtsen, you did the khamtsen gegen first. Then afterwards you did the nyerpa, and then after a few years you would be in the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Was your gegen your relative?   

**A:**  No. He was a friend of my family.   

**Q:**  Did you study the dönkhatre?   

**A:**  I studied the dönkhatre for 3 years. Then I studied tsenyi for one year and then the revolt started.   

**Q:**  Were you a pechawa or lagyüba?   

**A:**  I was admitted as a pechawa just before the revolt.   

**Q:**  In some khamtsen, if you were a pechawa you didn't have to do the khamtsen gegen, what about in Tsetang Khamtsen?   

**A:**  In our khamtsen, even pechawa had to do the shöndre and serve as the khamtsen gegen.   

**Q:**  When the revolt took place, how old were you?   

**A:**  I was 17. I was in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did the monks think that revolt was going to happen? Did you think that the monastery would remain as before?   

**A:**  Yes. It was well known that the revolt would take place. Some thought they would win the war and some thought they would lose. They were saying different things.   

**Q:**  When the revolt took place, were you in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you first learn of the revolt?   

**A:**  It took place on March 10th. We could see the artillery shelling and then around evening, we could see riders on horseback fleeing from Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Could you see those things from Drepung?   

**A:**  We couldn't see Norbulinga, but we could see people riding horses and going there. On the 2nd day of the revolt 4 shells were fired, two in front and two behind the monastery onto empty spots.   

**Q:**  Did most of the monks think to stay or flee?   

**A:**  Most people fled on the day of the revolt. Except for some younger kids and older monks, the others fled up to the Gembe Utse [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ་དབུ་རྩེ] [the mountain above Drepung] and passed the mountain pass. They couldn't go down since there were soldiers in front. So some stayed and some fled.   

**Q:**  Did the laji and lene send you messages to flee or to stay?   

**A:**  It was a chaotic situation where they didn't know where to go. Some of them, like the shengo, stayed, and some fled.   

**Q:**  What did the monks think at this time?   

**A:**  Some said the Chinese would do different things. Some were based on facts and some were made up. The majority fled.   

**Q:**  Didn't you go to Gembe Utse?   

**A:**  I myself crossed the mountain pass and went home and stayed there. I was still wearing my monk's robe in my home, but my family said, "If the Chinese come they will arrest you, so it's better to return to the monastery." So I returned through the same route.   

**Q:**  What was the monastery like when you returned? Had the soldiers come?   

**A:**  When I returned, the Chinese had still not arrived. Then the Chinese arrived and told us to bring out all the weapons and put all the weapons on the place where the parking lot is.   

**Q:**  How many days after the revolt did they do this?   

**A:**  This was probably a week after the initial revolt. I don't remember well. They said to bring the weapons so I brought my cleaver. They said this is for cooking so you can take it back. Then they told all the monks to come to [[what is now] the parking lot. They shut up the Loseling monks in Loseling, and the monks of Deyang, Gomang and Ngagpa in Gomang Tratsang. We were shut up in the assembly hall (dukhang). Then they differentiated monastic officials and put them on Loseling's top floors. After 2 days, they sent the rest of us to our khamtsen, and we made tea in the khamtsen together. The others were shut up in Loseling.   

**Q:**  I heard that some were shut in the Phodrang [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང] House.   

**A:**  The main lene were shut up in Loseling's top floor and the lower ranking officials, like the one's in charge of the mitsen and the khamtsen, were shut up in the Ganden Phodrang [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང] building. The monks sent to Phodrang weren't told they were arrested. They were told that they were going for studies in Phodrang. I was young, so they told me to come and study. I thought that I was not a chöndze and in charge of the khamtsen, so I decided to study writing and thought it would be good to study. When we came to Phodrang, I saw soldiers were surrounding the building. so I thought I shouldn't have gone there. The monks who didn't have titles [Tib. གོ་གནས] were left in the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  Then after some time, they did another investigation of those in the Phodrang and released some of them.   

**Q:**  They didn't released the ones shut up on Loseling's top floor, right?   

**Q:**  They released them from the Phodrang and another group of many people, like the Lene and the Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] Khambas, were sent to build roads in China. Then the officials left on Loseling's top floor and in Phodrang were sent to Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] and Trapchi Prison. From there, they differentiated them and some were said to have been sent from there to Kongpo.   

**Q:**  Did they send them right away or after 2-3 months?   

**A:**  I think that this took place after 3-4 months.   

**Q:**  What did you do during these months?   

**Q:**  During the three months, the monks on Loseling's top floor and in the Phodrang might have been doing studies. We in our khamtsen studied various documents from the Chinese government, like ones regarding the revolt and such things.   

**Q:**  Did the monks from all of the khamtsen gather together [in one place] or did they stay in their own khamtsen?   

**A:**  We ate separately, but the following five khamtsen, Tsetang, Tsangpa, Gyerong, Pithug and Tshawa, studied together in Tshawa Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Who were the leaders at this time?   

**A:**  The main leader was the Work Team (Tib. ledön rukhag), and the detailed (day to day) work was done by the Democratic Management Committee (Tib. mangtso dagnyer uyön lhengang [Tib. ལྷན་ཁང]) whose zhuren was Gyurme Rinzin [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་རིག་འཛིན]. He was from Tsetang Khamtsen. He was the zhuren from 1959-1975. He died in 1975. Under him, there was one zhuren and one uyön in charge of road making, planting apple trees, rock splitting, planting vegetables, etc. Some young monks went home and about 200 monks went to learn driving vehicles. Some went to the Post Office [Ch. you dian ju] and to department stores [Ch. gong si]. Some of them are still alive and some went to the countryside.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay at this time?   

**A:**  I stayed in the monastery working on security (Tib. དེནཇག [བདེ་འཇགས]).   

**Q:**  Were most monks wearing their monks' robes?   

**A:**  Most monks wore their monks' robes because in the past we were not allowed go around the monastery without wearing them, so it had been the custom to wear our monks' robe and it was hard to change that. But later, when we were doing physical labor, we started wearing pants and [lay] garments.   

**Q:**  When did the "Culture Rigshung" [Tib. རིག་གཞུང] start?   

**A:**  At first, it was not like nowadays. In the beginning, there were only 4 sub-units in the Democratic Management Committee. Financial (Tib. ནོརསི [ནོར་སྲིད]), Cultural Heritage (Tib. rigne ngöshül [རིག་གནས་དངོས་ཤུལ]) which was for overseeing the things in the temples, and Security. There was only a little bit of production (Tib. thönkye [ཐོན་སྐྱེད]).   

**Q:**  How did the monks earn their living at this time? Some say that they had started kind of messy.   

**A:**  At first, they were in their own khamtsen. Then after monks were sent off, there were less monks. For example, 400 were sent to build roads in Kongpo and 200 were sent to learn driving, while some were sent to school and some went home. Therefore, the rest were gathered together in Loseling where they ate food together.   

**Q:**  How many months after the revolt did this happen?   

**A:**  We ate together like this for 5-6 months.   

**Q:**  You used the tsamba left in the khamtsen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At the end of 1959, about how many monks were there in Drepung?   

**A:**  A little less than 2,000.   

**Q:**  After those other monks left, what did these 2,000 monks do since there was no tsog?   

**A:**  Well, then the monks started working in five units, like planting trees and apple trees, and working on building a water mill at the Jiri Risur. Then we planted trees and apple trees in front of the monastery. Then, at Tölung Yamda [Tib. ཡབ་མདའ] there were big meadows which the monks opened up and made agricultural fields and built houses. Then some monks went to the Ngachen Phang [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན་འཕྲང] [Power Station construction project], and one group went to Polinga [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ག] where an athletic field was being made. Only the old, the old monks were left in the monastery. All of the younger monks were sent out to work. Then we did work at the Cement Factory--the monks did all of the work making the foundation for the wall. The Ngachen Power Station was built by the monks of the three great monastic seats and the Labor Camp Members (Tib. ལེམི་རུག).   

**Q:**  Were they paid a salary? Or did they get work points at the Ngachen Power Station?   

**A:**  They got the work points, but only very few. In one year, the monks got ¥20 or ¥30. One kind of monk who wasn't able to work, had to repay money for their grain rations. When they went to work in constructions, they got only ¥1 per day.   

**Q:**  How long did the monks eat together communally at Loseling?   

**A:**  After we ate together in Loseling, later Loseling broke up and we were divided into smaller units, such as one for sewing, one for construction, for carpentry, for blacksmiths, for collecting firewood, etc. These stayed separately and made fire (cooked) for themselves. Later, when the monks became less after they had left for construction, etc., then it was divided into two organizations: the apple organization (Tib. kushü drigdzug [ཀུ་ཤུའི་སྒྲིག་འཛུགས]) and the Old People's Home (Tib. གེནསོཁང [རྒས་གསོ་ཁང]). One stayed in Loseling and one moved to Bombora.   

**Q:**  Was this before the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  It was the time when the Cultural Revolution started and when another group of monks were sent to the Lhasa Cement Factory. Another group was also sent to the Lhasa Flour Factory [Ch. mian fen chang] and some were sent to the West Military Supply Depot [Ch. xi jiao da chang]. There were still some students in Nechung. So roughly, during the Cultural Revolution, 360 monks were sent out like this and 360 stayed in the monastery.   

**Q:**  From 1959 until the Cultural Revolution, did they hold the Mönlam?   

**A:**  Oh, I think 2-3 Mönlam were held. One I went to. I was young and was staying in the monastery. There was definitely a second. I'm not sure about a third.   

**Q:**  Did they sometimes hold the tsog prayer assembly?   

**A:**  If the monastery got some sponsors, they would hold the tsog for a little bit. But there weren't sponsors like nowadays because individuals' livelihood was hard then.   

**Q:**  How did the monastery get its livelihood from 1959 to the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  The older monks were in the Old People's Home and got money from the government. The younger monks worked and were living by one's own toil. They bought barley and had it roasted and milled, and ate together at Loseling. And some of the small units were making their living by planting vegetables and they also ate together.   

**Q:**  Did the government provide the expenses for Loseling or did it use the things left from the past?   

**A:**  First, they used the things left in the monastery like grain, butter and tea until they ran out. Then we bought from the government. We bought tsamba and we were sold one gyama of butter a month, and there was no oil. We divided the tsamba among the monks and the butter was kept jointly with the tea and used for making tea for everyone in the morning. There was no butter tea in the afternoon and evening. The monks ate their pag separately and drank the tea together.   

**Q:**  How did the monks get the idea to go to Ngachen Phang? Did the Work Team say that they needed 20 people to work?   

**A:**  The construction units contacted the Work Team and said they need some more workers and the Work Team asked if there were volunteers. If there were volunteers, they sent them and if they didn't have volunteers, then they picked others to go to work.   

**Q:**  Did the Work Team stay continuously [in Drepung]?   

**A:**  Two or three members stayed continuously in the monastery until the start of the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  How did the Cultural Revolution start in the monastery?   

**A:**  At first, the two groups, gyenlo and nyamdre, arose and they fought. Then after this they destroyed the old thoughts and old cultures [Tib. བསམ་བློ་རྙིང་པ་དང་རིག་གནས་རྙིང་པ]. All the old things began to be destroyed in the monastery and the houses, and they also destroyed all the small monasteries.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there two groups in the monastery?   

**A:**  No. The government said that the monks weren't allowed to join these two groups. During this time, they abused the monks a lot. They said, "The statues are the dead monsters and demons, and the monks are the living monsters and demons [Tib. lha de lha 'dre gdon bgegs shi ro red/ dgrwa pa lha 'dre gdon bgegs gson po red]." Like this, we were not regarded as humans.   

**Q:**  Did the monks destroy things in the monastery or did people from outside do it?   

**A:**  The order came from the Financial Office [Ch. cai jin ju] to destroy the statues and to collect the precious stones, jewelry, gold and silver. All of the things in the Phodrang house and Deyang Tratsang were destroyed completely. [Trindor: During the Cultural Revolution, Deyang was entirely empty inside.] In Gomang, there were 16 khamtsen and Loseling had 23 khamtsen. Among these 39 khamtsen, except for Tsha Khamtsen, all of the others were destroyed. Tsha Khamtsen was said to be needed to show or as an exhibit. The cadres of the Financial Office in Lhasa and the cadres in Drepung took the youngsters to destroy the things. The thankas and pecha were burned and the earthen statues were thrown into the garbage.   

**Q:**  Was there a special reason for destroying only Deyang?   

**A:**  There were many protective deities on the top floor of Deyang, so I suppose they were angry about that. After destroying the top floor, they also destroyed the things in the dukhang.   

**Q:**  How did they differentiate the monks when they sent out 360 monks and left 360 monks in the monastery during the Cultural Revolution?   

**Q:**  They had already destroyed the statues, stupas and pecha [Tib. སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་རྟེན]. After the statues were destroyed, then they held a meeting of the 700 monks in Drepung and said, "Now it is the Cultural Revolution and we have destroyed the old, so in the future there will be no religious practice in the monastery. So if you stay in the monastery there is no point. If you want to go home to your families, or if you want to go join some work unit, we will write letters of introduction. But if you stay here now, later if you want to go to a work unit it will be difficult." So as I mentioned above, many younger monks left at this time. Some went to the grain office, some to the construction unit.   

**Q:**  Were these people volunteers or were they picked?   

**A:**  They left in a desperate situation thinking that any way they could, do not let us stay. Some went to the Military Supply Depot, to the Cement Factory, and also to the Construction Unit [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན་ལས་ཁུངས]. And some went home.   

**Q:**  In general, were those left in the monastery old people?   

**A:**  Yes, most of them were old and some have died.   

**Q:**  So they reduced the monks twice? First in 1959 and second in the Cultural Revolution, right?   

**A:**  Yes. From the 360 who stayed, there are now about 40 or so left in the monastery. All of the others died. The other older monks are mainly the ones who returned to their villages, the ones who were released from the Labor Camp and the ones who were in the city. After these monks had returned to the monastery [in the 1980's], I have heard that now there are about 100 monks in the monastery.   

**Q:**  When did they start loosening the policy?   

**A:**  In 1978. It was since the 3rd session of the 11th Party Congress [Tib. ཏང་གི་སྐབས་བཅུ་གཅིག་པའི་ཀྲུང་ཨུ་ཚང་འཛོམས་གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཐེངས་གསུམ་པ] was held. The open door policy was implemented and the economy was made more active. And they implemented the nationality policy and religious policy and started renovating the monasteries, though we didn't hold the tsog. Then in 1980, on the 4th of 6 lunar month, the [holiday known as] Trugpa Tseshi, they started holding the tsog in Drepung.   

**Q:**  This was when Hu Yaobang came to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Was it? I don't remember. From then on we started doing the sojong on the 8th, 10th, 15th, 25th 30th (Tib. ཉཏོང་གྱེསུམ་།ཉེརྔ་ཙེཇུ [ཉ་སྟོང་རྒྱས་གསུམ་ཉེར་ལྔ་ཚེས་བཅུ]) and also the yarne. These didn't start all at once. They started gradually.   

**Q:**  When you first held the tsog, did the Department of Religious Affairs (Tib. chödön; Ch. jü [chos don Ch. ju]) tell you to do this, or did the Democratic Management Committee ask them about doing it?   

**A:**  During the Cultural Revolution, the monks couldn't wear monk's robes and recite mani prayers, but later. from one side, the policy became looseer from above and the masses also reported that we needed to hold the tsog on the 8th, 10th, 15th 25th and 30th days of the lunar month. So they said it was okay.   

**Q:**  How many monks were there in 1980?   

**A:**  There were about 160-170 monks like us. We held the tsog in Bombora Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Had these monks stayed continuously after the Cultural Revolution or were there some new monks?   

**A:**  At this time, there were no new monks.   

**Q:**  After 1959, some monks were sent to join work units, so when did they start coming back to the monastery?   

**A:**  The new monks started getting admitted in 1982.   

**Q:**  Not the new monks. When did the old monks start coming back to the monastery.   

**A:**  The monks who were sent to the Labor Camps and who didn't have homes/households started coming back before 1980 when the policy became a little better. The work units didn't want them and there was no place to send them, and we were actually short of monks to do work. Taking care of the temples for example. From 1982, they started admitting new monks, and also the old monks came back. Their ration cards and residence permits [Tib. ཟ་འབྲུ་ཐེམ་ཐོ] were transferred to the monastery. When they admitted the first new monks in 1982, the Department of Religious Affairs said, "If there are old monks who know sutras and tantras [Tib. མདོ་སྒགས] well, they should be admitted. Also those older ones who are in good physical condition should be admitted. But those who are old and not knowledgeable and in poor health shouldn't be admitted." However, actually those old monks hadn't [just] been sleeping in the monastery, but had been working in the monastery so they should be taken care of. So we admitted older monks and also some young monks, and at that time there was no exam. After that, we admitted young monks who didn't have problems with their five organs [Tib. དབང་པོ་ལྔ] [who were not physically handicapped] through taking an exam that consisted of memorizing about 30-40 long pages of pecha.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, when you admitted the monks, did you have to ask the Department of Religious Affairs like nowadays?   

**A:**  Yes. We had to report the names, ages, birthplaces, the county where they belong and the gegen of the young monks to the Department of Religious Affairs. Then through the approval of the Department of Religious Affairs, they got admitted and their ration card and the residence permit would be transferred [to the monastery].   

**Q:**  In the beginning, when the new monks were admitted, was it easy to get their ration card and the residence permit transferred?   

**A:**  It was easy up to 1986 because there was a Police Station [Ch. pai chu suo] there. After 1986, no one has been able to get their ration card and the residence transferred.   

**Q:**  When the policy became loose in 1978, how many monks were left in the monastery who had stayed there continuously from 1959?   

**A:**  Maybe, about 250. Many monks died every year because all of them were old. Each year, about 20 of them died.   

**Q:**  From 1982 until now, what was the time when there was the highest number of monks?   

**A:**  It was in 1985, at the time of 1st Mönlam. We had about 450 monks.   

**Q:**  How many new monks did you admit at each time after 1982?   

**A:**  In 1986 a small amount of monks were admitted. In 1990, about 60-70 were admitted. but some older died and some young monks were imprisoned. Some went to India and some went back to their villages. So the number became less.   

**Q:**  From 1982, did they admit a fixed number of new monks every year?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**Q:**  How many are there [living in Drepung now] who are not in the official monastic community [Tib. དྲིག]?   

**A:**  There are a little over 200.   

**Q:**  How many are there who are in the drig?   

**A:**  There are about 400.   

**Q:**  Are you working with the apples?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When were the apples planted?   

**A:**  They were planted between 1964 and 1968. We now have about 7,000 apple and pear trees.   

**Q:**  What is the main work that has to be done with the apples?   

**A:**  The main, regular tasks that have to be done are irrigation, fertilization in Winter and [in] Spring. Now we are fertilizing. Soon after the Tibetan New Year and the Mönlam, we have to prune the trees. In Fall, there is a lot of work such as guarding trees, plucking apples and selling the apples.   

**Q:**  How many workers are there?   

**A:**  We have about 20 workers with the apples.   

**Q:**  Do they have to work all year-round?   

**A:**  These 20 have year-round work. Now they get off on 4 Sundays and hold the tsog on the 8th, 15th and 30th. During the Fall when there is a lot of work, they can't go to the tsog, but they get their share of gye.   

**Q:**  How much salary do the workers get paid in a year?   

**A:**  We use the work point system of calculation for all the production activities of the monastery such as for the restaurant and the shops. All the income is merged together for the common cause, regardless of their income. They distribute the work points according to their work for 6 months at the beginning of July. There is less income in the 1st half of the year. For example, the gönyer get about ¥1,000 and the other monk workers get ¥800-900. In the 2nd half of the year, there is more profit. For example, from the apples, we get about ¥100,000. The income from the restaurant and the shop is kind of regular. So the income in the 2nd half of the year is more.   

**Q:**  Last year, did the apple workers get in total about ¥3,000 for the entire year?   

**A:**  No, it was a little over ¥ 2,000. The gönyer made a little over ¥3,000 since they worked every day. The others made less since they had 9 days off each month.   

**Q:**  How much gye did they get?   

**A:**  The gye came out to be about ¥900 last year including from the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  [Trindor la:] There were [also] two sungjö and you had a good income from these, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Counting these other sources of income, then the monks in total got over ¥3000 in a year, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Counting the work points and the gye, we got this amount. [Trindor is speaking: Actually they got ¥450 from the sungjö in Fall, and ¥900 from gye and the spring sungjö. So with about 200 for work points they were probably close to earning ¥4,000 ¥ or about ¥330 per month.]   

**Q:**  How do you decide who works and who doesn't. What are the rules?   

**A:**  Among us, the younger ones, there are about 90, they study tsenyi. There are also about 10 monks learning tantric rituals (Tib. ངགཆོག [སྔགས་ཆོག]). Then among the rest of the younger ones who are in the drig and who are able to work, they are working in their own work units. The child monks who are in the drig, but who are too young to work are in the school. There are also many of them who are cooks, drivers, shepherds, nomads and are working in the restaurants and shops, and with the apples, etc. As for the roughly 200 of them who are not in the drig but are working, we pay them wages when they work. If there is no work, we send them to study pecha. But all of those who are in the drig have to work. And then regarding those in the drig who are too old to work, we put them in the Old People's Home.   

**Q:**  When (what age) do you put them in the Old People's Home?   

**A:**  According to the original rules of the government, for men it is over 60. But there are many who are over 60, about 70, but who can work as tsenyi gegen, and the gegen of the dönkhatre and the gönyer are still working.   

**Q:**  What about those who want to be pechawa but can't get admitted, how do you decide that?   

**A:**  There is a limit for that. Last year we added some to the tsenyi group from the workers. Last year we checked whether the workers can study pechawa or not while working and we gave a test to see what kind of foundation they had. We gave a test on the texts called ngöntogyen and umajugpa. And even if they couldn't recite the umajugpa, they had to be able to recite the ngöntogyen.   

**Q:**  Did the Democratic Management Committee give the test?   

**A:**  Yes. For the tantra, they had to be able to recite the text of Jigje. So there were many who wanted to study pecha, but if we put all of them into the pechawa group, then we wouldn't earn enough money to support their livelihood because they would have no work points and the government wouldn't give us anything for them [just to study]. On the other hand, we make the monks who are not in the drig do work in the restaurant and the shop, etc. Our plan is that if we are permitted to admit some more monks, then we will make some more pechawa, but now new monks are not admitted. And now the government not only doesn't pay money to the pechawa, but it also doesn't pay a single fen to the gegen. The Democratic Management Committee pays some money to some gegen and they pay the young monks ¥3.5 or ¥4 per day. If the monastery was kind of rich, we could pay some money, but since the monastery has to live on one's own toil, we have to do the production to get some money since if we didn't we don't have any other source of money.   

**Q:**  Do all the monks working on the apple trees and also in the restaurant, etc., get the same work points?   

**A:**  Yes. All of the money we get from the different work units are merged together and they pay the work units. If we didn't do that, some would have a good income and some wouldn't have much. If each work unit paid its income to their own members, the ones working in the restaurant and shop will become rich individually.   

**Q:**  How many work points were there last year?   

**A:**  The gönyer get the most--they got about ¥2,400-2,500 because they didn't have a single day off.   

**Q:**  Can the gönyer take leave and use a substitute?   

**A:**  In general, they never close the temple, but if they were sick or had to visit their friends or their friends came to visit, he can get a substitute. But this is rare since the gönyer are old and their gidru would do the shopping. But the young monks would have to go home for the New Year or the Wonkor.   

**Q:**  Is ti right that they get money for the Old People's Home from the Five Guarantees Welfare System (Tib. genlennga [འགན་ལེན་ལྔ]) because these people didn't have children and a home?   

**A:**  Yes. They used to get ¥18 per month. Then in 1985 it was increased to ¥30 per month. However, nowadays the cost of the ration grain and oil has risen, so that actually isn't enough, and they also have to buy clothes, butter and meat. But it is good that they get the shares of the gye and phog. If they didn't get gye and phog, it would really be very difficult.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between those monks who have the ration card and the residence permit, and those who don't?   

**A:**  Oh there is a big difference. For example, the government sells grain to those who have the ration card and the residence permit.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between the grain prices of the government and the market?   

**A:**  I'm not sure what the market rates are for these.   

**Q:**  How much is it if you buy from the government?   

**A:**  (Trindor:) The government tsamba is ¥0.41 per gyama and the market price for a better quality tsamba is ¥1.00 per gyama, and for the regular quality is ¥0.70- ¥0.80.   

**A:**  The government pays us ¥5 to buy meat per month.   

**Q:**  Do you get both tsamba and flour?   

**A:**  We buy flour and rice from the government. Mostly we buy flour. It can be exchanged for better quality tsamba from our homes. There is no tsamba from the government. (Trindor:) The government's tsamba isn't good quality. [Must be Trindor la, not on the tape.] So we buy it and then give it to beggars, etc. We really buy our eating tsamba from the countryside.   

**Q:**  How much do you get from the government for each person?   

**A:**  The government sells the workers 34 gyama per month and for those who are not working, the children and the people in the Old People's Home. they get 26 gyama. The government also sells each person one gyama of cooking oil and gives a pass to buy 12 kg of kerosene oil per month, and 14 kg for a 2 person household, etc. who have the residence permit. [Not on the tape.] [In society, they sell these passes for ¥0.5 per kg and then have to pay the ¥0.8 actual price.]   

**Q:**  If you don't have the residence permit, were you allowed to go to the Old People's Home?   

**A:**  No, because they don't get the relief/aid from the Old People's Home. The Department of Religious Affairs has the name list of the people who get relief.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa, when the villagers come to work, they have to pay ¥1 to the Police Station for the registration fee [Tib. འགྲུལ་ཐོ]. Do the monks have to pay this?   

**A:**  No. (Trindor la:) They take it from the construction workers, but not the monks.   

**Q:**  So it seems to me that nowadays, the livelihood of the monks is okay [Tib. ཨའུ་ཙམ]?   

**A:**  Yes. (Trindor la:) I heard Sera is poorer than Drepung and that they are talking a lot about their suffering.   

**Q:**  Is Drepung the best among the three monastic seats?   

**A:**  The livelihood of the masses is okay. In terms of work points, income probably is about the same. (Trindor:) Your apples are better than Sera's. I heard Sera doesn't have ones like this.   

**A:**  We have apples, but they have good peaches from which they make a good income. So in terms of production distribution, Sera is better than us. As for the pechawa wages, ours is better. For example, we pay our pechawa ¥3.5 per period and for one period we pay ¥4 per pechawa. Sera pays only ¥2 per period. We also pay some money on the 8th, 15th and the 30th by collecting donations. We don't have any accumulation, but we also think about the livelihood of the people who don't work, the children and the Old People's Home.   

**Q:**  Do you get the afternoon tea free?   

**A:**  It's free. Each person in the drig gets one 5 liter thermos [Ch. wu bang] of tea per day. Sometimes they also get food free.   

**Q:**  Does the Department of Religious Affairs or the Democratic Management Committee have the power to decide the religious activities, like the teaching in the chöra and going for the chöthog, etc?   

**A:**  The monastery itself decides this because even if they [government] tried to do that, they don't know religion.   

