# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0052.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1912  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན] was the sister of the late Surkhang Sawangchemmo and the first wife of Yuthok Dzasa. In this interview she discusses the problems of her father Sursur Dzasa [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར་ཛ་སག] and her parent's divorce which was ordered by the 13th Dalai Lama. She also comments widely on events in the 1930's and 1940's in Lhasa society.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0052_01/H_0052_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When Reting [Tib. རྭ་སྒྲེང] took political power as the Regent, you might have been in your 20's, right?   

**A:**  I was probably 23 or 24 years old.   

**Q:**  Do you remember those events?   

**A:**  I don't remember them very well because I was always staying at home. I was engrossed in domestic affairs. I swear by the Three Jewels that I was not attentive to external affairs. Furthermore, at that time, my husband (Yuthok) and I had 5 children. Also, there were many people coming to our house because Kungö [she uses the honorific term for her husband rather than his name] was good, and he was fond of meeting people [Tib. མི་དད་ཆེན་པོ]. I served all of them well. There were people coming for the entire day, so I didn't know happened outside. However, I will tell you whatever I know.   

**Q:**  When Reting Rimpoche was the Regent, were you in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did they confirm Reting as the Regent? How did you hear about this?   

**A:**  I don't have much to tell you about this. Probably, he was unanimously confirmed as the Regent. Most people had deep faith in Reting because he was an authentic reincarnation [Tib. ཡང་སྲིད་འཕྲུལ་བྲལ].   

**Q:**  Yes, it was said that he was an authentic reincarnation - that he tied up the mouth of a clay pot and he also stuck a peg into a rock and left his footprint on the rock, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I also heard that when Reting Rimpoche was sitting as a child at night, there was a fire burning and shining around him.   

**Q:**  When you got married, had the 13th Dalai Lama already passed away?   

**A:**  I got married two months after the Dalai Lama passed away. Before the Dalai Lama passed away, Kungö used to come to our house many times. I got married on the 2nd of the 1st month and the Dalai Lama passed away in the 10th month of the previous year.   

**Q:**  He passed away on the 30th of the 10th month, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Therefore my marriage ceremony was not that elaborate.   

**Q:**  At that time, Yuthok was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> [Tib. མདའ་དཔོན] (Commander) of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> [Tib. གྲོང་དྲག] Regiment, and there was trouble in the regiment. So did he talk about that, saying things like, "Oh! My God! There is so much trouble!"? Do you remember anything about that?   

**A:**  At that time there was trouble in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment, but they just let Kungö go kind of gradually [Tib. ཤུད་ཤུད་ལ]. When he came to our house, even though he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, he didn't have to attend any meetings with the soldiers. So probably, at that time, they were letting him go gradually.   

**Q:**  Do you remember when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> soldiers rushed out [Tib. ལུག] one night?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. But I don't remember what happened on that particular night. If you ask Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང], he knows a lot about this because he was the junior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and he was there to experience that.   

**Q:**  At that time, did Yuthok talk about that and say that they were great or that those people caused trouble? Did you have this kind of conversation with him? Or did he not talk about that at all?   

**A:**  Usually, when Kungö [Yuthok] came, he would talk with my older brother and we were not involved much in those talks. So we didn't converse much about those things. He would come to our house and stay for 1-2 days, and we would not talk much at night, right? Probably, he talked with my older brother a lot because they were friends.   

**Q:**  Did you remember anything about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> [Tib. ལུང་ཤར] incident?   

**A:**  I don't remember much about those events, but I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was shut in. I didn't know about their secret relations.   

**Q:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> became very famous. He had a kind of party, right?   

**A:**  Yes, one of the reasons why <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> became famous was that he investigated twice the land (estates) of aristocrats [Tib. ས་ཞིབ] and the taxes they were supposed to be levied.   

**Q:**  This was the investigation on the newly opened fields and the newly levied taxes were called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབབ་གཞི] The land investigation of manorial estates that was devised and conducted by Lungshar in order to raise new tax revenue from these estates for the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s program of modernization, especially the expansion of the army.">babshi</a>, right?   

**A:**  Oh! Yes, at that time, there was a sawang working with Lungshar.   

**Q:**  Was there a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> also?   

**A:**  Yes, probably. Wasn't he from Jamyangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ]. They had two brothers; one was called Chödarla [Tib. ཆོས་དར་ལགས] and other was called Tenkyongla [Tib. བསྟན་སྐྱོང་ལགས].   

**Q:**  Chödarla was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང], right? I don't know in detail about Tenkyong la, but he was from Jamyangkyil, right?   

**A:**  Probably he was the Sawang.   

**Q:**  Oh! I see. At that time, they had a joint committee called Drungtsi Sungdrel [Tib. དྲུང་རྩིས་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ] that brought together the heads of the Ecclesiastical Office, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, and the heads of the Revenue Office [Tib. tsipön], right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> became famous when he levied high taxes on some estates and he gave exemptions on some others.   

**Q:**  Normally taxes were levied on the taxable land (Tib. ཏྲེཤིང [ཁྲལ་ཞིང]). How did he levy the taxes when he did the investigation? Did he levy the taxes on the treshing?   

**A:**  For example, he investigated how much land Surkhang had. We told him that these estates were for serving as the government officials. We had a very big estate called Kalung on which he levied a new tax of 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> [1 dotse   500 srang]. Probably, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was helping [Tib. སྐྱབས་འཇུག་འཛིན་པ] Surkhang [since that was not a large amount]. This 10 dotse went to one of the Babshi Offices of the government.   

**Q:**  Was that like an income tax?   

**A:**  Yes, it was like an income tax.   

**Q:**  Did the household (Surkhang) pay the 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>, or was it collected from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>?   

**A:**  The household paid that. I heard from my mother saying that we paid 10 dotse.   

**Q:**  Were you related to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**A:**  No, he was nothing to us, but at that time, though my brother was young, people might have a great hope in him and my brother was very tactful in speaking with people. So Surkhang was levied just a small amount of taxes [by Lungshar].   

**Q:**  Do you remember anything or did you hear about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> College incident when the manager, Tshachag [Tib. ཚ་ཕྱག], prostrated in front of the Dalai Lama and submitted a petition [Tib. ཕྱག་འཚལ་བརྒྱབ]. It was said that Shölkang [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] sent them [to do that], right?   

**A:**  I don't remember anything about that. I just heard later that the monks said that they are going to prostrate to submit a petition, but actually they urinated on the stage in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Did you know the reason why the monks were agitated?   

**A:**  I don't have much to tell you about this. Probably, there was a small reason for that.   

**Q:**  We don't know the reason why the monks came along, right?   

**A:**  Probably, Kungö Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན] might know about this because he was a monk. He is staying in Nepal. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> Kungö might also know about this. Lobsang Gyentsen might know more because he was older and he was from the monk household of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Tenkyongla. Are you Mella familiar with him? [Gelek] Rimpoche must be familiar with him. You should ask him.   

**Q:**  After the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> trouble, there was the trouble of the military officers [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་དཔོན་པོ], right?   

**A:**  Regarding the trouble of the military officers, Tsarong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> and my father, and Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ], Salungwa [Tib. ས་ལུང་བ], Nyelungwa [Tib. སྙེ་ལུང་བ] and probably <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. འཕྲེང་གདོང] was also involved. There was also Netö [Tib. སྣེ་སྟོད].   

**Q:**  How did the trouble of the military officers happen?   

**A:**  The people who liked [Tib. མོས་པ] the work line of Tsarong were the military officers. My father liked Tsarong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> very much and Tsarong also liked him. All of them liked Tsarong. Mrs. Taring will have the details about this. One day Tsarong went to a party given at the house of the Queen of Derge (Tib. Derge Tsünmo [སྡེ་དགེ་བཙུན་མོ]). While his soldiers were staying idle, the soldiers got into fight in Yamon and people rushed hither and thither and Sawangchemmo was called there because he was the commander in chief [Tib. མགཇི]. On that day, probably, one person became handicapped [Tsarong cut off his hand]. I didn't know for sure. I just heard about this. Probably, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> might have told the previous Dalai Lama about this because of his dislike of Tsarong. I heard that the Dalai Lama was very agitated with Tsarong from that day on. When that happened, [diminished favor] to Sawangchemmo [Tsarong], it happened the same to his followers and all of them were diminished in favor [Tib. ཉམས་ཉེས]. They were not diminished all in one day, but all of them were demoted one after another. Oh My god! my father was also demoted to the status of an ordinary lay official. He was demoted for a small matter. Later on I heard about that. When my father was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of the Bodyguard Regiment of the Dalai Lama, there was a young boy trained for copying government documents (Tib. ཨིཏྲུག [ཨེ་ཕྲུག]) who was from Nyemo Jünba [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་འཇུན་པ]. Probably, my father tried to [have sex] [Tib. ཚད་ཚད་གནང] with the wife of the young boy.   

**Q:**  Was that the girl nicknamed, "Balloon Brand" [Tib. སྒང་སྦུག་ལན་པར]?   

**A:**  No. Because he tried that with the wife, her husband got angry and probably he verbally fought with my father. At that time, there were some people at the lower level who reported this matter to the Private Office [Tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] of the Dalai Lama saying that Surkhang did this. This was the reason why my father got demoted. He was told that it was because he played with another person's wife. Then my father was just an ordinary lay official [Tib. དྲུང་འཁོར་དཀྱུས་མ]. Usually, he wore a golden head ornament [box] called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གའུ] 1. A small box/pendant for keeping religious objects. 2. A small jewelery box worn by women as a necklace. 3 A small box worn on the hair of lay officials.">gao</a> on his head knot [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག] and a yellow brocade dress. On that day when he came back he was wearing a type of dress called Tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ] that had a collar and openings on both sides. and his golden head ornament was also removed. So at that time, people were kind of old-fashioned and my mother burst into tears. We also didn't dare to look at my father's head. So that was how they demoted the officials. It was kind of shameful. From the next day people came to say sorry and they offered money in envelopes as their condolences [Tib. ཐུགས་གསོས]. Although I was a child, I heard them talking about that, but I didn't want to listen to them. Probably, I was 13-14 years old. I sat near the wool workers and just worked with them and didn't show my face to the people who came to offer condolences. Even though I was a child, I didn't want to look at them.   

**Q:**  Didn't the military officers gather together and do something?   

**A:**  Probably, they didn't do anything. If they did something, I didn't know about it.   

**Q:**  There was a talk about sending the military officers to a meeting.   

**A:**  Probably, they must have done something. Anyway, the power was on the side of Tsarong Sawangchemmo.   

**Q:**  After Surkhang was demoted, how did he get to go to Kham?   

**A:**  My parents didn't get along well because of a bad cause. Once, on the 2nd day of the Tibetan New Year, there were people throwing a kind of fire cracker from our house and the people going in the street would also throw fire crackers upwards to our house. At that time, father was wearing a brocade fur dress and he had kept this much firecrackers in his pouch and he was throwing the firecrackers on the people who were passing by. His sons were also there. Then when somebody threw up a firecracker, it entered his pouch and the other fire crackers exploded. So he took them with his hand and his arm got burnt and it became like a chicken whose skin was peeled off. At that time, someone we knew who was called the "translator" [Tib. ཡིག་སྒྱུར] gave him this [opium] saying that it would relieve the pain. So my father started to take that. At that time there was a person called Koko Dawa [Ch. ge ge, Tib. ཟླ་བ]. Chundenla's mother also knew him. He might not been using it himself, but he knew somebody who was familiar with [opium] and they gave it to him. After that my father would say that he is going for circumambulation around Lhasa and he would come back late. Actually, he was going to have that. Therefore, he didn't get along well with my mother. But since it was just an internal matter, my mother didn't say anything. Later, the Dalai Lama inquired about this and said, "Nowadays, the Surkhang family probably is not getting along well." At that time, Tsarong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> mediated between them to make them get along well, but, they didn't agree to the mediation. At that time, my mother used to tell the two of us, the daughters, "Let's separate from Surkhang. We will get one estate as our share." That was all that would happen if a woman didn't get along well. My mother wanted to go out [of the marriage and family] with an estate taking her two daughters. The Lord Chamberlain then was named Data [Tib. ཟླ་རྟ], but was also nicknamed, "face hairy" (Tib. ཨབསོ [ཨབ་སོག]). The Dalai Lama inquired through the Lord Chamberlain and he asked my mother if she was not getting along well. She said, "Yes, we are not getting along well, but this is just a matter between the couple." When he asked my father, he also said the same that it was just a matter between the couple. But then the Dalai Lama issued a edict saying, "If you are not getting along well, the mother should stay in Surkhang." At that time, the son, Wangchen Gelek [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] was a student in the lay official's training school [Tib. རྩིས་ཕྲུག་པ] that was held in the Revenue Office [Tib. ཙིཁང] in the name of the Treshong estate [Tib. བཀྲས་གཤོངས]. The Dalai Lama said, "Wangchen Gelek should become a lay official right away and does not have to wait to do it at the Festivals [Tib. མཛད་ཆེན་སྟབས་བསྟུན]. Surkhang should manage the Treshong Estate. Father should go separately and the Surkhang family should pay him a salary and a share." All of us were worried saying what shall we do if father has to separate. Then my father asked for lodging in Horkhang [an aristocratic family]. After that, my mother told my older brother that he should give Father whatever he wanted. Then my father was appointed as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> [Tib. ཇ་དང] Regiment's depön.   

**Q:**  Did your father got separated after he was demoted or before?   

**A:**  It was before that. He was already demoted and all of us cried. At that time, there wasn't any unfriendly relations. Because he didn't have work, he threw the fire crackers when he was a ordinary lay official.   

**Q:**  Was he appointed as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Depön or was he was the Tog Magpön [Tib. tog ? dmag dpon]?   

**A:**  No. He was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Depön. Then he got the golden head ornament (gao) again.   

**Q:**  Did he get it in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  He was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> in Lhasa and he went to Kham, right?   

**A:**  He went to Kham as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Depön and he stayed in Kham. While there he got together with Jigmela's [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས] mother and she gave birth to him and after that she died. I was about 18 years old at that time and I was staying at home. After that, my father got the third rank position of Dzasa [Tib. ཛ་སག]. My father was very capable, even though he was smoking (opium). He sent Jigmela to school and he built his house and made arrangements for taking Tsarong's daughter as his bride.   

**Q:**  Which of Tsarong's daughter did he arrange to take for Jigmela?   

**A:**  It was Thondrub Drolma [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་སྒྲོལ་མ] who later became Shölkang Jedrung's [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང] wife. My father also did the engagement.   

**Q:**  What happened?   

**A:**  Later, everything broke up [Tib. ཁྲུ་སློག] when the lady of Wubug Gyatso [Tib. འོད་ཕུག་རྒྱ་མཚོ] became my father's wife. A lot of things happened after that.   

**Q:**  How did it happen?   

**A:**  Probably, it is unnecessary to say here.   

**Q:**  When your father went to Kham, was it the time of Reting Regent or the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama had passed away. The Dalai Lama passed away when I was 22 years old. The 13th Dalai Lama passed away just before I went to Yuthok [s a bride].   

**Q:**  This was in 1933, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, your father Sursur [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར] was in Kham, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after he arrived at Kham, he got promoted to be the Governor of Kham (Tib. དོཇི་ཛས [Tib. མདོ་སྤྱི་ཛ་སག]) through an edict.   

**Q:**  That was the time of Reting, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  He was promoted to be the Governor of Kham from being the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Depön, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time the position of Governor was a joint position [Tib. ཟུང་སྦྲེལ] with y father and the monk official Khyenrab Palden [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ་དཔལ་ལྡན].   

**Q:**  When the 13th Dalai Lama died, one of the powerful persons was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> [Tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After 1-2 years, all of a sudden <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> resigned, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you know anything about the reason for this?   

**A:**  I don't remember clearly, but what I heard from people was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was a very smart person and before those things happened, he went to the hermitages and he also went in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street wearing a white skirt. Then he resigned all of a sudden and he went to Drepung for a time.   

**Q:**  Why did he go to Drepung?   

**A:**  To avoid a kind of danger.   

**Q:**  No. This was before that, it was when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> incident happened.   

**A:**  Was it at that time?   

**Q:**  Probably, it was at that time.   

**A:**  They took out the eyeballs of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> after the Dalai Lama passed away.   

**Q:**  At that time, probably <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was acting like a crazy person [Tib. སྨྱོ་འཆམ་སྐྱོན].   

**A:**  Anyway, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was a knowledgeable [Tib. དགོངས་པ་ཆེན་པོ] person.   

**Q:**  Do you think that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> didn't become insane [Tib. ཐུགས་སེམས་མི་བདེ་བ]?   

**A:**  Yes, I think so. He just [deliberately] gave the appearance that he had become kind of insane or crazy [Tib. འཆལ་ལེ་འཆོལ་ལེ].   

**Q:**  The reason for him doing that was because there was a danger that he might get demoted, right?   

**A:**  Not really getting demoted, but he was afraid because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s eyeballs were taken out.   

**Q:**  Why would he be afraid because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s eyeballs were taken out?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> did that [took out Lungshar's eyeballs]. At that time there were many cruel punishments.   

**Q:**  He was afraid of getting arrested, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  That was really strange. He thought that if he would stay like this for a long time, he might get into trouble, so he voluntarily resigned, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If this was the case, why did he try to become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> [Tib. ཞབས་པད] again during the time of the Regent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> [Tib. སྟག་བྲག]?   

**A:**  Yes. Later he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>, right?   

**Q:**  He didn't become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>. He tried to become a Shape and said that he will offer the Tashiling [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་གླིང] Estate as a bribe to the Regent Taktra.   

**A:**  I didn't know about this.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had the trouble, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> went to Drepung. Do you remember anything about this?   

**A:**  I don't remember much. I just heard that he ran away to Drepung.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the people in Lhasa think that what <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> did was good and beneficial for the state and the people, or did the people think that what he did was for himself to become a king?   

**A:**  At that time, the people who knew the situation were saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was good. But most people were saying that what he did was for himself to become a person with high position [Tib. ཆེན་པོ]. It was kind of half and half. Half of the people liked him and the other half didn't like him. Right after Lungshar's eyeballs were taken out, all people liked him and said it's a pity [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ]. Right after this, everyone stood on the side of Lungshar and people were saying that if what Lungshar did had worked out, it would be good and the Chinese would not have been able to do such things after they came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Who said that?   

**A:**  Many people of the masses told me this.   

**Q:**  After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was demoted and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> resigned, another big trouble occurred when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Langdün [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་གླང་མདུན] resigned from the Prime Minister position [Tib. སྲིད་བློན], right?   

**A:**  I heard this was caused by the tactics [Tib. འཕྲུལ] of Reting   

**Q:**  What do you mean by tactics here?   

**A:**  I mean Reting didn't like him.   

**Q:**  Why didn't he like him?   

**A:**  I didn't know the reason for that. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> was a very nice person and his character [Tib. ཐུགས་རྒྱུ] was good and he was a humble person.   

**Q:**  Yes, all the people were saying that he was very humble. Anyway, probably, it was not okay for Reting to have a partner, right?   

**A:**  Probably.   

**Q:**  Otherwise, he didn't need to resign because probably he was doing whatever Reting told him to do, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But Reting saw that there was a problem if he was there when he [Reting] was doing something crooked [Tib. ཀྱོག་ཀྱོག]. Probably <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> would not follow him, because Langdün was always going straight and not doing crooked things.   

**Q:**  At that time, Yuthok was there, right?   

**A:**  Well, at the beginning, Kungö was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of the Bodyguard Regiment (Tib. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་སྲུང] 1. Bodyguard. 2. The &quot;Bodyguard&quot; Regiment of the Dalai Lama that was also known as the Kadang (tib. ཀ་དང) Regiment. 2. The Bodyguard Regiment of the Panchen Lama.">gusung</a> depön [སྐུ་སྲུང་མདའ་དཔོན]).   

**Q:**  No, he was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment at the beginning, and later he went to the Bodyguard Regiment.   

**A:**  Yes, when he was transferred to the Bodyguard Regiment, he didn't need to hold the ceremony for getting appointed [Tib. གསར་མཇལ]. At that time, I was familiar with that. He just received the appointment order [Tib. བཀའ་སྒྱུར] and offered the order Khata [Tib. བཀའ་སྒྱུར་མཇལ་དར] and that was all. He worked many years as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་སྲུང] 1. Bodyguard. 2. The &quot;Bodyguard&quot; Regiment of the Dalai Lama that was also known as the Kadang (tib. ཀ་དང) Regiment. 2. The Bodyguard Regiment of the Panchen Lama.">gusung</a> depön.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for him to get the third rank position of Theiji?   

**A:**  They wanted to appoint my maternal uncle Somphü [Tib. གཟོམ་ཕུད] as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་སྲུང] 1. Bodyguard. 2. The &quot;Bodyguard&quot; Regiment of the Dalai Lama that was also known as the Kadang (tib. ཀ་དང) Regiment. 2. The Bodyguard Regiment of the Panchen Lama.">gusung</a> depön, so Kungö [Yuthok] was promoted to the Theiji rank and Somphü was appointed as the gusung depön. Those two orders were given at the same time. He [Kungö] was kind of expelled [Tib. ཕུད་པ].   

**Q:**  At that time, could he say, "I don't want the Theiji rank"?   

**A:**  No, he couldn't. He just had to say, "As you say."   

**Q:**  Where was your brother <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> at that time?   

**A:**  He was in Kham. I heard that he had become the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment, but I am not sure about that. After that, my brother was also transferred and his replacement was Jagdrag [Tib. ལྕགས་སྤྲག].   

**Q:**  Was he the father of Paljorla [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་ལགས]?   

**A:**  Yes. Later my brother became a fourth rank Rimshi [Tib. རིམ་བཞི] Official and was on the staff of my father. Anyway, at that time, two bad things happened, though they were not that bad.   

**Q:**  After that, your brother was appointed as the Head of the Palanquin Carriers of the Dalai Lama (Tib. ཕེབཇམ་གོཔ [ཕེབས་བྱམས་འགོ་པ]), right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then he came up [back from Kham].   

**Q:**  Did he get transferred?   

**A:**  No. It was kind of a vacation [Tib. གཞིས་སྐོར] and then probably [while back in Lhasa] he was appointed as the Phebjam Gopa.   

**Q:**  After that, he didn't need to go down [to Kham], right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably when my father came up [from Kham], my brother also came up. When the Doji came back, his staff also had to come back.   

**Q:**  When did your father finish his term as the Governor of Kham?   

**A:**  When Nangchunwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ] came to Kham as his replacement, he came back.   

**Q:**  What was the cause of that [coming back]?   

**A:**  The Doji's term was 3 years, so they were replaced after 3 years. After that a real kalön came as the Doji.   

**Q:**  Why did a real kalön come after that?   

**A:**  Probably it was not convenient [Tib. ཐུགས་སྟབས་མ་འགྲིག] for them to send a real kalön earlier, so two Dzasa were sent as the Doji.   

**Q:**  After that, your brother came back, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He worked as the Phebjam Gopa for many years.   

**Q:**  Did your father remain as a Dzasa after that?   

**A:**  Yes. He was the Dzasa in charge of the Foreign Office (Tib. ཆིགྱེ་ལེགུང [Tib. ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཁུངས]).   

**Q:**  Was that right after he came back?   

**A:**  Not really right after that. He remained as a Dzasa without work for a awhile, and then he was appointed as the Head of the Foreign Office. At that time, his colleague was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Liushar [Tib. ས་དབང་སྣེའུ་ཤར].   

**Q:**  At that time, a lot of strange things happened like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> event and then Trekhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང་བཀའ་བློན་བླ་མ] also resigned, right?   

**A:**  Probably that happened at the same time as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> incident.   

**Q:**  After he resigned, Temba Jamyang [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama. At that time the situation was kind of strange with some people being pulled up and some people being pushed down. What were the aristocrats saying about that? Were they saying that it was good or bad?   

**A:**  Even if people thought something about that, they wouldn't dare to tell it to Reting. Although Reting Rimpoche was good, there were many servants and they stirred up trouble hither and thither [Tib. ཕར་ཚུར་དཀྲོག].   

**Q:**  But Reting himself did those things, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were done by Reting, but...   

**Q:**  But the servants got blamed. Later, we heard that although Reting was knowledgeable, he was kind of active [Tib. འཁྲུག་པོ] in playing games and flying kites.   

**A:**  Yes, there were people who accompanied him and helped him pass the time [Tib. དབུ་འཁོར་ཞུ་མཁན] like the person called, "crazy Dinkhang." [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁང་སྨྱོན་པ]. Reting Rimpoche was fond of him.   

**Q:**  And there was also Phünkang Jedrung la [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང་ལགས], right? Those people were different [Tib. ཁག་ཁག].   

**A:**  Yes. They were different. The person I mentioned above was just someone to help him pass the time and he was a person who just talked many different things and didn't use honorific terms and verbally fought with people. Do you remember him?   

**A:**  Gelek: No, I don't remember him.   

**A:**  He used to come to our house and he also came to Yuthok's house wearing some worn out clothing. And there was also the person called Agu Tönpa [Tib. ཨ་ཁུ་སྟོན་པ] who served Reting by singing opera songs. I don't know much about him. He also helped Reting to pass the time.   

**Q:**  The 13th Dalai Lama gave much many emphasis to the development of the army and economic management. But at the time of the Reting, he was not that attentive to such matters, e.g., the economic management. So were the people in Lhasa were also not attentive and just fooling around, or were they worried thinking that there would be some kind of problem later?   

**A:**  Just a few thoughtful people were worried about that.   

**Q:**  Did you ever talk about that at home saying if we aren't be careful, something would happen?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, my late mother used to tell me, "In the past, the Dalai Lama was trying to set up many new schools and to get medical treatment for the people and when people cultivated new fields, he exempted these from taxes. Now all of these no longer exist and it is like the proverb, "Make the old man fall down and make the old woman stand up." [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་སྒྱེལ་རྨོ་བོ་བསླངས], they were pulling up some people and making some people to fall. So what shall we do?" Just a few people were talking like this. But probably, most of the people were not that thoughtful. In the past, the former Dalai Lama tried to set up a big school in Jangsebshar [Tib. ལྕང་གསེབ་ཤར], the park where later the house of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས], the family of the 14th Dalai Lama, was built. At that time there were Chinese there and the school was a Chinese school. So at one time he tried to develop the culture, but all of these didn't work out. I heard at that time that my late uncle who was a Secretary of the Kashag [Tib. གདྲུང] went to the Chinese place and he knew a little bit of the Chinese language. My uncle used to be attentive to all matters and he went to the Chinese side and was working for both the Tibetans and the Chinese. After that, the Dalai Lama exempted newly cultivated fields from taxes for 3 years, and he set up a new office called the Agriculture Office [Tib. སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུངས]. He also set up the Medical and Astrological Institute, the Mentsigang and he also distributed something at childbirth like what the [pregnant] mother should do and what they should do after giving birth. Probably, there were scriptures from ancient times regarding those things. At that time, the Dalai Lama was not thinking of his own enjoyment, but he was thinking about such matters.   

**Q:**  So the Reting was not thinking in that way, right?   

**A:**  There were some people who were worried about that. But some people were not attentive to that.   

**Q:**  If the aristocrats were not attentive to government affairs, what were they thinking about? Were they thinking about doing business or what? What were they doing to pass their time?   

**A:**  A few of them were doing religious practices, but most of them were working for their own families.   

**Q:**  Like doing business, right?   

**A:**  Yes, some of them were doing business.   

**Q:**  Some of them were playing mahjong, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you ever think that there would be a danger that the Chinese would come? At the time of the Panchen Rimpoche, people might have been thinking a little bit about that, right?   

**A:**  At that time, all people were thinking that the situation would not be good because there were prophecies from many Lamas. But people never thought that it would be so bad as it is now. People never thought that all of the things would be robbed away in one day. Later on, when the Chinese arrived at Tibet, my brother [Sawangchemmo] was very much worried about that.   

**Q:**  At that time, even if you never thought that it would happen like it did, did you think that the situation might be like when the Ambans came to Tibet?   

**A:**  We thought that it wouldn't be worse than that when they [Chinese] would make us kind of small and leave us there.   

**Q:**  What do you mean small?   

**A:**  I mean we could get some kind of rights and make us kind of humble [Tib. སྙོམ་ཆུང]. We never thought that it would happen like this. Probably, my brother was thinking in that way because he had many relations with the outside and he knew the situation. But we were not learned people.   

**Q:**  What did you think when Reting Rimpoche demoted Künsangtse Tsipön [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ་རྩིས་དཔོན] from the position of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> [Tib. བླ་ཕྱག] during a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] The &quot;Yogurt&quot; Festival held in Lhasa to celebrate the end of the monks&#x27; summer retreat in the middle of the 5th lunar month (usually August). It was a time when Tibetan Operas were performed.">Shodön</a> Festival? Were you in Lhasa then, and do you remember this?   

**A:**  I was not there. I didn't know the reason. Did you Rimpoche know about that?   

**Q:**  I had heard about that. At that time people were kind of surprised when Künsangtse was demoted.   

**A:**  Yes. We were surprised and we also went to offer the condolence gift [Tib. ཐུགས་གསོས] with a Khata and probably Künsangtse himself was also disappointed. After that, he didn't stay here [in Lhasa] and he went to stay on the [estate] Gungtang [Tib. གུང་ཐང] [which was located at the east side of Lhasa]   

**Q:**  Did he move there?   

**A:**  Not really moved there, but mostly he stayed there and didn't show his face.   

**Q:**  Did he stay there until Reting's regency was over?   

**A:**  It was not like that, but most of the time, he stayed in Gungtang and didn't make relations with people.   

**Q:**  How far is it?   

**A:**  It is about 4-5 miles from Lhasa. It was a good estate. It belonged to Künsangtse and there was a good house there. Künsangtse's relative was also related to us. When things happened like this, I also didn't want to talk [to others].   

**Q:**  Künsangtse went there to avoid [meeting people], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was he demoted from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> to the status of ordinary lay official?   

**A:**  No, he was demoted both from his job and from status of lay official [Tib. ལས་ཞབས་ཆབས་ཅིག]. So he had to braid his hair into two braids and wrap them around his head which was called the Kongpo hair style [Tib. ཀོང་སྐྲ]. There might have been something to blame him for, but probably not much.   

**Q:**  They replaced him with Joktre [Tib. ལྕོག་བཀྲས], who was one of the Reting's followers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was also like the proverb, "Making the old man fall and making the old woman stand up."   

**Q:**  Künsangtse's trouble was a small one. After that there was the trouble of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> [Tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] which was much more serious, right?   

**A:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> and Gajang Temba [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ] had a serious problem. What was their secret problem? I don't know about that at all. I just heard that Khyungram said [at a meeting], "Not being full even after eating the mountain and not being quenched even after drinking the ocean." [Tib. ri bo zos nas ma 'grangs/ rgya mtso btungs nas ma ngoms][he implied Reting was like that.]   

**Q:**  At that time, Surkhang lost the Treshong [Tib. བཀྲས་གཤོངས] Estate and Reting got it, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Treshong was lost just before that. Later, I heard that the my brother <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was close to Khyungram. But fortunately he was not involved in the letters.   

**Q:**  Oh! yes, that was the petition from the Three Monastic Seats.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> was related to my mother and we were close. My mother used to call him older brother.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> was also involved in that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but they didn't get <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a>. Bönshö was related very closely to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>. Khyungram was treated very badly. It was terrible! My maternal uncle Khyungram was old and aged, but he was imprisoned and banished. I heard that they whipped my uncle many times and then they made him ride an ox up to Shundongkar [Tib. ཤུན་གདོང་དཀར]. At that time, our household sent a clerk with money and a Khata to Khyungram after he passed Shundongkar. We also sent money to him through the clerk.   

**Q:**  I heard that in the beginning, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> was close to Reting. right?   

**A:**  I am not sure about this, but later that comment slipped out. And there might have been something else.   

**Q:**  Probably, there was some kind of grudge, right?   

**A:**  Not really grudge. Probably we was trying to be honest and upright [Tib. གཞུང་སྲང་པོ། གཞུང་སེམས] for the government.   

**Q:**  When Phünkang was appointed as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>, did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> want to become Shape?   

**A:**  I didn't know about that. Gajang Temba was also banished, right?   

**Q:**  Did they banish Gajang Temba again? I heard that Gajang Temba made corrections on that letter.   

**Q:**  After that, Reting stayed in power only 5-6 months. How did you hear the news about the resignation of Reting?   

**A:**  I just heard about that all of a sudden on the 29th of 12th month, the time of the Tsegutor [Tib. རྩེ་དགུ་གཏོར] or the New Year time when the Regent went to the Potala. Why did he resign? He shouldn't have resigned.   

**Q:**  I don't know about the history. What did you feel at that time?   

**A:**  I didn't feel disappointed or bad, because at the time of Reting we had a hard time when they took away our Treshong Estate. I also didn't feel glad.   

**Q:**  For what reason did Reting Rimpoche resign?   

**A:**  I am also wondering about this.   

**Q:**  At that time, people were talking about different things. Some of them were saying that it was because Reting had lost his celibacy and he might have to ordain the Dalai Lama giving him his the monk's vows, so he was avoiding the ordination[Tib. རབ་གཡོལ].   

**A:**  There was the talk about avoiding the ordination, and he was also afraid.   

**Q:**  Probably he had the plan to resign earlier.   

**A:**  Probably.   

**Q:**  He also sent a letter on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སམ་ཁྲ] The traditional rectangular wooden writing/message board. The message was written on the polished, blackened surface of the wood that was covered with a white chalk. A stylus was used to clear away the chalk leaving the shape of the letters, which appeared black. It was usually about 12-14 inches long and 2 inches wide. There was a lower board on which the messages were written and a top board which served as the cover. In many cases there were several additional writing boards between these two.">samtra</a> message board [Tib. ཕྱག་སམ] to Kyabje Phabongkha [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྗེ་ཕ་བོང་ཁ] asking him to become the regent.   

**A:**  Phabongkha wouldn't like to become a regent.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> became the regent, was he kind of the same as Reting or was he kind of different regarding government matters. Was he better and more reserved [Tib. སྒམ་པོ]? Or was he kind of not attentive?   

**A:**  Regarding the basic politics, probably it was kind of the same. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> didn't make any progress and probably he didn't do according to the thoughts of the former Dalai Lama like setting up new schools and hospitals and giving exemptions on taxes to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> (serfs). Otherwise, it was kind of generic [rule] [Tib. དེ་འདྲ་དེ་འདྲ་རེད].   

**Q:**  After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> took power, Surkhang was the first kalön he appointed. We heard that at that time your father was requesting to be made a kalön. Was that correct?   

**A:**  Probably not. I don't think so. I think there wasn't any talk about my father asking to be a kalön.   

**Q:**  He was also not among the candidates, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [He wasn't]   

**Q:**  Who were the people who were requesting to get the kalön position? There was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>   

**A:**  Probably, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> wasn't asking.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Surkhang household offered a "snack" [Tib. ཞལ་ཏོག] [gold biscuit] to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a>, right? It was said widely and people were saying that you went to offer the snack, right?   

**A:**  Not really like that. At that time, that was the way to do things [Tib. འགྲོ་ཁུངས].  

