# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0052.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 25 May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 81  
**Date of Birth:** 1912  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན] was the sister of the late Surkhang Sawangchemmo and the first wife of Yuthok Dzasa. In this interview she discusses how her husband got to remain in India in 1957 when the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa. She also discusses the political groups in Kalimpong and Yuthok's role as a mediator as well as his anger over a leaflet sent to Tibet from India. Additionally, she talks about Ngabö's flight and capture, and his work on the 17-Point Agreement.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0052_03/H_0052_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You said that you came [to India] in 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I came in 1956.   

**Q:**  When you came there in 1956, was there a political group?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a political group, but I don't remember all the names. Shakabpa and Khenjung were in it, and what's he called? A tall person with a thin moustache.   

**Q:**  Some call him Jayangshar [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཤར] Khenjung.   

**A:**  Jayangshar Khenjung is correct. There seemed to be quite a lot. So when Kungö [Yuthok] was staying there as sort of the representative of the Kashag, there was a period when they did not get along. But I cannot tell you the reasons why they did not get along. However, Sawangchemmo [Yuthok] tried to mediate a lot. Then I don't know whether they got along after that or did not. In the meantime, at Lhasa, without Yuthok knowing about it, leaflets were distributed. When they did that then it seems like there were disturbances [Tib. འཁྲུག] everywhere.   

**Q:**  I see, this created some waves.   

**A:**  Yes. It also seems to have created political disturbances. Kungö did not know. Later, it's said that the leaflets were sent from Darjeeling. The leaflets were thrown and then the Chinese questioned the Kashag and they did not allow even the rituals to be performed. There was a servant, the drönyer [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར] of (Kalön) Shasur. Just after we had finished our supper, he came with a letter from the Kashag. Then he told about the leaflet distribution, the Kashag, and that they were not allowing the performance of government rituals. He was crying as he was relating the situation in which they [Chinese] were giving the Kashag a very hard time. So in the Kashag letter, it seems that there were so many rituals to be performed. All the rituals were done by Jamyang Khyentse [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་མཁྱེན་རྩེ] Rimpoche in Gangtok. The government's name was not used and it was said that it was Yuthok's ritual. Dadang Pola [Tib. mda' thang ?] and others went to Gangtok to assist.   

**Q:**  Were they not permitted to do the rituals in Lhasa?   

**A:**  It was not that it was not permitted, but it was said that they were trying to stop doing rituals and making it very difficult. This servant said that they were making it very difficult to perform rituals. So this was done by the late Jamyang Khyentse. With Dadang Kungö, there was a monk official as his assistant, but now I don't remember his name. He was an ordinary ranking monk official.   

**Q:**  In 1954 [unfinished]   

**A:**  Now regarding the question of why they did not get along [in India], this I really don't know very well. There was the People's Association on one side and Shakabpa and them were on the other. Yuthok Sawangchemmo negotiated between them.   

**Q:**  Between whom?   

**A:**  You know there was the People's Association, [who was] the opposition, and Shakabpa.   

**Q:**  Now I didn't quite understand about the People's Association.   

**A:**  There was the People's Association too [in Kalimpong]. It was not just Kudrak. But they didn't get along. You know there is the association called Panjain Kyidu [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག]), ask them. They know about it clearly. Anyway there were two sides. Shakabpa and the monk officials joined together. So one day, Yuthok spoke to them together. Usually when they got together, I went outside. This time Shakabpa and the others were already coming in and so I sort of couldn't go and I stayed inside. Yuthok said, "The Dalai Lama, the three great monasteries, (Tib. ཌེནས་སེནདྲེགསུམ), and the government are all in Tibet, so this time even if it is like the person who has killed your father, don't mix them together in this." [means you should overcome your anger and hated for the other side].   

**Q:**  So on the side of the People's Association, was Alo Chöndze there?   

**A:**  No, he was not there, he was later.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that Alo Chöndze, Phünkang, and Yuthok were in one group.   

**A:**  No. Yuthok was right at the top [he was an Acting Kalön]. He was just put in with the group. He was not at all the type to do that [join something]. His thinking was absolute [ "pure"].   

**Q:**  In 1956, the Dalai Lama came to India for pilgrimage. Then when he was returning, was Sawangchemmo coming [from Lhasa] to this side [India]?   

**A:**  No, it was not like that. Among the Shape with the Dalai Lama were Ngabö, Ragashag [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག], Surkhang, and Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and then [unfinished]. The ones who were there, were Yuthok, Shasur, Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] perhaps. It was customary that the most junior Shape goes to receive the Dalai Lama [when he returns] . So Yuthok came along [from Lhasa] with Drunyichemmo Angula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས], who perhaps was also the youngest [drunyichemmo]. They was the first reception committee [Tib. ཕེབས་བསུ] [to welcome the Dalai Lama back from India]. Now all this I learned much later, after Tibet was lost and everything. Later he would relate it like a story. When he went to receive the Dalai Lama - when he first came [from Lhasa] he said he wondered whether he +would be able to stay a day or two in Kalimpong. He said that he might have to return since he might not be on time. Then he was able to stay a day or two. Then they went to Gangtok and all the Shapes got together and the Dalai Lama did a senriy [divine lottery]. The names of Yuthok and Drunyichemmo Angula were drawn [as to who should stay in India representing the government]. So the two went down to Kalimpong. What the outside was told was that they took sick leave. That's what I heard. Now I don't know whether I should say all these things or not. I don't know. I hesitate. They might say this lady can't keep her mouth shut.   

**Q:**  These are some things that happened a long time ago and I'm asking everybody.   

**A:**  [interviewee asked to have her answer erased].   

**Q:**  Okay. .   

**A:**  So that is what happened and Kungö [Yuthok] was very angry, saying these guys are sacrificing Tibet. The Dalai Lama is still in Tibet, and this is too much. Since then something got into him [implying he was disturbed]. And beside this, Sawangchemmo received a letter from the Drönyerchemmo [Phala] saying that they did not do it out of disrespect [Tib. ལྟོས་མེད]. It just happened out of carelessness [Tib. ཧོལ་རྒྱུགས] and for this I take it upon myself to apologize and so please don't let this matter disturb you.   

**Q:**  So this is in reference to the leaflets that were thrown during Mönlam. [Note: the questioner was mistakenly thinking about the previous leaflet in 1956 at Mönlam time.]   

**A:**  Yes, the ones that were thrown during Mönlam [Note: it was distributed before the 1957 Mönlam.] So in this relations got further and further apart. [Tib. ཐག་རིང་དུ].   

**Q:**  How long was his stay at Kalimpong?   

**A:**  For a long time. He arrived in 1956 and stayed about 2 years. Then it was said that from Tibet 10 bad persons had come and Sawangchemmo was told to please not stay in Kalimpong. This was said by a high ranking police officer at Darjeeling. You remember Namchu Babula? [Note: These people were said to want to kill Yuthok]   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Yes. They and about three other constables arrived. Then we moved to Darjeeling.   

**Q:**  That was about the 10 people who had come from Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, the 10 newcomers.   

**Q:**  They were Tibetans.   

**A:**  Now I don't know whether they were Tibetans or not. The police also told Sawangchemmo not to go out for walks, but to take the car. He said this is what they said, and he doesn't know why. At that time, Seykusho Rinzinla [Tib. སྲས་སྐུ་ཞབས་རིག་འཛིན་ལགས] [Yuthok's son] was there, right? He told him [his father] you had better not go for walks. Then we moved to Darjeeling and they said the same thing, so we finally moved to Calcutta. We stayed the longest time in Calcutta, right? It was just over a year's stay when Tibet was lost.   

**Q:**  When coming to Kalimpong what, was Yuthok supposed to do? Where did he stay?   

**A:**  You mean us?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  At Dhurpin. Just coming from Dhurpin there was a large Indian house.   

**Q:**  A red one, the place where we stayed around 1956-57? Madrabnikunj.   

**A:**  No. It was called Ordlene Kuti (House). We didn't stay at the main house since the owners, who were Marwari, used to have keep their family there for the summer. So on this side, there were 4 rooms and 4 rooms upstairs too. A sitting room and a kitchen below. Next to the sitting room was a small room.   

**Q:**  Then what was the work at Kalimpong?   

**A:**  I really don't know anything about the work in Kalimpong. Really, I'm telling you the truth. Now this instance regarding the disagreement and the distribution of the leaflets, it's as I have related. We had just finished eating dinner when the servant came and were just sitting around. So as soon as it was said that Shasur's servant had come from Tibet, he was called in and right there he related the story. So I heard this. Let alone this, I had brought a short sleeve dress and a fur dress. Other than that I brought nothing. No jewelry, nothing. I was to return after two months. [the leaflets appear to be the one's Shakabpa distributed in Tibet in 1957 that spoke of the cooperation between the Kashag and the anti-Chinese exiles.]   

**Q:**  So how did you come from Lhasa?   

**A:**  I told you last time. A telegram arrived at Tsarong. and I was told to come to Tsarong.   

**Q:**  So after the discussions in Kalimpong, Sawangchemmo was to stay, and so he sent a telegram [to you]. What was stated in the telegram?   

**A:**  It said that he had 2 months leave for pilgrimage. So unless you come soon, the leaving period will be over soon. So without anything I came. Since it was winter I took a fur dress and in India it was decided not to take any (other) dresses since ones could be made there. Since it was almost New Year [1957], I brought a sleeveless dress and one apron. I was so stupid. The main servant was the one who asked if the New Year's dress should be packed. So I should have thought of packing the jewelry too, shouldn't I?[for New Years]. So the jewelry was kept at Tsarong House.   

**Q:**  You know there was something about some money from the U.S. Government that has been mentioned in print in some Indian newspaper. What year was that?   

**A:**  I don't remember.   

**Q:**  Now let me ask you about the 1950. Lhalu was the Doji and Ngabö [his replacement] was not interested in fighting and it seemed that he was thinking of starting discussions. At the same time, at Tromo, many representatives were sent to foreign countries.   

**A:**  You mean the trade representatives?   

**Q:**  No, while at Tromo, in 1950, Shakabpa and others.   

**A:**  It's regarding the Trade representative.   

**Q:**  Anyway, whatever it is, there was no help from the outside and so the 17-Point Agreement was implemented, right?   

**A:**  No, No, its not like that. There was no opportunity for discussions.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  There was no opportunity to even discuss and go. When it was said that the Chinese were coming, I was not there. Regarding this, my sister Sandutsang Achala [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཚང་ཨ་ལྕག་ལགས] can tell you very clearly. She was among those who were chased by the Chinese [from Chamdo]. She came barefoot and had no time to put a sash around their dress and just got up from bed and fled.   

**Q:**  What I am trying to ask you is this. From one perspective, after the 17-Point Agreement, take for example the two sitsab, they were being very hard-headed from the beginning. But then there were others. Since the Chinese were saying very nice things, what were they thinking? Were they thinking that maybe it might be all right, or what were they thinking? Were some thinking that since the old ways were traditional, they wanted to do something new?   

**A:**  It's not like that. No it's not.   

**Q:**  It seems to me that there were two strains of thought. Nobody was helping from the outside and they [the government] can't fight a war. And the 17-Point Agreement was signed already saying that if you don't sign then they will forcefully liberate (Tibet).   

**A:**  It's not that way. From the Kham area there was a lot of talk that from the Kham side the communists were coming. When this happened, Rasa Gagen [Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན] was the one who was speaking on the wireless. Anyway, we Tibetans made a lot of bravado talk [Tib. ཁ་རྒྱགས་པ] like they were going to fight until even the women are fighting and until we have even lost our hands up to the shoulders [Tib. ཕོ་ཟད་མོ་ལ་ཐུག, ལག་ཟད་དཔུང་པར་ཐུག་ཐུག]. So when they were saying this, the Chinese were swarming in, like a herd of beggars. It was time for Lhalu to come up [back to Lhasa] and when a representative was asked to be sent down, the representative was not arriving. So Ngabö [agreed to replace him in Chamdo] and went down. I don't think those two even had time to properly hand over things. Lhalu was just ready to leave. So when Ngabö was there, it was the 7th month and it was the occasion of the Kashag's [annual] picnic. So even though telegrams were sent [from Ngabö], the gadrung [Kashag's secretary/aide] did not report that the messengers have arrived as he did not want to bother the Shapes. So the picnic was continued for probably a day or two more. So during this time the Chinese just flowed into Chamdo and chased everyone up [back to Lhasa]. So Ngabö and a few soldiers probably did not have the wish to fight. Now all this talk is what we heard but not witnessed.   

**Q:**  Yes, Yes.   

**A:**  Then it's said that he [Ngabö] crossed a pass. All the workers and everyone were there. This was told to me clearly by the personal physician, the Lamenpa [Tib. བླ་སྨན་པ], who was previously a Shölkang miser (serf). He used to check my pulse. [Traditionally] One Lamenpa has to go with the Doji. When he had just returned from the Kham side, he came to see me and it was at that time that he related these things to me. So while they stopped for a meal and were resting, Ngabö said, "If we go like this, it is not good at all. If we start moving, then the Chinese are going to come. So today, we should just stay here and think about going back. And so if there are some among you who want to return [to Lhasa] then do so. Those who want to stay, do stay." So whether they left from there or they left after arriving at Chamdo, I can't be sure, but the doctor said, "My, these servants really let us down". [meaning unclear] All the Kudrak said that wherever Sawangchemmo goes, they will go - the staff officers [of Ngabö], the leja, said that. So the staff and all returned and then the Chinese came and sort of arrested them. Sawangchemmo was led away on a horse that did not even have a saddle. It seems the rest were on foot. When they got to Chamdo, Sawangchemmo was kept upstairs. All the Kudrak staffs officials were kept in a large place. Each one got a mug full of rice. There was not one among them who knew how to cook rice! What woe, Oh my! [Tib. ལྟས་ངན] However there was a monk official who had came from one of the three great monasteries. Only he knew how to cook rice. He [the doctor], said that he felt so sad. Then after a few days Sawangchemmo gave advise from top of the roof. He said, "Now you all please don't feel disheartened. It is all right. I am going to discuss things [with the Chinese], so you all don't feel sad." On that day so many were crying. So since they had decided to discuss things [terms for an agreement], Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ] and the others arrived [from Yadong via sea], right? They came down and then went to China, right? During this time, Ngabö told the doctor that he could return if he wanted to. He said that he received some amount of silver dayan or something as salary [traveling money from the Chinese]. When he got to Lhasa, he said that only 1 silver dayan was left after expenses. He said that they [Chinese] were so shrewd and the doctor was so surprised. There was only 1 dayan left, how calculating he thought. Then Ngabö went down [to Beijing] and they said that they want to implement the 17-Point Agreement. The Agreement itself must have been written by the Chinese. We wouldn't write one, isn't it? And when they said that they had no seals and that they needed to consult Tromo, they were told that if you guys can put a seal on right now then that's it. If not, then you all will have to stay here and our People's Liberation Army (PLA) soldiers will go to Lhasa. So after that, those at Lhasa were waiting for a reply, since they had sent the representatives. They were not thinking that war was going to come. So it was said that if this happens, then it will be too much [that soldiers will go to Lhasa] and so they immediately made a seal and seals were affixed. This was done through bullying tactics, right? So if they had not made the seals and fixed them, then it seems that they were going to advance [towards Lhasa]. If they did that, then the people down there would be arrested and kept, right? Among them, there were many Kudrak, like Künsangtse, and who else?   

**Q:**  You mean those who were discussing [the terms]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར], Sambo Sey [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་སྲས], some drunyichemmo- was it Thubden Chömpela [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཆོས་འཕེལ]?   

**A:**  Wasn't Sandutsang Rinchenla [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་ལགས] there?   

**Q:**  Yes, and depön (Phüntso Takla).   

**A:**  Yes, people like depön know everything.   

**Q:**  Yes, but he's in England, I'm waiting for him. He, however, is writing a book.   

**A:**  Even if he is, it would be one chapter and it could be one chapter in this one. If it comes out in many books then you can get it. Now Kungö [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] has written many books but until now he has not written about it.   

**Q:**  Yes. A lot has not been published. So what I was trying to ask you was that among the Kudrak, there were many it seems who did not like the old system and went to China to study. What were they thinking? Did they want to do something new?   

**A:**  Well, I don't have anything to say about others, right? I wouldn't know about the others. My brother, [Shölkang] Jedrungla [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང་ལགས] and Surkhang Jedrungla were sent together. When they were sent they went to prostrate themselves before my father and the drunyichemmo and others so that they wouldn't have to go. But they went to China and whatever education they got would give them something, right?   

**Q:**  So they were saying that they didn't want to go?   

**A:**  My father went everywhere to request [a leave for them], but they were not given leave.   

**Q:**  But why did the two absolutely have to go?   

**A:**  They sent them. The Youth League. I think he [her brother] was the Youth League leader. When they returned by sea, my brother stayed in Sikkim and never returned. Never did. So he sent requests asking for leaves one after another. Later, it was said that we are not going to give you any leave. If you return then it's well and good. If not, then we were going to demote you by taking you off the official's garment [Tib. གོས་སྟོད་ཕུད]. My poor father went to all the drunyichemmo and prostrated. At that time, I even spoke to Drunyichemmo Angula. He was at that time a letter writer at the Yigtsang. Now I forget the title. So they phoned and telegrammed and then my brother returned. As soon as he did, the government itself put him in there. Once again he was told to go to China. Then he got involved with the Youth League. Surkhang Khenjung was able to quickly come here and return again and so he stayed in India. Now, my poor brother got messed up with the Chinese. And when he did get messed up with the Chinese, his hope was based on the fact the communists said that they were peaceful and that they had come to help the poor and help Tibet. So he worked with that in mind and my brother had no other thoughts. He was a very kind-hearted person who always wanted to help others. So when they saw his fault, when he was in India, they did not leave him alone saying that he must return. Later, when he was completely mixed up with the Youth League, they said that he was such a great communist that he was a party member. But in the eyes of the Tibetan people, he was like an irritant in their eyes [Tib. མིག་ནང་གི་དྲ་མ]. But not one member of our family was asked to come and work with the Chinese. There were so many who were saying that one has to attend the offices or else you are going to be left behind. That one has to go forward by taking the first steps right now. At first, they were saying that our Tibet after 10 years was going to be an excellent place without anybody bullying.   

**Q:**  Who was saying this.   

**A:**  It's the same as what the Chinese were saying. The Chinese said [speaking English] "Least 10 years". That they were going to make the roads.   

**Q:**  So they said for the next 10 years.   

**A:**  They said for at "least 10 years" that they were going to help and then after that they supposedly were to have finished helping us so they were then supposed to leave Tibet.   

**Q:**  After 10 years?   

**A:**  Isn't that what "least" means.   

**Q:**  You mean "At least" that means the smallest number.   

**A:**  No, Ola, the biggest number [Tib. མང་ཤོས་དེ].   

**Q:**  At the most, yes.   

**A:**  Yes, that is what the Chinese said, and this they definitely said. So before the 10 years were over, they got more and more arrogant [Tib. སྐྱག་ཁྲལ་ཚ་རུ་བཏང]. My brother Jedrungla just got mixed up with the communists otherwise [he wasn't with the Chinese].   

**Q:**  Yes, when I asked around here they were all saying this. That Shölkang Jedrungla and Surkhang Jedrungla really went with the Chinese and played it up.   

**A:**  And that they were sort of completely communists.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Then when the People's Association was organized, from among them volunteers came forward [to kill her brother and others]. The one who was to kill Shölkang Jedrung was the monk official nicknamed "Nepalese," Pebola [Tib. བལ་པོ་ལགས]. He volunteered and also Taring and other Kudrak were chosen for elimination with someone of the members guaranteeing to be the assassin.   

**Q:**  Are you talking about the 1952 in People's Association.   

**A:**  The People's Association had a meeting, right? It was the first People's Association. So when it was said that [unfinished] At that time, [aristocratic] ladies such as Taring Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ], Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང] and others were among those who were teaching Tibetan to the Chinese. My brother was with the Youth [League]. So suppose the [People's Association] meeting took place today and when it was said that so and so agreed to be the assassins at the meeting. [However, at the meeting] there were two dobdos from Sera who also used to hang around as "servants" of my brother. The two of them came straight to Shölkang from the meeting as they knew exactly what kind of a person my brother was. They were his servants since the time my brother was a student at Tse labdra. I didn't quite understand very well, but I think they went straight to my father. My father sent the servants and horses and told [Jedrungla] to come down immediately. Now, you know Ola, these two monks came straight from the meeting to the Shölkang House. I don't know where the meeting took place, but maybe on either side of the Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག]. When the horses were taken and got there all the houses were closed. It is said that not one person was there. The Chinese had heard about [the meeting] and took them all away. I don't think the servants from Shölkang house got as far as Wobbling [Ch. he ba liang] when my brother arrived at home. So it was like that. From the meeting what was said leaked out to the Chinese and they closed the whole thing down.   

**Q:**  You are talking about where they were meeting right?   

**A:**  From where the People's Association met and guaranteed to eliminate a number of people who were at the Trungji linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] school. [Taring and others who were teaching Tibetan to the Chinese soldiers/cadres] So this discussion was immediately informed to Shölkang. Immediately the horses were saddled and servants sent to tell my brother to return. The distance was not more than 10 minutes. My brother had already arrived home and when the servants got there, the Chinese had already closed the [school] house down and barred the doors to the school. Not one teacher was there. [seems the servants were going to Trungji linga school where Shölkang was]. They got to know about it. So it's like that.   

**Q:**  During this time there were a lot who were going to school in China and there must have been many from the Youth League. What I heard was that there were many who were thinking about modernity.   

**A:**  That was all taught by the Chinese. The Chinese were saying that it will be very good if you do that. The Chinese said they were going to do such great things.   

**Q:**  Yes, but there were some people who were going along and others who were not.   

**A:**  A section believed in the Chinese, thinking that it would be good if the country becomes nice and clean . So a section from the eastern side were sending all the messages of the Chinese. Another section just hated the communists. When the communists first came, all the people clapped their hands. The Chinese were so happy (laughter) but we considered it bad to clap hands. They thought that we were greeting them - when Ngabö and all first came [he was with the Chinese] so that's how they said that Ngabö brought the Chinese and came. We had to bring the Chinese because without the Chinese he was not going to be allowed to leave. If one were really truthful, then Ngabö [unfinished]   

**Q:**  Yes. If one were to think from one perspective, then I don't think that his [Ngabö] thinking was that bad because he sort of had no other alternative. On the one hand, there was no way to fight and nobody was helping from the outside. And so he probably thought, well, I guess that's about it and went about his work [making an Agreement].   

**A:**  From the beginning, if we had not let things slide, the roads in Tibet were very bad. When the Chinese first came up people said that they were nothing. That they were like ants coming in a line and when they sat they fell at the same time. If we had from the beginning stopped them, it would have been good.   

**Q:**  If they [the Tibetan government/army] had fought in the first place, you mean.   

**A:**  Mainly what transpired was that people had violated the karmic law [Tib. རྒྱུ་འབྲས་རྙོག] or something.   

**Q:**  In 51-52 Aunty, you were at Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa. When the Dalai Lama was to leave, they [Chinese] dug the grounds at the back side of our house and when we asked what it was for, it was said that it was for a gunnery unit. If the people and the Khambas were to start a commotion, then all the guns were pointed to the [Potala] palace. When they dug it, on one side it was dug deep and the other side was a slope. When I went for a walk at first I thought, "What are they doing".   

**Q:**  The first People's Association demonstrated quite forcefully; going to Zhang Jingwu's residence, right?.   

**A:**  When the People's Association was organized and said that they were going to demonstrate and that the Khambas were there. Then the Chinese brought the culprits out and they squeezed the Kashag saying can you look after them or not, and that they have to be executed. [Interruption] It was said that if you do that the firewood would also run out. That the Khambas are coming. So around 55-56, they said that you better make sure the doors are barricaded [Tib. མནན]. But nothing happened. But it is absolutely true they caught Khambas and took them away. Our servants saw all that. Around the market place, Wongtö Shinga [Tib. འོང་སྟོད་ཞིང་ག], it is said that Khambas disappeared. They said that the Khambas were caught and they took them in front of our house and by the back entrance of Yabshi Langdün [Tib. གླང་མདུན]. [Note: she is confusing the incident on 1 April 1958 when the Chinese arrested all the "private" Chinese who had come to Tibet on their own for business, and sent them back to China.]   

**Q:**  So they were being arrested.   

**A:**  They were surprised, arrested and taken at gun point.   

**Q:**  So this was before Chushigandru went to Lhoka.   

**A:**  Some must have gone before that. They did go before that. They must have arrested them from this group. They would go back and forth, right?   

**Q:**  In the old days there used to be a lot of political songs. Do you remember any around the 1950's. It seems that from 1950-59 there weren't any of those songs.   

**A:**  The communists had come so who had time to sing then.   

**Q:**  I mean in Lhasa.   

**A:**  No, they didn't have time to sing songs. Then you can't sing recklessly. I don't think there were any new songs. Everybody was busy adulating the Chinese and preoccupied with stage acts. There were no songs. The earlier songs were very nice.   

**Q:**  Regarding the leaflets, what was in it?   

**A:**  I saw just a bit of a copy that was sent. I don't recall very much now. In that it said, "Those who are inside as well as outside Tibet should jointly take the responsibility and kick out the Chinese [Tib. གཞིས་བྱེས་ཁུར་མཉམ་ལེན་གྱི་ཐོག་ནས་རྒྱ་མི་མཐར་སྐྲོས་གཏོང་དགོས]." So the Chinese really made them have a very hard time [Tib. སྐྱག་པ་ཤོར་ཤོར་བཟོས]. There was talk that they really squeezed the Kashag. Now this is what I heard.   

**Q:**  So it is said that both inside and outside together, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So when they said together they really handed in the people who were inside Tibet. Isn't it? That's sort of how I saw it. I thought " Oh My."   

**Q:**  But this was said by those who were outside Tibet, right? So the Chinese don't have to believe leaflets distributed from the outside as the truth, isn't it?   

