# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0052.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1912  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Yuthok Dorje Yudrön [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན] was the sister of the late Surkhang Sawangchemmo and the first wife of Yuthok Dzasa. In this interview she discusses the political maneuvers of Taktra and Reting and about her father's divorce, demotion and then his appointment as Doji. She describes what she heard about the Reting event as well as attitudes about the Chinese in Tibet. She then describes her brothers going to bring Reting back to Lhasa from his monastery and the views of Janglojen Gung about traditional Tibet. Gelek Rimpoche also discusses the attitudes of the monks in Drepung when the Chinese arrived.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0052_02/H_0052_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Bribing and embezzling was happening everywhere. This was a different matter. It seems that most of the officials who were put down [Tib. བསྙལ] at the time of Reting, were pulled up [Tib. བསླངས] during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> era. This was especially true about important positions. It seems that bribing with money is one side [but also] Taktra had pulled up the people who didn't support [Tib. ལྟོས] Reting and who supported Taktra. This was because for Taktra, the danger would come from the Reting side. What do you think about that?   

**A:**  You are right. Yes, they were thinking like that, and we also thought that if we asked for that position it would work out. If there was no hope for that, we wouldn't have asked for that position. Therefore, Kungö [Yuthok] also got the position of Doji (Governor of Kham). People were unhappy and surprised, and I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> even said, "If Yuthok was the Doji, how would he be able to write petitions? Yuthok's writing was not good." Actually, even though Yuthok didn't write much, but his writing was good. After hearing this, Kungö was kind of aggressive and learned more and he did well during his term of Doji. At that time, the people said that Kungö was not suitable for the Doji, but he was able to do it.   

**Q:**  Were Yuthok and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> related to each other?   

**A:**  Yes. A daughter of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> came to Yuthok as a bride and she gave birth to 6-7 daughters and 2 sons. She was the former wife of Kungö [Yuthok].   

**Q:**  At the time of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, did his [Taktra's] Chandzö have the main power? For example, in the beginning while Reting was in charge, the abbot had power, but later he didn't have much power. Instead, Reting's relatives had power. How about Taktra? Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> have the main power?   

**A:**  I wouldn't know all those things, but when I looked at the situation, probably the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> had the main power.   

**Q:**  At that time, how old was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a>?   

**A:**  He seemed 2-3 years older than me.   

**Q:**  So at that time, he might have been in his 40's, right?   

**A:**  Probably, when I was 34-35 old years old, he might have been about 40 years old.   

**Q:**  What kind of person was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>? During the years 1934-1950 in Tibet, Kapshöba was a person who caused trouble. Was he really knowledgeable or what?   

**A:**  His mind was most likely quick, and he could think of all kinds of things. He could make things good and also bad. People said that he was a kind-hearted [Tib. བཟང་པོ] and generous person and that he kind of had compassion. But probably he was a very cunning person [Tib. དབུ་བདེ་པོ], and he would always stick to the people who had high positions.   

**Q:**  He was not a big or high Kudrak like one of the Depön Midra [Tib. སྡེ་དཔོན་མི་དྲག] [Note: the highest stratum in the aristocracy], right?   

**A:**  No. He was a just a lay official.   

**Q:**  Was he rich? Did he have many estates?   

**A:**  He was not very rich, but was not poor. He was as same as the ordinary lay officials.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> have many estates?   

**A:**  No. He was also an ordinary lay official.   

**Q:**  What kind of things do you remember during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> era? Was it a happy time? How were prices? How was the economic situation then?   

**A:**  At that time the price of the things was low, but money was not that abundant for the people.   

**Q:**  The 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> [Tib. སྲང] note came out then, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was kind of so-so [Tib. དེ་འདྲ་ར་ཅིག་རེད]. It wasn't a happy period, but it also wasn't that bad. The price of things didn't go up until the Chinese arrived.   

**Q:**  Didn't the price go up a little bit during <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s time?   

**A:**  The price went up after the Chinese arrival.   

**Q:**  Before <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley cost about 15-20 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Please tell us as much as you remember about the things that happened during the Regent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>. Yesterday, we talked about appointing the kalön. After Surkhang, who was the second kalön appointed by the Taktra? Was Surkhang the replacement of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a>?   

**A:**  No. He was the replacement of Nangchungwa.   

**Q:**  Why was Nangchungwa demoted?   

**A:**  He was not demoted. Didn't he become a monk in his old age [Tib. རྒན་ཆོས]?   

**Q:**  Did he resign?   

**A:**  Yes, and then he became a monk.   

**Q:**  Probably, he was told to resign, right?   

**A:**  I don't know about that. Anyway, he was not demoted.   

**Q:**  At that time there was the trouble in Lhundrup Dzong [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you familiar with this? It was the trouble with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> [Tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] and the Ngagpa colleges. It was said that they went to collect donations [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] in Phembo [Tib. འཕེན་པོ] and they whipped the monk nicknamed "the bearded baby goat," Rebe gyau [Tib. རེ་བེ་རྒྱའུ].   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this. At that time, I was probably not there. I was probably at someplace far away.   

**Q:**  Where were you during the Reting incident?   

**A:**  I was in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  How did you hear about the Reting incident in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  I was staying in Gyami Tsering's [Tib. རྒྱ་མི་ཚེ་རིང] black house which was located at the front of Sandutsang. It was Janglojen Gung [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་གུང] who told me what happened to Reting.   

**Q:**  At that time, everything was finished, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Reting had already passed away [Tib. ཞིང་ལ་གཤེགས]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a>'s wife Tsheyangla [Tib. ཚེ་གཡང་ལགས] was there so we were talking to each other saying, "What shall we do?" It was kind of inconvenient [Tib. འཚེར་པོ] to talk with them about this event.[She was a relative of Reting]   

**Q:**  How did Janglojen tell you?   

**A:**  Right away he said, "Probably, there was a disturbance in Tibet about Reting. Then he said that the Regent Rimpoche [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཚབ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] had passed away. After that, we didn't receive any letters regarding this matter, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> sent letters to many people and wrote all about the event. He also sent a letter to Janglojen and Jangling Bulag [Tib. བྱང་གླིང་བུ་ལགས] [also known as Pomsur [Tib. སྤོམ་ཟུར]).   

**Q:**  What did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> write in his letter?   

**A:**  He wrote, "In the meantime, such and such things have happened, and I am sorry for that, but I didn't have anything to do with them." Since the letters were sent to people from both sides, he didn't write in detail about the event.   

**Q:**  Did he write, for the benefit of others [Tib. དགོངས་པ་གཞན་དོན་དུ་གཤེགས] that the Reting Rimpoche had passed away, or did he write that he was killed?   

**A:**  He wrote that he had passed away. It was out of the question to write that he had been killed.   

**Q:**  What did he write?   

**A:**  He wrote that he had been imprisoned and that he passed away suddenly.   

**Q:**  Why are you saying that it was out of question to say that he was killed?   

**A:**  It was out of the question to say he was killed.   

**Q:**  Why? Do you mean it was not right [Tib. མ་འོས་པ] to kill him, or what?   

**A:**  At that time, we didn't know what had happened, though those people might have known about it. He didn't write that in the letter. Janglojen showed me the letter. We were related to each other.   

**Q:**  When Janglojen ran away from Tibet, he wrote a famous letter. Do you know about this?   

**A:**  No, I never saw that. What was the letter about?   

**Q:**  When he ran away from Kongpo, he sent a letter to the government in which he wrote, "Son of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> Lhalu Sey [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ་སྲས] was said to be the son of the false father Shelling Depön and it was worked out to get through it." [Tib. ལུང་ཕྲུག་ལྷ་སྲས་སྐྱེད་བྱེད་ཤེལ་མདར་བརྫུས་ནས་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གྱི་གོ་འཕུད].   

**A:**  Janglojen Gung was a person who wrote a lot of letters.   

**Q:**  At that time, Janglojen, Künphela [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས], and Abo Rabga [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་རབ་དགའ] made a kind of association [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག] for the Guomindang. Did Janglojen talk to you about this?   

**A:**  We didn't talk about this, but he said that he had a job. When I asked what the work was, he said, "I had something." He didn't tell me anything specific.   

**Q:**  Did he tell you anything about the purpose of their work? Did he say anything like, "The current system in Tibet is not good, and we have to do something"?   

**A:**  He didn't say much, but he said that the current Tibetan system was not good. We had made mistakes [Tib. འཕྱུགས] in the past. If we had gone under the British at that time, it would be good now and our country would be good and clean. Because it didn't happened like that, the country became mediocre [Tib. ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག]. He always said that. This was the thing about which he talked the most.   

**Q:**  What did he mean mediocre? What were the things that had became mediocre?   

**A:**  Mediocre meant that people didn't have much happiness and that some people had seized the power and that the country hadn't developed in everything. Janglojen treated his servants kindly.   

**Q:**  After the Reting incident, did Janglojen say that it was good or it was bad?   

**A:**  He said, "All of them are corrupt or rotten [Tib. རུལ་པ]." As for the people like us who were practicing religion, poor thing! Janglojen had some errors in his ideology because he would say all of them were corrupt. Other than that, he was a very nice person. He said that all the laws were corrupt or rotten.   

**Q:**  What did Janglojen mean, "rotten"? Did he mean the government was corrupt, or the kudraks were corrupt, or the monasteries were corrupt?   

**A:**  Yes. He said that the people in the monasteries were not practicing religion. He used to say that Dharma Pala, who built Sarnath [the temple in Varanasi], was a great spiritual figure [Tib. བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ] because he sacrificed himself, right?   

**Q:**  [Gelek]: Probably Dharma Pala was from Ceylon, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He built all the stupas in Sarnath and his photo was also there. He sacrificed himself and was like the Buddha. He [Janglojen] used to say that it was not good for people who practiced religion to keep many estates. We had slightly different points of view.   

**Q:**  [Gelek]: Actually, this was not a matter of different points of view. It was good.   

**A:**  Yes, but he didn't have much faith towards the Lamas. As for the monks, they were magnificent [Tib. ཞིང་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན], but he didn't recognize them as magnificent. On this matter, we had differences. Anyway, we were just related to each other, and he was doing his things and we were doing our own things, and we got along well and didn't talk much about those things. He disliked it [religion], and we liked it, but he used to treat us very kindly.   

**Q:**  What did Janglojen say regarding the trouble of Reting? He just said that everything smelled rotten, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he always said that.   

**Q:**  Later, didn't your brother <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> talk about Reting Labrang having relations with the Guomindang?   

**A:**  No, he didn't.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I mean later on.   

**A:**  No, he didn't. Later, he just told me a little bit about going to Reting, but he said that he didn't treat Reting harshly and he paid respect to him according to his position [Tib. གོ་བབ་སླེ་ཤིང]. Probably, that was true. But now in Tibet, there is some unpleasant talk regarding Reting.   

**Q:**  What kind of talk is it?   

**A:**  It's probably talk that is widespread, I will listen carefully and tell you. There is widespread talk regarding Reting.   

**Q:**  What do you mean?   

**A:**  The Chinese interrogated Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> about how Reting was killed and who had done that, and they told something. In those talks, my brother was clean. I have to tell you clearly who those people were. I can't tell you rubbish things. I am glad to see that my brother was not in there. Otherwise, they would have told them about that. My brother also told me that he acted tactfully and treated Reting in a gentle manner [Tib. འཇམ་པོ].   

**Q:**  When I was living with Chunden La [Tib. ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a>, although I didn't write them down or tape them, but I still remember when Sawangchemmo went to the Reting Labrang the first time with the soldiers, Reting Rimpoche called Sawangchemmo aside and told him, "Something has happened in the past, but those are small matters. I will return it to you." [the Treshong Estate] Didn't Sawangchemmo tell you about this?   

**A:**  Yes, he also told me this. [laughter] My brother was knowledgeable. So now it is good. People didn't say anything about him. If he had done something bad to Reting, that would have been very bad.   

**Q:**  Did Reting tell <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> that he would return Treshong?   

**A:**  Yes, he told him, "I will return Treshong to you. It doesn't matter; this is a small matter." [laughter] Then probably my brother told him, "It doesn't matter, there is no talk about this [Tib. བཀའ་མོལ་འདི་ཚོ་མི་འདུག]."   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> prostrate himself to Reting?   

**A:**  Yes. He said he prostrated himself and treated him in a gentle manner and didn't treat him badly.   

**Q:**  Who was the first to arrive at Reting, your brother or Lhalu?   

**A:**  My brother was the first, I think.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> go with the soldiers?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. He said that he didn't go with the soldiers. It would not be good to go with the soldiers, because Reting would feel afraid. He said that Reting was also making pleasant talk with him when they reached Phembo.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  Probably, Reting told my brother, "You should also do good." My brother said that he was harmonious [Tib. མཐུན་པོ] with Reting.   

**Q:**  Do you mean when he took Reting to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably he talked with him and didn't treat him harshly.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for taking Reting to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I swear by the Three Jewels that I don't remember this.   

**Q:**  He might have told Reting that there was trouble in Lhasa and I was sent by the Kashag to take you, right?   

**A:**  Probably, he told Reting, "In any case, please come to [Lhasa] and I will do anything for you [Tib. ག་རེ་ཡིན་ནའི་ཞུ་གོ]."   

**Q:**  This was the way he used to talk, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Later, did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> tell you that he was afraid because there were monks on the way? What did he tell you?   

**A:**  Do you mean Reting Rimpoche? He said Reting was a little bit afraid.   

**Q:**  Do you mean on the way?   

**A:**  Yes, because there were the soldiers. About those things, my brother told him, "It doesn't matter."   

**Q:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> told Reting when they reached the Phembo Gola mountain pass, "Now we are going to send your monk bodyguard or Simgag, and the younger servant [Tib. གསོལ་གཞོན] to Lhasa, and we are going to take you alone to the Potala." Did you hear about this?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  [Gelek]: I saw this in a book printed in Lhasa.   

**A:**  Was it written clearly about this?   

**Q:**  [Gelek]: Yes, it was written that Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> said that. But Sawangchemmo was not involved in killing Reting.   

**A:**  The two of them were there, and they told the bottom line of the matter.   

**Q:**  This was not their talk, it was said by Changöba [Tib. བྱ་དངོས་པ].   

**A:**  Not this.   

**Q:**  Do you mean what Tsidrung Yeshe Thubden [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐུབ་བསྟན], the one nicknamed "Nepalese" [Tib. པེབོ], wrote in his book?   

**A:**  No. Recently there was talk about that in Lhasa. When the Dalai Lama was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, I went to Kalimpong and then I went to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When it was decided that the People's Liberation Army would come to Tibet and then they liberated Tibet, what did you people think? Did you think that the system would remain as before, or did you think that they would implement reforms?   

**A:**  I thought that they might do a little reforming, but I never thought that they would do anything like this.   

**Q:**  What reforms do you mean?   

**A:**  I thought they would slightly decrease our power and take away a few of the rights that we had and make the ordinary people kind of good. I thought that they would leave us like this.   

**Q:**  Did you think in that way?   

**A:**  Yes, I was thinking in that way because I didn't know much and I was not a learned person. My older brother and younger brother were very afraid of it.   

**Q:**  What did they say at that time?   

**A:**  What should they say? My brothers were with the Dalai Lama in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and I came back to Lhasa. On the day when the Chinese came to Lhasa, we also cried. I was in Surkhang House on that day with my mother. When the Chinese came, they brought the big photos of Chairman Mao and Zhude at the front, and there were quite a lot of soldiers. When we watched them from the window, I burst into tears saying that those bad people have come.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, did the Chinese act show-offish?   

**A:**  Not really show-offish, they were kind of calm [Tib. ལྷིང་ལྷིང]. At that time, there were 5-6 leaders [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] and they were acting tactfully and visiting the kudraks and they also came to Surkhang. Among them, there was Phünwangla. He spoke Tibetan.   

**Q:**  In the past, in the Tibetan Government meetings, it was said that if the Chinese would come we will fight until all the men were exhausted and only women were left [Tib. ཕོ་ཟད་མོ་ལ་ཐུག་ཀྱང], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But in 1950, they just made a little bit of war. What was the reason for not making war [against them]?   

**A:**  It was because of the difference in the number of people.   

**A:**  [Dr. Goldstein interviewing Gelek Rimpoche.] [Gelek, speaking English]: Mel La put the question to me, asking what I thought. [laughter] I do remember when the Dalai Lama was going to stay in Yadong. In the early morning, I was eating <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> dough balls [Tib. སྤགས] and a villager sitting in Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] told me, "Someone came," "The Dalai Lama. He left this morning." It was said that they left for India because the Chinese were coming. I remember feeling very sad and I even cried [laughter], thinking now the Dalai Lama was gone forever. That's my understanding.   

**Q:**  Did you think that you should leave, too?   

**A:** [Gelek]: No, not at that time. I heard that Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] was leaving, and this and that fellow were leaving, and they talked about the two tutors, Ling Rimpoche [Tib. གླིང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] and Trijang Rimpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང], who were also leaving and I felt very sad. On the next day, I went to the ritual at the Drepung All-monastery Prayer Assembly [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན], and I heard about the appointment of the two sitsab.   

**Q:**  They were called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> [Tib. སྲིད་ཚབ], right?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Yes.   

**Q:**  That was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས], right?   

**A:** [Gelek]: Yes, Lobsang Tashi was a monk official. He was a Khenche [Tib. མཁན་ཆེ]. Both of them were known for their honesty and loyalty.   

**Q:**  Before that, had you heard in the monastery that Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ] had fallen? What did people say? What did they say about it in the monastery?   

**A:** [Gelek]: They did talk a lot. They said that Chamdo had been lost. I especially remember that people said Ngabö didn't fight properly and set fire to the armory. People said that Lhalu collected some kind of soldiers and wanted to fight, but they couldn't. The monastery people deeply understood that the Chinese were going to come. They also knew China would do something. [But] They never thought that they would drastically change everything. They always thought the monastery would remain the monastery and China would remain China. It would probably only affect the Tibetan government [Tib. སྡེ་པ་གཞུང], no one else. I think the majority were thinking like that.   

**Q:**  Did the monks in the monastery say that they should go as monk soldiers, sermag [Tib. སེར་དམག], and fight?   

**A:** [Gelek]: Yes, not only talking, some of them were already assembled as the sermag and they went. At that time, they also were called the, "Flag-frightened regiment" [Tib. དར་འདྲོགས་དམག་སྒར], which means they had a flag somewhere and when air blew on the flag, it made a noise. They were frightened and thought that the Chinese were coming, so they ran away. That's why it was called that.   

**Q:**  These were the monks, right?   

**A:** [Gelek]: Yes, I think they were monks. Actually, those sermag had some name. Do you [Mrs. Yuthok] remember this? When they went there when the Chinese came, they were called the Sermag Regiment.   

**Q:**  At that time there were Mongolian people practicing religion in the monastery. Did those people know what was going to happen?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: There were very few people who knew. There were a few Mongolians who had experience and they were very upset. I remember that Geshe Ngawang Nyima [Tib. དགེ་བཤེས་ངག་དབང་ཉི་མ] used to warn me, but nobody bothered and nobody believed them. Not even that, but in the late 1950's when there was some trouble in Kham, some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> Geshe also warned us, but we never thought that this would happen.   

**Q:**  In Drepung, there were some pro-Chinese agents. Were they saying that the Chinese wouldn't do bad things?   

**A:** [Gelek]: I know a few of the Chinese monks, like Lobsang Thönyö [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དོན་ཡོད]. My guess is that at that time these people were not sure what would happen. They were mostly Guomindang. They were not very sure where they would go. I was quite sure [they would] only set up the old Chinese medical clinic in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was that acupuncture?   

**A:** [Gelek]: Not really acupuncture, they used a very small dry needle.   

**Q:**  Was that the golden needle [Tib. གསེར་ཁབ]?   

**A:** [Gelek]: No, they used some herbal treatment. Those monks were active with the communists.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1950 or 1951?   

**A:**  [Gelek, speaking Tibetan]: It was long after that.   

**Q:**  The Chinese came in 1951, right?   

**A:** [Gelek]: It was in between 1950-51. [Yuthok]: My brother knew earlier - They stayed in Polinga [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ག] on the first floor of the house where we lived.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the Chinese?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: No, the monk called Champa Gyurme [Tib. བྱམས་པ་འགྱུར་མེད]. I think at that time the monks who were working for the Guomindang in the monastery didn't know where they were [Tib. ཚོད་མ་ཐིག་པ་བྱས], and they were unsure. After that, when they stood at the side of the communists and started working for the communists, they just set up hospitals. I think at that time, the monks who used to work for the Guomindang, started working for the Communists. Though I was a child, I remember this happened in the monastery. [Yuthok]: At that time, he was in the monastery and he lived near our house and worked on making thick broad bean sauce [Ch. dou ban jiang] and that stuffs and sold them.   

**Q:**  They were not sure where they are, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were slightly afraid at that time. [Gelek]: They were afraid of the new China.   

**Q:**  Did the Mongolian monks go to Lhasa or did they just stay there?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Those elderly Mongolians probably were religious practitioners, those were the young monks who did that. [Gelek]: I am not sure about that. Some of them were good geshes who had knowledge in learning the scriptures. Many of them were real religious practitioners and they didn't have anything. One or two of them were working for the communists. One of them later became the abbot of Dülwa [Tib. མཁན་པོ].   

**Q:**  Was that Thabkhela [Tib. ཐབས་མཁས་ལགས]?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: No, Thabkhela was from Tsang. Dülwa Khembo's [Tib. འདུལ་བ་མཁན་པོ] name was Thubden Jungne [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་འབྱུང་གནས] or something . He was good at scriptures. Later, we came to know that he was a communist spy. It was for sure that he used to be the spy of the Guomindang in the past and later he worked for the CCP.   

**Q:**  [Yuthok]: Was he the person with blue eyes?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Yes.   

**Q:**  [Yuthok]: Was he Geshe Yamphel la [Tib. ཡར་འཕེལ་ལགས]?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: No.   

**Q:**  [Yuthok]: Was he the tall one?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Yes. [Yuthok]: I heard that he was still working for the Chinese later on.   

**Q:**  Why did you [Yuthok] think that Ngabö didn't fight properly in Chamdo?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Ngabö fought well and he also set the ammunition dump on fire. [Gelek]: Yes, but he didn't fire guns against the Chinese. [Yuthok]: He won't dare to shoot because so many people had come. Ngabö didn't do anything wrong.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese came to Lhasa for the first time, did the people come out to watch them or did they just remain inside?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: They came out and watched and they also watched from inside the house and also from the roof.   

**Q:**  Did the soldiers come through the north or what?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: They came from the east side crossing the Kuru Bridge and they came along the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street at the front of Surkhang house. I am not sure where they went on the first day.   

**Q:**  Was there anybody from the government coming to receive them?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Nobody was there. They came by themselves. [Gelek]: I remember some of them were coming from the west side riding horses. Probably, those were the Chinese coming via India. They went behind our Labrang.   

**Q:**  Some of them came from India?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Those were the Chinese like the Representative Zhang [Jingwu] Dai Biao. I remember that they were riding horses and I remember I also clapped my hands and spit on them and they looked up and laughed. At that time, didn't some of the Khambas also go to receive the Chinese? [Yuthok]: Probably not. [Gelek]: Yes, they went to receive the Chinese officials.   

**Q:**  Who were the Khambas who went there?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: There were quite a lot of Khambas and there were also traders and there were also people from the government. [Yuthok]: At that time, my younger brother Rimshi [Tib. རིམ་བཞི] told me that Geshe Rimpoche [Sherab Gyatso [Tib. ཤེས་རབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] was our Lama. He had the priest patron relationship with Surkhang. At that time, there was an order for Geshe Rimpoche telling him not to come up [to Tibet] and my brother had to tell them about that and he felt very bad. At that time Geshe Rimpoche told him [Rimshi], "It doesn't matter. You people are not to be blamed. You didn't have the power."   

**Q:**  Who else was there with Geshe Rimpoche?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Who knows! I heard that there were some Chinese soldiers.   

**Q:**  Were there about 50 people at that time?   

**A:** [Yuthok]: Yes, probably, there were about 50 . [Gelek]: There were about 50 Chinese and there were also some of his Mongolian pupils and some other servants. [Yuthok]: Yes, there was a servant called Kelsang La [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ལགས].   

**Q:**  How many retinue did Geshe Rimpoche have at that time?   

**A:** [Yuthok]: Probably, he had only 4-5 retinue. [Gelek]: There were Mongolian and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> pupils also. I am not sure whether he had about 100 people in the retinue.   

**Q:**  What did Geshe Rimpoche say about the reason for coming to Tibet?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Probably, Geshe Rimpoche was only thinking about practicing religion.   

**Q:**  Did he tell you that he was for the religion?   

**A:** [Yuthok]: Yes, he said that he was for the religion and he wanted to see the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Why did the soldiers come with him?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Yes, probably, it was said that it was not okay to have the soldiers with him. [Gelek]: No, Geshe Rimpoche said that he had something to talk about with the Communists. [Yuthok]: I didn't hear about this. It is not like that. [Gelek]: Why did he take soldiers with him? [Yuthok]: Probably, they told him not to take the soldiers with him. But, he said, "It is not okay if I don't take the soldiers. Probably, this had something to do with the Communists, right? Anyway, he was very much disappointed.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Geshe Rimpoche standing on the communist side?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Yes, he had to go to the side of the Communists. At the beginning, he went down at the time of the Guomindang and after that the communists [Answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Were those Guomindang soldiers?   

**A:**  No, they were Communist soldiers.   

**Q:**  That was in 1944 though, right?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Yes.   

**Q:**  This was before the Lhundrup Dzong trouble, right?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Probably, this was later on. [Yuthok]: It was at the time of the Regent Taktra.   

**Q:**  Were you [Yuthok] in Tibet at that time?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: I was not in Tibet. [Gelek]: When did Rimshi go there? [Yuthok]: When I went to Kham, Rimshi was in the north. Probably, it was after that in 1947-48.   

**Q:**  Did he try to come once earlier?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: No.   

**Q:**  The British say that the monk was sitting in Lhasa, that can't be wrong. I don't remember exactly.   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Maybe. Geshe Sherab [Tib. ཤེས་རབ] [Answer not finished]   

**Q:**  I heard that at one time in the Kashag, Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> angrily told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> something strong. Do you remember that?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: I don't remember that clearly, but he said that he told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> something.   

**Q:**  [Gelek]: Was that when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Yes, at that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was almost kind of doing that [declining].   

**Q:**  [Gelek]: About 15-20 days after that, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was diminished.   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Probably, it was something like that.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the two of them not getting along well?   

**A:** [Yuthok]: I didn't know about that. I don't think that they had many reasons because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was not a very reserved person [Tib. ལྗིད་ཁོག་ལྗིད་པོ] and he was just saying something [carelessly] [Tib. སྦ་སྦ་སྦ] from his mouth. After Kapshöba was demoted, he came carrying a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to our house saying that he wanted to see my mother. [laughter] Before that, we didn't have much relations with him, but he was kind of clever [Tib. མཁས་པོ]. At that time, Kapshöba always used to say Tashi Delek [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས] as the greeting. Otherwise, usually in Tibet, people would say that only at the time of the New Year. After Kapshöba said it, everyone started saying that. It is good to use that when we meet Tibetans.   

**Q:**  It was like saying hello, right?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Yes. We didn't have much to talk when we meet people. We can't just ask them where are you going? So it is good to say Tashi Delek. Since he [?] was related to him, he had to take care of him. Otherwise, probably the Dalai Lama also didn't have much hope for him.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: It was because the Dalai Lama had to do something and take care of his old servants and he was regarding the religion as the main thing. [Gelek]: Two of you misunderstood each other. This was not what Mel La said. When the Dalai Lama was young and when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was the king, at that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> and Taktra didn't get along well. Probably, this was kind of caused by the Yabshi. Anyway, they didn't get along well. [Yuthok]: Oh! you mean Yabshi and Taktra, right? [Gelek]: Yes, because of that, the Dalai Lama also didn't like Taktra. [Yuthok]: Oh! I see. The Dalai Lama didn't have any dislike towards the Regent Taktra. Probably, he might have that [dislike] a little bit to the Chandzö Chemmo [Tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ], right? [Gelek]: In Tibet, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> was good for making excuses [Tib. ལག་པ་ཕྱིས་ས], right? [laughter]   

**Q:**  Yes, it is very difficult to understand why people blamed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> for doing all the bad things, right?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: That is correct.   

**Q:**  I think at the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, he issued a proclamation against the father of the Dalai Lama (Tib. གྱེཡབ [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡབ]) and he kind of demoted [Tib. གནས་དབྱུང] him, right?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Not really demotion, but they issued the proclamation.   

**Q:**  They insulted him. Do you [Yuthok] remember this?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: Oh! I see, you are right. At that time, the father of the Dalai Lama acted kind of powerful and bossy [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་པོ]. Once, on the 2nd of the New Year, one of our servants was in the Potala. He probably didn't do anything, but the father of the Dalai Lama said that the servant looked at him angrily and had him imprisoned right away. [laughter] He was Kungö's [her husband's] servant, and he was called Samden Lhadar [Tib. བསམ་གཏན་ལྷ་དར]. After that, we had to tell the Dalai Lama's father, "The father of the Dalai Lama might have looked at him from his own perspective [Tib. གཟིགས་ཕྱོགས]. Actually, he didn't have anything in his mind." After about 2 days, he forgave him and he was released. So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> might have told him something, right? Otherwise, he wouldn't have done anything. [Gelek]: He issued the proclamation [against the father]. This was spread widely.   

**Q:**  I heard that the mother of the Dalai Lama, Gyeyum Chemmo [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡུམ་ཆེན་མོ], came to the Kashag. Did she come?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: Why did she come to the Kashag? [Yuthok]: Oh! yes, I heard that she came to the Kashag. This is correct. She claimed that the government was not supplying her needs well and she burst into tears. [Gelek]: Was that after the Gyeyab died? [Yuthok]: At that time, the Gyeyab was alive. The guardians [Tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> family were Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] and Dombor. She claimed that they didn't treat her well.   

**Q:**  I heard that this was the first time a woman had come to the Kashag, was that correct?   

**A:**  [Yuthok]: It was as you said, but she might have gone there inattentively [Tib. སྣང་མེད], because she didn't know much about the rules. She is not to be blamed, because Shasur and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> couldn't understand her language well when she was speaking the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> dialect.   

**Q:**  Did she speak the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> dialect or Chinese?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: They didn't speak the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> dialect. They just spoke a strange language, like Siling Chinese.   

**Q:**  It wasn't Tibetan, right?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: No. In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> family, they would speak a strange language which sounds like ta ta ta. Even now they speak that language. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Lobsang Samdenla [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན་ལགས] spoke good central Tibetan language, right?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: They came to Tibet in their childhood, but usually when they gathered together they spoke their own language. It wasn't real Chinese. It was kind of a nauseating [Tib. སྐྱུག་བྲོ་པོ] Qinghai dialect.   

