# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0081.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Thubden Wangpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་དབང་པོ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 8 July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Thubden Wangpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་དབང་པོ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 60  
**Date of Birth:** 1932  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Wangpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་དབང་པོ] was a monk official in the Tibetan government who went to Beijing in 1953 on a tour and remained there, entering the Central Nationalities Institute, where he taught Tibetan for decades. In this interview, he discusses going to the Tibetan Government's monk official school (Tse labdra) and becoming a monk official. He also discusses going to Beijing on a tour in 1953 and then remaining there to teach Tibetan at the Central Nationalities Institute.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0081_02/H_0081_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  This is how I first became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ] The school for training monk officials in the Potala that was run by the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office.">Tse labdra</a> student. The government could take monks as a tax [Tib. ཏྲཇ] from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> and from mushi jogsum. From each monastery, (the government) could conscript a certain number of students for the Tse labdra school. This number was divided between the various colleges and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> [in each monastery]. There were also other village monasteries in Lhoka that send <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> to the Tse labdra. These monasteries were called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> tsogpa [Tib. རྩེ་ཚོགས་པ]. So before I became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, I became a Tse labdra student. In my case, once when there was a traja, Gungru Khamtsen [Tib. གུང་རུ་ཁང་ཚན] of Ganden sent a monk to the Tse labdra. While in Tse labdra, he fell out of a window and died, so the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> office wrote to Gungru Khamtsen many times saying that your monk in Tse labdra has died so send a replacement. But Gungru Khamtsen was poor, had only a few monks, all of whom were northern nomads (Tib. ཧོར [ཧོར]) so they had no more clever kids to send and they weren't able to send a replacement for 3 years. At this time, my father was a Tseja Chola [rtse phyag jo lags] [clerk in the Tseja] and he came to hear about this. So he went to the Khamtsen and asked if they would accept his son [me] as their nominee for the Tse labdra. They said fine. I didn't immediately become a monk. At Monlam, the Khamtsen monks lived at Paljor Rabten [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་རབ་བརྟན). It wasn't a big house and only held about 40-50 people. At this time, my family gave a tshomja to the Khamtsen monks and put Tse labdra clothes on me. Tse labdra students wore a red chupa and ཨ་སོགཤ [Tib. སོག་ཞྭ] hat. So that is how I got into the Tse labdra. It was sort of "backdoor" [Tib. ལྟག་སྒོ], but not exactly. For the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་བབ་སྤྱན་ཞུ] The ceremony at which candidates for a position present themselves before officials (or the Dalai Lama/Regent) so that the higher officials can see firsthand what the candidate looks like. A visual inspection of candidates.">mibab jenshu</a>, one needs a candidate that is alert, clever and has no defects in senses. So since Gungru (Khamtsen) was all Hor (nomads) and had no clever monks to send [I was sent]. Historically, it is said that the 5th Dalai Lama started the Tse labdra. Then it is said a fire broke out, an then the 7th Dalai Lama started it again and had a monastery constitution (Tib. ཇཡིག [བཅའ་ཡིག]) made up.   

**Q:**  When did you become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ] The school for training monk officials in the Potala that was run by the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office.">Tse labdra</a> student? Was it before the Sera War?   

**A:**  In the 40s. When the Sera war started, I was already in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ] The school for training monk officials in the Potala that was run by the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office.">Tse labdra</a> [so it was before 1947]. I was about 14 when the Sera war started. The monks conscripted as Traja didn't have to give any money gifts. There was another category who asked to join and gave gifts-used their own funds-these were known as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a>. Those who were conscripted were known as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་པ] The name for the students in the Tse labdra school who were recruited by conscription from specified monasteries to be trained to become monk officials.">shungba</a>. There weren't many gerpa students since the school was extremely strict. If a gerpa student joined, he had to give tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མ་འབྲས་སིལ] A special dish consisting of sweetened rice, melted butter and wild sweet potatoes (gro ma).">droma dresi</a> to all the students and teachers as was the Tibetan custom when joining a private school [in Lhasa]. Our teachers were an official from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> office, and one older monk from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> [Tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] monastery called Lodrö Chösang [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་ཆོས་བཟང]. He was very learned and lived in Sharchenjog. The school taught grammar (Tib. སུམ་རྟགས), spelling [Tib. ངག་སྒྲོན], and a famous letter written by Nagarjuna [Tib. བཞེས་སྤྲིངས]. The Yigtsang official only taught calligraphy. The full name of Tse labdra was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Rigne Labdra Chemmo [Tib. རྩེ་རིག་གནས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ]. There were only two government set up schools: the Tse labdra and the Tsigang. Before I went to the Tse labdra I had studied privately at the Nyarongshar [Tib. ནང་རོང་ཤག] school. The strict customs of the Tse labdra were all written in its constitution (jayig). When I entered school, the others in that class had already finished 3 years, so I was behind. ... The Tse labdra was an avenue for poor monks to become powerful <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>. For example, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Temba Jayan [Tib. བཀའ་བློན་བླ་མ་བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར] both started as Traja monks. Dombor's father was an adrung. My parents told me,"Study hard and be good and later you will become a kudrak and help your family and relatives." I was a shungba, so I didn't have to do anything for the monastery. The monks who came from monasteries were poor, not like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> and rich monks. I was from a middle class family. Many such families made their kids monks with the hope of having them become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, but also many did not, since the discipline was very strict and there were many beatings. Most of the Traja were just common monks (Tib. ཏྲམང [གྲྭ་དམང]). For example, one boy got so many beatings that he was unable to bear it and jumped out of the window. The discipline was so strict that we couldn't stand up higher than the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒན་བདག] A senior student placed in charge of other students.">genda</a>'s waist when he was present. And when the teacher was present we couldn't rise above his knees. So we were bent over. [This was when we met them walking, etc.] In the early morning we had to go to school at three a.m. and start by saying prayers. If a student arrived after the first prayer, he got 3 nyugja hits. If you came during the last prayer, you get deja [Tib. རྟ་ལྕག] with a leather strap on the thigh. We didn't wear pants at Tse labdra, only the meyog. They had a way of wrapping their robe around their feet and in a way that the deflected the main force of the deja hit. ... The Tse labdra and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a> taught Tibetan religious texts, but the other schools just taught calligraphy. [Trindor says at his school which was called rgyal sgo gtong (the name of a house in the Ramoche [Tib. རྭ་མོ་ཆེ] area) they taught math. Nyarongshar was a different school. It was first ka kha [alphabet], then ka shib [Tib. ཀ་ཞིབ] then tshug shib [Tib. ཚུགས་ཞིབ], then genyog [Tib. རྒན་གཡོག], then genda (different scripts and writing styles). At Nyarongshar when you wanted to move up to another level, you had to write a petition to the teacher just like government, so when you were completed with school you could write government style petitions well. The poor kids sat under the stairs. The chola's kids sat on the steps and the aristocrat's kids sat upstairs with the teacher.   

**Q:**  Did they teach any history or modern subjects in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ] The school for training monk officials in the Potala that was run by the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office.">Tse labdra</a>?   

**Q:**  No. ... but when I went to Peking to study, they did. In Tibet, neither in the monastery nor in private schools did they teach books. Normally they just taught the shape of letters [Tib. ཡིག་གཟུགས]. For example, the book miwang togjö [Tib. མི་དབང་རྟོགས་བརྗོད] was not allowed to be distributed by the government. It was forbidden [Tib. སྤངས].   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  I am not sure, probably because it talks about Tibet and China a lot.   

**Q:**  How long is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ] The school for training monk officials in the Potala that was run by the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office.">Tse labdra</a> course.   

**A:**  Mine was 6 yrs, but there was no limit. It depended on your "backdoor" connections. If you had backdoor connections and a good patron (Tib. གོནདྲེན [མགོ་འདྲེན]), then you could make <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> in 4 years. In you had no backdoor, you could wait for years. There were some older students in their 30s-40s who were still in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> labdra. For example, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> was the best kind of gondren. Monks and monasteries were under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>, and the Yigtsang chemmo [Tib. ཡིག་ཚང་ཆེན་མོ] ("also called yangchen") was also done by the Yigtsang. It had 16 kinds of writing styles such as hor yig [Tib. ཧོར་ཡིག], lanza, and urdu. This text the Dalai Lama examined. These we had to learn in a month (before the exam). We just learned the shapes of the letters, not the meanings. On the right and left [of the exam] these scripts were used, and in the middle there was Tibetan. The paper [on which these were written] was big, about the size of a door. After we showed it to the Dalai Lama, we each got a roll of woolen woven cloth. Only the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་པ] The name for the students in the Tse labdra school who were recruited by conscription from specified monasteries to be trained to become monk officials.">shungba</a> got this, not the aristocrats. In the Tse labdra there was only 1 aristocratic students while I was there in school for 6 years.   

**Q:**  Did they give you food?   

**A:**  No. You had to get it on your own or from family. We made it ourselves. We ate some tea and bag. If your family was wealthy, they might bring you some foodstuffs.. There was also a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> labdra. The private applicants appealed to the Yigtsang for entrance into the Yigtsang labdra. The Yigtsang labdra carried with it <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> status. There was also a school in the Tsigang [for laymen]. They were called tsidru [rtsis phrug].   

**Q:**  Did they teach you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡེའུ] The traditional method of Tibetan arithmetic that uses a board and a variety of items like beans, sticks and stones.">diu</a>?   

**A:**  No. We learned mainly Tibetan culture [Tib. བོད་རིག་གནས], but not all. We learned some astrology [skar rtsis](about what could be done on different days). The early morning tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> chant melody [Tib. གདང] [in the prayer meeting] is different from that used in Sendregasum. It [the prayer meeting] lasts about 1 hour. Then we went to our rooms and ate. Then we went to school and then ate the noon meal. I was put in by parents with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> teacher, so I ate with him. My home sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and other foods, but some kid's families gave money to the person they left their kids with. Some of these adults there had 2-3 kids eating with them. I stayed with several different people during my 6 years. We studied texts before the dinner meal.   

**Q:**  Did you have vows at this time?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ] The school for training monk officials in the Potala that was run by the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office.">Tse labdra</a> students were supposed to be monks with vows (rabjung or domba), but I didn't have anything. If you slept with women you were expelled. That was called trapa log [Tib. གྲྭ་པ་ལོག].   

**Q:**  While you were a student there did you have any relations with the Khamtsen [that sent you]?   

**A:**  No, but at Mönlam my family sometimes would give the Khamtsen a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོམས་ཇ] A prayer assembly meeting of a Khamtsen at which tea is served to the participating monks.">tshomja</a> with tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and alms.   

**Q:**  Did the Khamtsen give you a share of the alms?   

**A:**  No. It was the poorest <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> in Ganden Monastery, so it didn't. I heard that the richer ones did. After my handwriting became good, while I was still a student, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> used to send things to me to copy. Then after some years I became a tsidrung. At that time the Dalai Lama was in Yadrung. To do this I had to send a petition and a better <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf to the Yigtsang with examples of my writing like an exam. Then I went for the mibab jenshu. There you just stand. You don't do anything but look dignified. Then after a few days they said yes or no. Basically it depended on giving money to the Yigtsang's Drunyichemmo. Some students went many times and never got it. The first time I went up [to become a monk official] I didn't get it, but all the others in that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> got accepted as monk officials. So I stayed one year as a proctor (genda) in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> labdra. Then the next year I got it, but it wasn't worth much since the society was in turmoil. So there was the [new] Socialist School (Tib. ཇིཙོ་ལབདྲ [སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ]) and I decided to join it as one of the first three students. This was in 1952...[Trindorla-The Socialist School had both students who didn't like the government and those who were poor and needed money. Some also were older. The first thing they did was start a jitso bu'u-- police office-they hired Tibetans to sit around tea houses and listen to what was said. Lot of poor people were recruited for this.] At first we studied in a tent. There was a good Chinese teacher who taught us Chinese. By the time I went to China, the school had increased to 5. I thought that now things were changing and the Chinese were going to be in power and there would be a change in society so I thought it would be good to go to China.   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> send you to school?   

**A:**  No. If you went to the Chinese school it was considered terrible. They would never send you. I did it on my own. When I went to China I did it secretly. At this time I had no home. My parents had died and I was living with a relative. I joined the Youth Association [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོགས་པ] [the full name was Gyeje Shönu Sherig Thündrog Tsogpa [rgyal gces gzhon nu shes rig mthun grogs tshogs pa] and secretly went to China. I sent a letter from Metrogongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] to my uncle saying I have gone to China. My uncle didn't treat me well. If my parents were alive and we were okay in income, I doubt I would have gone. I had no thoughts of being a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and getting a high position and staying with the old government. I thought it was best to join the sarje (revolution) so I did this right from the start. So I went to China through the Youth Association. [Trindorla--at this time most were not real youths but mostly were adults]. This was a tour to see China. I joined the Youth Association in 1951. The first Visiting Delegation (Tib. ཏགོར་ཙོགཔ [ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ]) was called the "Gift Presenting Group" (Tib. དེནབུལ་ཙོགཔ [རྟེན་འབུལ་ཚོགས་པ]) because Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] was to give Mao a scarf]. Liushar was the (head of the group) (Tib. ཙོགཙོ [ཚོགས་གཙོ]). The second tour was the Youth Association Tour. That was us. When we reached Chamdo, Liushar was returning. Ngawang Thöndrub [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ] went to China in 1951. They [his colleagues] went without any [special] name for their group. In my group, most returned after the visit, but I stayed. They said if you want to return go or if you want to go to school here you can stay. Our leader was Shölkang Thubden Nyima [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉི་མ].   

**Q:**  Weren't you ever assigned to an office as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> official.   

**A:**  They sent me to the Construction Office [Tib. ཨར་པོ་ལས་ཁུངས], but I was already a student and didn't go.   

**Q:**  Did you ask the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> to do this [become a student]?   

**A:**  No. Things were already chaotic so I didn't. If you asked the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>, they would say you couldn't go, so no one asked them. It taught Chinese only and was located next to the Tibet Cadre school [Tib. བོད་ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ]. Later when there were many students it was called the "Socialist School," (jitsho labdra).   

**Q:**  How did you know about the school?   

**A:**  I had a friend from Lhalung Surje [Tib. ལྷ་ལུང་ཟུར་ལྕི] called Lodola [Tib. བློ་རྡོར་ལགས]. He said there is a Chinese teacher who spoke good Tibetan and was teaching Chinese and I'm going, so if you want to learn Chinese, why don't you go. So I went with him. No one said go there, nor did the Chinese invite people to go. I went quietly on my own.   

**Q:**  Was there salary?   

**A:**  Not when I was going. Later, there must have been. Before I left China, my teacher [from Lhasa] came to China. He was one of many researchers sent to Tibet to investigate customs. They were dressed in soldiers clothes but really weren't soldiers. Later in China I realized that he wasn't a soldier. He was actually a genyen [layman with vows] and married. Yu Dashan's younger brother was in this group.   

**Q:**  Where did your livelihood come from then?   

**A:**  From my family. From my maternal uncle. He was the head of the Post office (Tib. དྲཀང [བྲག་ཁང]) at Trapchi. While I was in China, the 1959 uprising occurred and my maternal uncle fled to India. So the household's things were all left there. So the neighborhood [office] wrote me that your uncle has fled and his possessions are here. But I didn't answer as I was afraid that I would we dragged in and considered a reactionary [Tib. ཞྭ་མོ].   

**Q:**  What did people think in Lhasa in 1951 about all the events.   

**A:**  There were only two thoughts. One that revolution (sarje) was good. The poor would rise and all would be equal in livelihood. The other said it was terrible if there was revolution (Tib. སརྗེ [གསར་བརྗེ]). This split occurred in China as well. Youths like change and so I thought it was good to join the Youth Association. Others thought that if I don't join I will be left behind, so did so. My thought was that if I go to China it will be fun. They give food, and I'll go to school. I didn't have any great, long-term profound plans. I thought it would be fun and useful since unless you knew spoken and written Chinese later it would be hard to find good work. Most information on politics came from Muslims in tea houses. They had radios and so knew a little. Otherwise there was not much news.   

**Q:**  Did you know what the 17-Point Agreement was?   

**A:**  I had heard about it, but did not know what it contained. I was young, so only thought of going to China. I was about 20 years old then.   

**Q:**  Was there a newspaper?   

**A:**  There was only the Kalimpong newspaper of Tharchin Babu [Tib. མཐར་ཕྱིན་སྦ་སྦུ].   

**Q:**  Did people say you were a red, etc?   

**A:**  Yes. But not to my face. The kids who went to school were called "dolai <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a>" and "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> labdra" (dayan students) [Tib. རྡ་ཡང་སློག་གྲྭ་བ].   

**Q:**  How long did you live in China?   

**A:**  36 years. All my Chinese students were excellent in Tibetan. In 1955 I came to Tibet bringing my students for practical training. At this time the reforms hadn't been done so we couldn't stay with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>, but on a second such trip after [democratic] reforms after 1959] the students stayed with the miser. ... They asked me to stay for one year in Trungshö [Ch. zhong xue] [the 1st middle school in Lhasa] so I did teaching there. It was about 1957. There were about 30 in my Tour Group that went to China in 1952. The heads of the Tour delegation [Tib. ཚོགས་གཙོ] were Surkhang Khenjung [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་མཁན་ཆུང], Shölkang Jedrungla [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང] (Thubden nyima), <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> Thöndrub [Tib. ཀ་ཤོས་དོན་གྲུབ]. He committed suicide during the Cultural Revolution. The people were from all regions of Tibet like Shigatse and Chamdo and Lhoka. Each of these had a leader [Tib. ཚོགས་གཙོ].   

**Q:**  Where did you visit?   

**A:**  Inner Mongolia, the Northeast and Shanghai. The trip took about 1 month.   

**Q:**  What propaganda did they tell you?   

**A:**  The point was to show how good China was so the youth would go back and tell others how great China was and that what other people had said was lies. I decided not to return but to go to school at the Minorities Institute (Tib. མིརིག་ལབདྲ [མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ]). At first I was a student, then they needed a Lhasa speaker to teach Tibetan and they insisted I do this for a month. I kept saying no since I wanted to study Chinese. Finally I agreed to do it for 1 year. So I only studied in school for 6 mos. So that is how I became a teacher. Ngawang Thöndrub introduced me. So I learned my Chinese from my students. In 1959 I did some research on linguistics.   

