# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0110.01   
##  : with Jia Zhangpu   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China  
**Date of Interview:** 2001  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Jia Zhangpu  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1931  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jia Zhangpu was a member of the 18th Army of the PLA. He discusses his hometown and his motives behind joining the army. He talks about various things he did while in the military such as carrying cars over rivers and entering Tibet. He discusses what happened once they reached Lhasa.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0110_01/H_0110_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell me about your life in the 18th Army when you were young. The more detailed, the better. We will treat this as the focus (of the interview)   

**A:**  Many of the people (who used to work with me) have already died.   

**Q:**  Where is your hometown?   

**A:**  Qinghai.   

**Q:**  You are 70 years old this year?   

**A:**  We came to Lhasa from Qinghai. We entered Tibet in 1954.   

**Q:**  How old were you at that time?   

**A:**  I was about 23.   

**Q:**  Is your hometown in the countryside?   

**A:**  Yes, we were farmers. I joined the army in 1951.   

**A:**  How did you join the army? Voluntarily or...?   

**A:**  Yes, voluntarily. It used to be the Qinghai Military Command of the 1st Field Army. The Northwest Army used to be the 1st Field Army. At that time Hu Bingyuan was the army commander. Liao Hansheng was the political commissar.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in your family at that time?   

**A:**  Four brothers. I am the youngest and naughtiest. My sister-in-law was not nice to me, so I joined the army and came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did your family agree (with you joining the army?)   

**A:**  I ran away. My sister-in-law was not nice to me. In March 1951, we were training to be prepared to fight Americans and support Korea. I was in the logistics and health department. At that time Peng Dehuai was the commander-in-chief. Wang Ping became the political commissar after he came back . We retreated after the truce was signed. I was 18 years old then. I worked at Liu Shou qu (Stay and Guard Department, a function of the army that takes care of the families of officers.) There is a Liu Shou qu in every army. A guy called Liu Xilue from Shanxi was very nice and told me "go back to Yuanji Town; it'd be better for you." That's what happened. So I came back to Yuanji in Qinghai. Counter-revolutionary activities were quelled in 1952 and those who were with Liu Shou qu were organized into the public security force of Qinghai.   

**Q:**  Oh, reorganized?   

**A:**  Became part of the official army. There was a 55th Division at that time in Qinghai. It started in 1953. The Qinghai-Tibet road was to be opened in 1954. We, the public security middle column, was also ruled by the army. We ourselves were army. We were organized into the Northwest Zizhi Ying (autonomous battalion).   

**Q:**  Northwest Zizhi Ying?   

**A:**  Northwest Zizhi Ying. We were with Fan Ming at that time. We bought horses and donkeys. Camels from Yongqing, and donkeys from Qinghai. The situation in Qinghai was very complicated then. The Defeated army of the Guomingdang (were still there). We left in July [1951].   

**Q:**  July?   

**A:**  We had ten donkeys. Soldiers had nothing (valuable). In Germu [Golmud] we were ready to go. It took us about seven months [to reah Lhasa].   

**A:**  Nearly a year.   

**A:**  It was unbearable! When we crossed the rivers, we removed the tires and carried (automobiles) over (the rivers.)   

**Q:**  (What happened) When you crossed the big rivers?   

**A:**  It was possible to move on when we reached Yang Ba Jing. There was no road. The battles were not fought yet. There were lots of local armed gangs.   

**Q:**  So you entered (Tibet) that way, from that side?   

**A:**  Yes, from that side. A part [of the PLA] came from Xinjiang. A part came from Yunnan.   

**Q:**  Yes. From Sichuan...   

**A:**  Yes, they were officially organized into the 18th Army under command of Tan Guansan... How did we come? Tibetan Working Committee. Then the Central Government had a Tibetan Working Committee.   

**Q:**  Tibetan Working Committee? Yes.   

**A:**  On December 14, 1954 the road to Tibet opened. And we arrived, too.   

**Q:**  You arrived at Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. Peng Dehuai made a promise to the Central Government. Peng Dehuai was from the Northwest (Army). He Long was from the Southwest (Army). They both made a promise (to complete the construction of the road to the central government). Fan Ming was a Shao Jiang (junior general). Mo Shengren was a Shao Jiang. They were both from the northwest, from Shannxi Province. I was with the Shehui Bu (Social Affairs Department) at that time.   

**Q:**  Shehui Bu?   

**A:**  Yes. I was young and had nothing to worry about. In the Shehui Bu, there was nothing (to do). We planned to be stationed in a place called Lu Gu which was near the (current) People's Hospital. Local people blocked the way and didn't let us go. We had to go along the valleys. Big vehicles couldn't pass. So we used smaller vehicles.   

**Q:**  Oh, smaller vehicles could pass?   

**A:**  Yes. When we reached Lhasa, it didn't work again. But we were in good spirits.   

**Q:**  In very good physical condition?   

**A:**  We were very simple-minded and did not think much. We were Young people. I had no health problems except that my eyes were not good. Later, behind the Potala Palace (woman called in the background)... The Public Relations Department made speeches there... There was a square in the front (of the Potala Place) and a tent was set up there. The road [to China] was opened in 1954, and a tent was set up (for the purpose of the event).   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  ...The Panchan was back in Tibet... The Central Government was doing the work of united front and many minority personages in Tibet were united.... We began to buy houses at that time. Some were used by the Tibetan Work Committee [xizang gong wei]... I never left the Shehui Bu. In 1957 (I) was demobilized. (My superior said) if you want to go back (to your hometown), go back; if you don't want to, you can work in Lhasa. I didn't want to go back. Song Ziyuan was the head of the Shehui Bu. I can't remember the names of many (who used to work at Shehui Bu.) Roughly speaking, that's it. I will not talk about the difficulties.... ...I was assigned to do the She Gai (socialist transformation) work after we cracked down on the rebels. ...in 1961 ... Hou Jie was the head of the Engineering and Transportation Department. Wang Xiaori was the director of the office. The staff of the Qing Guan Ju (Qinghai-Tibet Highway Administration Bureau) was moved to the Engineering and Transportation Department.... Concrete roads were built in 1961. Our first stop was Qu County. Have you heard about it?   

**Q:**  Well, probably.   

**A:**  Our first stop was La Zi. There was no road to La Zi. We were going to Qu County via La Zi. We lived in the monasteries. At that time, there was no one living in the monasteries. (The monasteries) were old and no one lived there. We built a garrison. ... We went to Dingri. We built the road all the way to Nyelam. I came back after (the road) was completed... (Construction) Workers were recruited from Henan, northeast China (to build the road.) Workers were poor. I lived with the army and had a better life. I did not have a big salary. It was 25 yuan and 51 fen (a month.) There were changes during the Cultural Revolution. (Talked to woman.) I was moved to Ba Yi.   

**Q:**  Ba Yi?   

**A:**  Yes, I went to Yang Hu Station in Ba Yi. The old woman (his wife) was a worker at that time. Ba Yi was a bit better. (We) had better food and everything else was better.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  1956. No, in 1966. The Cultural Revolution started in 1966, 1967, 1968 and 1969. Later in the Cultural Revolution, after the Lin Biao (incident) occurred in 1971...   

**Q:**  Yes, 1971.   

**A:**  After the Lin Biao (incident) in 1971, we began the "three combinings" in Yang Hu -- combining with the revolutionary cadres, combining with two factions , and combining with the army. I was involved in the "three combinings." (That) got me to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Linzi?   

**A:**  1966, 1967 ... I stayed there for seven years. At that time, many classes of the autonomous region (to educate officials) were held there. Many people did not come back, including people of the Transportation Department. Hou was on good terms with me. He's from Henan. He did not come with the 18th Army. He came later. He transferred me to Lhasa. After we came to Lhasa ... I was compensated seven or eight thousand yuan in salary .... In 1980, there was no transportation bureau in Lhasa yet. No such a thing. The Fang Jian Dui (Prevention and Inspection Team of Road) and the transportation bureau were together.... City Construction Bureau (ju). No, it was the City Construction Department (ke). Ma Haizheng was director of the department. There were three teams under the department. I was a team leader. Yes, (it was) the City Construction Department. I have a good memory of it. The City Construction Bureau was established later. There were two bureaus (that were established later): the City Construction Bureau and Transportation Bureau. The deputy director of the Public Security Bureau became the head of the Transportation Bureau. He was Meng Xiaozhu.   

**Q:**  Meng Xiaozhu? He later became the deputy director of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry Department.   

**A:**  Many of us became leaders...   

**A:**  ...I worked for 39 years in total. I retired in 1985. ... Tan Guansan was the political commissar when we came to Lhasa. It was then Zhang Guohua. Then Tan Guansan and Zhang Jingwu ... Wang Qiming ... Cheng Mingyi... They were lieutenant generals. Qiao Xueqing was the head of the 53rd Division... The rebellion broke out on March 16, 1955 and was quelled... They (army) did not fire canons at the top of the hill (where the Potala Place is located). Some [cannons] were fired at the foot of the hill...   

**Q:**  Very good. The stories are precious...   

