# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0056.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Phüntso Tashi (Phundra) [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས (ཕུན་བཀྲ)]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** 4 May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein, Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Phüntso Tashi (Phundra) [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས (ཕུན་བཀྲ)]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 69  
**Date of Birth:** 1924  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Phundra [Tib. ཕུན་བཀྲ] was a Tibetan who grew up in Qinghai and became an important translator for the Chinese Communist Party in Tibet. In this interview, he discusses disagreements between Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, Tan Guansan, and Fan Ming, and about the Panchen Lama's relations with the CCP and Fan Ming support of the Panchen Lama. He describes the character of the different kalön, and how Zhang Jingwu sent messages to the Dalai Lama and vice versa, and about the Sino-Indian Treaty of 1954. Finally, he talks about how Zhou Enlai told the Dalai Lama to return to Tibet when he went for the Buddha Jayanti celebrations, and about Chairman Mao's instructions for implementing the reforms, and how he met Lobsang Samden (the Dalai Lama's brother).   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0056_02/H_0056_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Among those 3-4 Chinese leaders such as Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, Alo Buzhang, etcetera, in Tibet, were there differences in how they thought about what should be done on matters like implementing the Party's policy on Tibet, or regarding the explanation and the implementation of the 17-Point Agreement, including the matters regarding the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>?   

**A:**  At that time, Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, Tan Guansan, and Fan Ming were the main leaders. Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan had no disagreements. Alo Buzhang was not among the leaders [Tib. དཔོན་པོ], he was just a director [Ch. bu zhang]. Mainly, it was Fan Ming.   

**Q:**  Fan Ming belonged to the Northwest Bureau [Ch. xi bei ju], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When he had to make reports, he had to report through the Northwest Bureau, right?   

**A:**  When they had to make the reports to the Central Committee, the Northwest and Southwest Bureaus both had relations. When they had to report to the Central Committee, they would probably send them directly to the Central Committee and a copy would be sent to the Southwest Bureau.   

**Q:**  Did they also send a copy to the Northwest Bureau?   

**A:**  They probably had to send a copy to the Northwest also.   

**Q:**  Fan Ming belonged to the Northwest, right?   

**A:**  He came from that direction, but after he came to Tibet, he was no longer Northwest. Normally [Tib. ལུགས་མཐུན] they were not allowed to have that relationship and they had to unite [into one]. This was the main point of Fan Ming, and later the contradiction became more and more clear. It was written in 1988 that they had had to demote him.   

**Q:**  It started from that time, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they went through the motions of starting it from that time. We were just ordinary cadres. In 1958, Fan Ming was subjected to struggle sessions. Since then, it happened gradually. Before that, I didn't know about that. I used to think that Fan Ming's behavior was not quite right from early on.   

**Q:**  What kind of behavior do you mean?   

**A:**  The main thing was before the liberation of Tibet, the Panchen Lama lived in Qinghai. On October 1, 1949, the Panchen Lama sent a telegram to Chairman Mao and Commander-in-Chief Zhu [De] [Ch. zhu zong si ling] saying, "It is good [that you have been able to establish a new government], and I will rejoice and abide [Tib. ཡི་རངས་གོང་བཀུར] by whatever you leaders have said. Please liberate Tibet at an early time [Tib. སྔ་ཙམ]."   

**Q:**  Did he tell them to implement the democratic reform at an early time?   

**A:**  No, he didn't.   

**Q:**  He told them to send the People's Liberation Army, right?   

**A:**  He told them, "Please liberate Tibet." At this time, he should be regarded as kind of a progressive one, but the main policy line of the Central Committee was to place the Dalai Lama as the main one in Tibet, though they didn't clearly mention about the power and the fame. "The Panchen Lama has a sense [Tib. གཡའ] of progressiveness, so we should accept and trust [Tib. ཆ་འཇོག] him. This is what the Central Committee said." But Fan Ming's idea was probably that the Panchen Lama should be raised up and the Dalai Lama to be pressed down. Fan Ming was not a man of great intelligence [Tib. ཆུ་ཚད་མཐོ་པོ]. At that time, I was the only person who acted as his interpreter. When Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were not in Lhasa, Fan Ming was mostly there. So sometimes Fan Ming went to talk with the Dalai Lama. He would go to tell Dalai Lama about something and ask for his instruction and advice [Tib. བཀའ་སློབ་མཛུབ་སྟོན; Ch. zhi shi]. In 1954, the Dalai Lama went to China. He knew a little of the Chinese language. The Dalai Lama's thinking was that of a progressive [Tib. ཡར་ཐོན]. Once Fan Ming and the Dalai Lama had a talk and the Dalai Lama said, "You shouldn't ask me for instruction [Ch. zhi shi zhi shi]." Fan Ming wanted to raise the Panchen Lama higher with the hope of raising his own title and for his own material gain. When Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were not there, he used to go see the Dalai Lama and ask the Dalai Lama for instructions and advice. When Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were there, they never spoke to the Dalai Lama like this. They just said, "Regarding this matter, what is your remarks or opinions [Tib. དགོངས་འཆར]?" They never asked him for instructions or advice. Fan Ming was always asking him for instructions. He was trying to use the Dalai Lama, if he could, for his own gain, and to increase his power and to raise his position.   

**Q:**  According to your point of view, did Fan Ming have an excessively leftist view?   

**A:**  Fan Ming was very changeable. He was trying to elevate the Panchen Lama for his own rank and status. When the two Zhangs were not there and when he was alone in Lhasa, he would go to see the Dalai Lama and tell him those unnecessary things, asking for instruction. I think that he was trying to stick to the Dalai Lama's side for his own gain, like getting a promotion. Later Fan Ming suffered [with] struggle sessions and made a severe decision [Tib. ཐག་གཅོད] which was a little bit too severe. Fan Ming made mistakes in his work. Fan Ming's work was not in accordance with the instructions of the Central Committee. Now I sometimes meet Fan Ming. He is old. But it is strange that he is thinking in the same [manner] as in the past.   

**Q:**  Did the kalön have the thought of opposing the 17-Point Agreement or implementing it? After the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were demoted, in about 1955, what was their thinking?   

**A:**  There were various kinds of thoughts. As for Ngabö, I don't have to comment on [him]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> was not a deep thinker [Tib. དགོངས་པ་ཞེ་དྲག་མ་བཞེས་མཁན]. Surkhang was very tricky [Tib. མགོ་བདེ་པོ]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was very old and he was not someone who would assume a lot of responsibility [Tib. ཐུགས་འགན་ཞེ་དྲད་མ་བཞེས་མཁན]. So the main actors were Surkhang and Ngabö. Surkhang was very diplomatic [Tib. མཁས་པོ] and would call Ngabö "brother [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས]" [laughter] when they met. Ngabö was a little bit older. Surkhang was very tricky. When we went to meet him at his house, first we had to speak to his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར] A steward, administrative manager, aide.">drönyer</a> at the door. We were doing it according to custom and told him, "I want to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a>, please report this to him." When Surkhang heard this, he would come running to us [laughter] and say "Oh, Phüntso Tashila, you don't have to act like this. We are close, you can come right in." He was also shrewd in his work.   

**Q:**  What was his thinking, like deep inside?   

**Q:**  It was probably kind of complicated, right?   

**A:**  He was thinking about opposing [the Communists] as much he could. Surkhang's real sentiments were completely exposed [Tib. རྐུབ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་རྡོལ] in the 1959 revolt. He appeared very diplomatic, but when we watched him from the side, we could see that some things always got revealed. So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, Drönyerchemmo and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> had connections. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was not that kind of person. He was just speaking in a thoughtless and disorderly manner [Tib. ཏོ་རོ་མོ་རོ]. Therefore, it stirred up trouble [Tib. མདའ་དཀྲུག་ཕུ་དཀྲུག]. Lobsang Tashi didn't say much, so I don't know his personality. Surkhang was too tricky, he spoke well and nice, but he kept his feelings and thoughts to himself.   

**Q:**  According to my personal view, isn't Surkhang's way of acting considered expert-like in politics in terms of world standards? Weren't they called political experts?   

**A:**  No, they were not. If someone is really working on politics in a government, they would make a big plan, they don't do bad things behind one's back like plotting because if it would get exposed, then it would be shameful. In the world, the English were the most tricky on foreign politics, and they were very deceitful on the Hong Kong matter and said different things, but they didn't do anything excessive. If you do things different than what you say openly, then eventually you will get exposed and the world won't trust you.   

**Q:**  What was Gusung Depön Phüntso Tashi [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས] like?   

**A:**  I'm not sure about him.   

**Q:**  The Tibetans outside say Surkhang and Depön were the ones who wanted to implement the 17-Point Agreement, and they didn't like them. And Depön knew Chinese and had a lot of direct contact with Zhang Jingwu. Was that correct?   

**A:**  He didn't have much interaction with us. He wasn't close to us. The Tibetan government officials all had suspicions about each other. So they didn't dare come to us often. For example, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> didn't even go to visit each other because of these suspicions [of what others would think]. If they visited each other, it would become widespread right away. So they didn't come to us often. Zhang Jingwu used to invite Lobsang Samdenla [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན] often. He was the Jigyab Khembo. If Zhang Jingwu wanted to say something to the Dalai Lama, he would tell Lobsang Samdenla, "The Dalai Lama is studying scriptures for his Geshe Exam, so it was not easy to meet the Dalai Lama. Could you please tell him this?" Later, when our relations became better, the Dalai Lama would send us messages via Lobsang Samden. Phüntso Tashi [Depön] didn't come to us. We are from the same homeland, and he said we used to be students in the same school, but I don't remember that. I have something important to say. Phüntso Tashi was not that knowledgeable [Tib. ཤེས་བྱ་ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག] and he was not a learned [an educated] person [Tib. མཁྱེན་རྒྱ་ཆུང་ཆུང]. In 1954, the Central Committee talked with the Indian government regarding transportation and trade between India and Tibet. The talk was held between our Foreign Ministry and the Indian Ambassador in Beijing. I don't remember his name. He was a knowledgeable and nice person. And there was an agreement signed. In this [it said], all the Indian soldiers stationed in Tibet should be withdrawn, and the telegraph offices [Tib. ཏར་ཁང] and Post Bunglows [Hin. sbrag sbang ga lor] that were set up during the English rule were to be handed over to China. Actually, the Tibetan government should have taken possession of those things, but they couldn't. Later, all of those were handed over. So the Tibetan officials were very glad that this happened in 1954. The Dalai Lama also said that it was well done and he met about 100 high ranking Chinese military officers and gave them a party. This was in the Dalai Lama's name. Usually, the Dalai Lama was interested in shooting movies, so after dinner, movies were shown. Some of the movies were shot by the Dalai Lama and some of them were shot by Taring Lhajam [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང་ལྷ་ལྕམ]. The Dalai Lama himself showed the movies. The movie was shown from upstairs, and we didn't know who showed it. But when it was over, the Dalai Lama came down from upstairs and he asked me how the movie was. I told him, "It was good." And then he told me, "I showed the movie." [laughter] The Dalai Lama was very close to me. Once he said to me, "You are probably a kind-hearted [Tib. སེམས་བཟང་པོ] person with a sharp tongue [Tib. ཁ་གྱོང་པོ]." Sometimes, when he had something to tell Zhang Jingwu, he would tell me to report it. Sometimes, he also used to tell jokes to me. We were very close [Tib. ནང་ཚག]. Later he was a little bit angry with me.   

**Q:**  Did the Dalai Lama really have power? When I look from a distance, I doubt that the kalön would tell the Dalai Lama everything.   

**A:**  Before 1954, the Dalai Lama was doing preparations for his Geshe exam, so he didn't have a lot of time for work. Therefore, it was very rare that he himself made the decisions. When Zhang Jingwu would report something directly to the Dalai Lama, sometimes he would say, "Yes, I understand and I will tell the kalön. They will discuss and give you the answer." He didn't say anything definitively. After they signed the Agreement [between India] in 1954, the Dalai Lama had a great change in his mind, thinking that it was well done. He also went to China and met Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou, and he also went everywhere for an inspection tour. After he came back.   

**Q:**  If I don't use an honorific word, he became more open-minded, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he became much more open-minded after he went around in China. Since then, he didn't say that he would tell the kalön. This was a great change and the cause was the signing of the Sino-Indian Treaty and taking back the powers that were lost in the past.   

**Q:**  Didn't they withdraw the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</a>'s Office at that time? When did they withdraw them? Were they still there until 1959?   

**A:**  Later, that was converted into a consulate [Ch. ling shi guan].   

**Q:**  When did they change that?   

**A:**  That was probably in 1956.   

**Q:**  It was still there in 1959, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After the revolt there was a serious contradiction [disagreement]. So they withdrew theirs and we withdrew ours. They established a consulate in Lhasa and we opened an office, probably in Mumbai. Before that, the consulate was in Calcutta.   

**Q:**  There was an office in Kalimpong, right?   

**A:**  No, it was just a bureau [Tib. དོན་གཅོད]. It wasn't a consulate. It was a bureau dealing with trade. Later we set up a consulate in Calcutta, and it should be done equally so they also had to set up a consulate. So they set it up in Lhasa and we set up in Mumbai. After the revolt, there was a serious contradiction [disagreement]. Therefore, they withdrew their consulate in Lhasa and we withdrew ours in Mumbai. Even now they haven't set up their consulate in Lhasa. Probably, they might set it up gradually. At that time, there was a great change in the Dalai Lama's mind. Otherwise, I think he probably couldn't have gone to China in 1954 so easily.   

**Q:**  In 1954, there was probably some talk about implementing reforms in Tibet and the Panchen Lama said that they should do an experiment, right?   

**A:**  No, it was not in 1954; that was in 1956. In 1954, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama went to China. In 1955, there was a talk about Tibetan affairs and it was said that we should set up the Tibet Autonomous Region. They didn't give the name of the autonomy. If the autonomy was to be set up, there were the policies of the autonomy. They didn't fully implement the policy of the autonomy and Tibet was treated very specially. At this time, Che Jigme [Tib. ཅེ་འཇིགས་མེད] was there from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a>, and there was Ngabö and Surkhang. After the discussion it was said, "We must institute the Autonomous Region in Tibet. Before the Tibet Autonomous Region, we have to establish a Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region. If we set up the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, then we don't need to set up the Military Administrative Committee." The Military Administrative Committee haad been eliminated [Tib. བསྡུས] in other areas of China so we didn't need to set it up in Tibet. The Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region should have a little political power. All three units have the responsibility to discuss matters. At the opening of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, there was a meeting in Tibet and Chen Yi came from the Central Government. At this meeting the Nangmagang said, "The reforms should be implemented, this is our request." The Tibetan government didn't say anything. From the Chamdo side, there were some ministers [Tib. བློན་པོ] of the Derge Queen [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་བཙུན་མོ]. When they returned to Chamdo after the meeting, they went to the mountains and said that they were definitely going to oppose it.   

**Q:**  Wasn't <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgyela [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབ་གྱས] there at the meeting?   

**A:**  At this time, Tobgye was in Lhasa. When the ministers went to the mountains, they took the prince of Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་རྒྱལ་སྲས] with them. He is still alive. He was called Oga. I thought of asking him about this, but he didn't say anything clearly. He was probably feeling kind of ashamed. In 1956 there was a disturbance, and there were some criticisms [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] and an agreement was planned. This matter was important, so it was reported to the Central Committee. All of the Tibetan affairs were directly dealt with by the Central Government except the very small matters. Li Weihan was in charge of these small affairs and the United Front Bureau [Tib. ཏོང་ཞན་བུ] dealt with those things. The things that the United Front Bureau couldn't settle were reported to Zhou Enlai, and if he couldn't settle them, it was reported to Chairman Mao. Regarding the reforms was a major matter, so it was reported to Chairman Mao and he said, "Reforms should be postponed for awhile, don't hurry."   

**Q:**  Was that the decision for delaying the reforms for 6 years?   

**A:**  It was after that. There was probably no resolution. If there would have been a resolution, it would have been just a few words. Whether Mao agreed to an experiment of the reforms I don't remember clearly. At first, the ministers of the Derge Queen went to the mountains and Ngabö was sent to talk with them. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye also went there to tell them to come back. They told them, "Everything can be discussed."   

**Q:**  The reason for going to the mountains was that they were saying that they didn't want the democratic reforms, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was the point. For the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[hind. Buddha Jayanti] The 1956 celebration in India of the 2,500 anniversary of the death (nirvana) of the Buddha.">Buddha Jayanti</a>, Nehru made connections with the Central Committee and invited the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama to attend. The Central Committee said okay and they went to the meeting. When the Dalai Lama was in India, the People's Association was about to create a disturbance in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was that the time when they built a lot of sand bag bunkers in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they might have prepared [some by building sand bag bunkers]. The disturbance almost occurred though they couldn't do it. The reason the disturbance almost occurred was that the Dalai Lama was in India and they did that to make him stay in India. With the Dalai Lama in India, there were Ngabö and Surkhang. At this time, Gyalo Thondup and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> were with the Dalai Lama all of the time and they went wherever he went, and Ngabö and Shakabpa had a big argument.   

**Q:**  About what?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and those people said the 17-Point Agreement was not good, and especially the reforms should not be implemented. I was not there, so I don't know. They did a lot and tried to stop the Dalai Lama from going back. Premier Zhou went to Pakistan on a visit. Before going to Pakistan, he stopped in New Delhi. He met Gyalo Thondup and also met the kalön. Premier Zhou told the kalön, "You are planning to make the Dalai Lama stay in India. You have to think carefully. You consider the Dalai Lama as your deity [Tib. ལྷ], right? If he is a deity, he should remain in the temple. If you separate the deity from the temple, it will vanish. The Dalai Lama's temple is in Tibet. If he were to get separated from Tibet, temporarily they would go through the motions of using the Dalai Lama, but in the future, one day when they finish using him, they will kick him out."   

**Q:**  Did Zhou Enlai come to meet him especially or purposely?   

**A:**  He didn't come purposely. He came there on his way [Tib. ཞོར].   

**Q:**  Was that his first time coming to India? Once he also went to Nepal, right?   

**A:**  He mainly wemt to Pakistan. But he didn't come especially for this. I wasn't there.   

**Q:**  Li Zuomin was probably there?   

**A:**  Yes. Zhou definitely made these remarks.   

**Q:**  Did he tell that to the kalön?   

**A:**  Yes. Once after the revolt was quelled, Ngabö and the Panchen Lama had a meeting with Chairman Mao. Zhou Enlai was there. He said, "When the Dalai Lama was in India, I talked with the kalön and I told them to return to Tibet. This moved their minds very much and they went back to Tibet right away."   

**Q:**  Didn't they contact the Indian government directly?   

**A:**  I don't know about this.   

**Q:**  In 1954, there was a 3 month Party Conference in Beijing about Tibet, wasn't there?   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a meeting called "The Zhongyang Meeting on the work in Tibet [Ch. zhong yang xi zang gong zuo hui]?"   

**A:**  The meeting was called at the United Front Bureau. It was about Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming. They held the meeting for many days, but I don't know what the content was. They both went to Beijing. After Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming came back, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama went to Beijing. I don't know what the issue was about. What I said earlier about Fan Ming, those were my personal thoughts and you should be careful in writing about them.   

**Q:**  The 17-Point Agreement was a good agreement, but it ended up with the disturbance. Why did that happen? What are you thinking? Could things have been done differently from both sides?   

**A:**  The Central Government and Chairman Mao were really knowledgeable and correct on most of the principles, but I can't say they didn't have any errors. In 1957-58, the reforms were started in the Sichuan Tibetan minority areas and the Qinghai Tibetan minority areas. So the Tibetans there had close relations with Tibet since they were the same religion and nationality. At this time, Chairman Mao said, "When doing the reforms in Qinghai and Sichuan, and in particular when you are implementing the policy in Tibetan areas, you have to think about Tibet [about the implications for Tibet]. If the reforms go well or poorly in those places, it will have an influence in Tibet. It will also have an influence abroad. So you have to be careful." While the Central Government was saying that, the people at the lower level didn't put that policy into action and they went too far on the leftist ideology road, and the reforms went poorly. In the Sichuan Tibetan nationality areas and the Qinghai Tibetan nationality areas, things were done excessively leftist. So some of the chiefs who had titles [Tib. དཔོན་འགོ] ran away to Tibet. Some of them were not chiefs, they were just their subordinates. They also went to Tibet. Therefore, the revolt in Tibet was pushed by them. Otherwise, Tibetans alone wouldn't have been able to launch the revolt. This is what I am thinking. Because of this, the revolt occurred in Tibet and it was mainly because they were unable to put Mao's views into action well.   

**Q:**  This is my personal opinion. When the liberation was done in Kham, they could no longer stay there and came up to Tibet. In 1950 when the People's Liberation Army came into Tibet, why didn't the Khambas oppose them then?   

**A:**  First, they couldn't do that because, at that time, the most powerful were the Guomindang, but they couldn't handle the People's Liberation Army, how could they? The whole nation was liberated and they [Khambas] were suppressed [Tib. མནན་བཞག]. So how could they move them? Could they dare to oppose [them]? No, they couldn't. Secondly there was a good policy by the People's Liberation Army. Later, although the Zhongyang policy was not changed, they could not implement it.   

**Q:**  You mean the people working in the lower level, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You could say whatever you liked to, right? [laughter]   

**A:**  Yes, but Mao said, "When implementing reforms in minority areas, you have to be careful." Even after that, Chairman Mao said, "When implementing the reforms in the minority areas, Li Weihan and I are rightists. The rest of you are leftists." He meant this with reference to the reforms being implemented in the places adjacent to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Why was there a different policy in Qinghai and Kham, whereas in Tibet, the Central Government was directly involved, but not there?   

**A:**  The Central Government probably wasn't directly running the minority areas in Qinghai and Sichuan. My own thoughts are that Mao was correct until the Cultural Revolution, which was a serious mistake. Even during the Cultural Revolution, Chairman Mao thought in a correct way. For example, in 1959 at the time of quelling the revolt, Mao gave this advice, "Winning over through political means must be regarded as the main, and military attacks must be regarded as the secondary [Ch. zheng zhi zheng qu wei zhu/ jun shi da ji wei fu]." In 1959, the revolt occurred. Those involved in the revolt had their possessions confiscated. Those who were not had the Redeeming Policy [Tib. བླུ་ཉོའི་སྲིས་ཇུས] [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  Wasn't it said that the range of the attack was too wide [Tib. ད་ཇི་མིཨན་ཏཻ་ཀུཨན]?   

**A:**  No, it was said the range of attack must be small [Ch. da ji mian yao xiao].   

**Q:**  I mean it should be like this, but actually, it was too wide. For example, my home is in Namling. It is a remote place. My middle brother hid a gun in 1959 when the revolt was quelled and it was exposed in 1960 during the reinvestigation [Ch. fu cha]. So all of our property was confiscated. I filed a law case in the Tibet Autonomous Region saying, "Our people hid the gun, but had not joined the revolt. It was wrong to confiscate our property." So we wanted the policy to be implemented, but they gave me 800 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> and it was finished. My brother was sentenced to 15 years in prison and died in the prison. And there were similar cases.   

**A:**  Yes, there were many.   

**Q:**  Yes, there were a lot. Yes, later Zhongyang considered this and said that the range of attacks was wide and many of them were also rehabilitated [Tib. དག་སེལ]. When the revolt was quelled, it was said, "To quell the revolt while implementing the reforms [Tib. བིཨན་པིང་པན་བིཨན་གཻ་གེ]." The use of the Redeeming Policy [ gving compensation for things confiscated] was first done in Tibet. In China, this was used for the capitalists, but not for the landlords. In Tibet, doing this policy for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མངའ་བདག; ch. 领主] Feudal lord, manorial estate holders, serf-owners.">ngadag</a> was something new. They were implementing the people's commune in China, and in Tibet some said we should implement them in Tibet as well. Mao and Zhou gave instructions to Ngabö and the Panchen. I was the translator. Zhou Enlai spoke first. "You are probably doing the cooperatives [Tib. མཉམ་ལས] in a hurried manner. Do not implement the cooperatives in a hurry. In the past, they had no land. First divide the land and give it to the peasants. Let them plant the land and get a taste of the profits of farming and then we can see gradually [what to do]." Then Mao said, "Do not start the cooperative too quickly. Those without land in the past, if you give them land and let them plant it, it will become a very big revolution and the production will increase." So while communes were implemented in the whole nation in China, it was not done in Tibet until after the Cultural Revolution in 1968 and 1969.   

**Q:**  Weren't there the trial cooperatives in 1960?   

**A:**  At first it was confirmed to do this, but later, Deng Xiaoping, who was the General Party Secretary [Tib. ཟོང་ཤུ་ཇི], said when implementing Mao and Zhou's instructions, "Do not even do the trials. If we start, it will become widespread and there will be a hurry to implement it." So this idea was dropped. I know this clearly.   

**Q:**  I heard that Deng Xiaoping seems to have been more rightist regarding Tibet, like kind of having mercy on Tibet. Is this correct?   

**A:**  No. Deng always spoke truthfully and would say frankly that it was wrong when others did something wrong. That's why he suffered many losses before the liberation and also in the Cultural Revolution. It was not the matter of right and left. He was just straightforward.   

**Q:**  In the years 1957-57-58, Phala and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> had a close relation and they had relations with the US. Did Phala and some kalön have relations? Did the Dalai Lama know about the US involvement? What do you think about this?   

**A:**  Phala had a lot of power, but he was only a Drönyer, and except for his duty, he didn't dare to do other things. This was the custom of the Tibetan government and all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> only did their own work. If someone did more than that, people would scold them. So they didn't dare to do things except on sly. Surkhang and others might have had relations I think, but I don't know anything they did openly. They would not dare to do it openly, only secretly.   

**Q:**  Did the Dalai Lama know about [things] like the airdropped people by the US?   

**A:**  I don't know. I was not in Tibet. In 1958 I went to Beijing for studies for 2 years, so I wasn't in Tibet. I returned to Tibet in October 1959. The revolt was completely over. But the documents were there and I had some talks with the people I knew.   

**Q:**  This is very hard to understand. The US government was thinking that there was a direct connection with the Dalai Lama. They were saying that they were not sure whether they had connections with the Tibetan government. Phala was there, so I'm not sure whether Phala was working on behalf of the Dalai Lama or he was working on his own.   

**A:**  This is very hard to tell. [If] I may even say something, it is just a guess because I was not there. It was probably not that he didn't know at all, and may not be that he thought about everything and made the decision. If we say that the Dalai Lama didn't know anything, he says a lot of things like such and such <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> is like this and like that. This shows that it was not the case that he didn't [know] anything. 1954 he didn't speak much about politics, but afterwards, he improved and did more after coming back from China. So he was, on the one hand, young, and on the other hand, he had to study <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a>, and his two teachers were strict. Taktse Rimpoche went to America and Gyalo went first to Taiwan and then the US, so they certainly had many relationships. Since they had relations it is hard to say that the Dalai Lama didn't have relations at all. Lobsang Samdenla and I met in 1979 or 80 when he came to Tibet. I had good relations with him in the past. He acted as if he hadn't been involved in the revolt. He was straightforward with making relations with the people he knew and didn't have any suspicions. One day, the government gave a meal and we were there. So I said when toasting, "In the past, Tibet was part of China. There are all sorts of reasons and today I won't speak in detail about Tibet. Individuals say it's not, but other governments accept this. So though you say Tibet is independent, the US government doesn't accept this. So your path is useless, so return home. The result will be like the proverb, 'The clerk will get exhausted and the hound will have its leg hurt [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས་སྐུ་ཐང་སྙེལ་རོགས་དང། ཤ་ཁྱི་རྐང་པ་ཚ་རོགས].'" Then Lobsang cried a lot and said, "Now we will return." After he went to India, I heard that he had reported well, but I would not know. It was written in the foreign newspaper, "When they went to report the Dalai Lama, they had to go to Dharamsala in a tense manner." I am not sure, they were kind of suspecting them. At that time, Lobsang Samden and Phüntso Tashi came.   

**Q:**  In 1956, there was a plan to do reforms in Tibet and many officials were brought in from inland China and there was a plan to recruit 10,000-20,000 cadres in Tibet. How did this come about?   

**A:**  It started in 1956. There was a plan to do reforms. The Chinese officials were eager and in a hurry to do reforms. There was probably a plan to start reforms with the start of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. Many officials came to Tibet to implement the reforms. Then the 6 year postponement occurred and it was said that, "It will not be done during the first and second 5 year economy plan[Tib. རྒྱལ་དམངས་དཔལ་འབྱོར]. You [should] consider whether you want to do it during the third 5 year plan." This was clearly written in Chairman Mao's work on the "Internal contradiction between the people [Tib. མི་དམངས་ནང་ཁུལ་གྱི་འགལ་ཟླ]." Many of the Chinese officials returned home so the Tibetan officials in the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region offices had no work and couldn't be sent home, so many were sent to China for schooling. That's how the Xianyang school came about.   

**Q:**  In the years 1952-53, if the Tibetan government said t<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> they were going to implement their own reforms, what kind of influence would it have had? I heard that the Tibetan government didn't say that they didn't want the reforms, but they said that they were going to do them by themselves. You probably knew about it. Ngabö had said in a meeting, "It would be better to make our own hat which would fit us. If other people make us a hat to wear, it won't fit well. So it would be better to start the reform by ourselves." In case the Tibetan government had put it into action, what would the influence be? Do you think that the present history would be a different one?   

**A:**  Yes, I think it would a different one. But it was hard.   

**Q:**  The history had proved this [Ch. li shi zheng min].   

**A:**  It is not the case that history had proved it. This was a matter of thinking. People were talking a lot about the traditional system [Tib. སྔར་ལམ]. It was like what Gendün Chompel [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] said, "All of the new things are blessed by the devils [Tib. གསར་པའི་ཐམས་ཅད་བདུད་ཀྱི་བྱིན་རླབས་ཡོད] and all of the old things are such and such." It was exactly like this. If something is a traditional system, it was regarded as very good, even if it was a very bad one. People were not allowed to ride motorcycles. It was [said] that it was a very bad thing and harmful.   

**Q:**  Did Ngabö actually say that?   

**A:**  Probably, he might have said that. I also heard about that, though it was not very clear [repeating about the hat again].   

**Q:**  When did he say that?   

**A:**  It was probably in 1953-54. It was because in the 17-Point Agreement it was mentioned that the local Tibetan government should implement the reforms. If the people said that the reforms should be implemented, they should consult with the government and make the decision. The Central Committee would not force [us] to do it. But, if I tell you according to my experience, it was very hard to put it into action whatever their superiors told them. The Tibetan people knew that. They said that the policy of the Central Committee was good, but it became lighter and lighter [Tib. སླ་རུ་སླ་རུ] when it came down [to local levels].   

**Q:**  I heard a lot about people saying that it became the second beer when it came down and it became the third beer when it came to the countryside [means weaker and weaker]. This was the difference between theory and practice [Ch. li lun shi jian], right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the past, Chairman Mao said, "What was written on paper doesn't necessarily follow it as a fact. There is a great difference or distance between the actual fact and what was written on the paper [Ch. zhi shang de dong xi bu yi ding shi shi ji the dong xi. zhi shang he shi ji you hen da de qu bie]." For example, the American government is saying they are great and they have human rights [laughing]. But, in Los Angeles, they did many different things which made Bush feel very shameful and inconvenient to talk to the world. Many countries were saying that Americans shouldn't talk about human rights. You just have to take care of human rights in your own country. We are friends, so I am just telling my experience. We should learn the philosophy of Marx and Lenin. I am reading the scripture of Buddhist philosophy. It was not exactly the as same as the materialism philosophy, but there are many similarities on the level of theory.   

