# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0056.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Phüntso Tashi (Phundra) [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས (ཕུན་བཀྲ)]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** 4 May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein, Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Phüntso Tashi (Phundra) [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས (ཕུན་བཀྲ)]   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 69  
**Date of Birth:** 1924  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Phundra [Tib. ཕུན་བཀྲ] was a Tibetan who grew up in Qinghai and became an important translator for the Chinese Communist Party in Tibet. In this interview, he talks about his schooling in the Tibetan-Mongolian School in Xining and how he became a teacher in the countryside and had a hard time earning his livelihood before 1949. He talks about serving Geshe Sherab Gyatso and how Sherab Gyatso was appointed Vice Chairman of the Qinghai People's Government, and how he was sent to Beijing to the Nationality Commission Office. He also talks about Ngabö being sent to Kham and the arguments in Yadong regarding the Dalai Lama's return to Lhasa. He further talks about the meeting of Zhang Jingwu with the Dalai Lama in Yadong, and how Zhang was scheduled to return from Yadong to China, but had to come to Lhasa instead. Additionally, he talks about Zhang Jingwu's disagreements with Sitsab Lukhangwa, and how he translated the Dalai Lama's telegram accepting the 17-Point Agreement. He also discusses the arguments about Tibetan soldiers carrying the Chinese national flag when they went to meetings, and about the People's Association.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0056_01/H_0056_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  We would like to ask you how did you join the revolution and about the troubles between the kalön and the sitsab?   

**A:**  I'll tell you briefly. I was born in Amdo Qinghai in China. It was called Tsongön in Tibetan because there was a blue lake there. When I was probably 13, I went to a school in Xining.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am 69 years old [born in 1924]. I went to school when I was 13 years old in Xining in [1937]. I stayed in the school for 5 years [1942]. My school was called the Tibetan-Mongolian School, or Bösog Lapdra [Tib. བོད་སོག་སློབ་གྲྭ]. In the Amdo area, other than the Chinese and Muslims, there were Tibetans and Mongolian and of these, the majority were Tibetans. There were six Autonomous Prefectures [Ch. zi zhi zhou; Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ཁུལ] in Tsongön. Five of them were called, "The Tibetan Autonomous Prefectures [Tib. བོད་རིགས་རང་སྐྱོང་ཁུལ]." One of them was said to be a prefecture of Tibetans and Mongolians joined together.   

**Q:**  Do you mean at that time?   

**A:**  Even now it is like this. In the old society, there wasn't any Autonomous Prefecture. There were only dzong. This school was started by the Xining Chairman [Ch. zhuxi] Ma Bufang. He recruited Tibetan and Mongolian students from the different areas and I was among them. All the food and clothes for the students were provided by the school. Were it not for this, students from poor families wouldn't be able to stay. I finished school after 5 years and then I became a teacher in a school in the countryside. Xining was liberated in 1949. Before this, the people of Qing Hai had a hard time earning a living. Before this, a lot of military taxes, Magtral [Tib. དམག་ཁྲལ], and the horse taxes, Tatral [Tib. རྟ་ཁྲལ], were collected when they fought the communists, which made all the miser beggars. Up to 1949, I had a hard time with livelihood. Then in 1949 the People's Liberation Army arrived. All the People's Liberation Army had strict discipline. So all the people thought that it was good that the People's Liberation Army had come. It was like the same when the People's Liberation Army first came to Tibet. Even now people are saying that at the beginning, the People's Liberation Army had a good discipline. Just before the liberation, I was with the Amdo Geshe Sherab Gyatso [Tib. དགེ་བཤེས་ཤེས་རབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ]. Just before the People's Liberation Army arrived at Xining, he came to the nomad area called Tragar Teldzong [Tib. བྲག་དཀར་སྤྲེལ་རྫོང] located near Lake Kokonor. It was a holy place. There is a monastery there and nearby there is a white rock, so the name came from this. At this time, my home was at Dobi [Tib. རྡོ་བི]. There was a main road that ran in front of the Monastery. The People's Liberation Army came from Gansu to Xining divided into three groups, and one group came to that place. The People's Liberation Army came to the Monastery suddenly in the night and they didn't know whether it was a monastery or a countryside, and they stayed at the Monastery. The next morning they went to Lanzhou [back to Gansu]. The People's Liberation Army cleaned up nicely after using the Monastery to stay overnight [swept, etc.] After this, many People's Liberation Army troops came one group after another without break. So people went to watch them. They didn't go into the miser's homes, but went on straight. A few old ladies prostrated to the soldiers, saying, "In the past we suffered a lot, but now those who will look after us have arrived." Sherab Gyatso didn't know about this because he was staying in the nomad's area. So I went to tell him [about] the arrival of the People's Liberation Army one after another. I told him "The communists have arrived. Their discipline is good. So you don't have to worry about them, you can relax and stay in this place." It was far and took 5-6 days on foot to reach where he was staying. It was fall and was raining a lot. It was also totally overcast and I was unable to tell the directions [east, west, etc.]. I didn't meet people on the road. I went along asking where I was as I went. Finally, I reached Geshe Rimpoche and told him everything frankly. He said you did well. The owner of the Monastery was the Arotsang [Tib. ཨ་རོག་ཚང] Lama, who was also famous. Sherab Gyatso told me to tell all of this to Arotsang Lama. He also said this was very good. Ma Bufang had also treated them badly. We were poor so they treated us badly. We were unable to live. Arotsang Lama was famous. He called the chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་འགོ] of that area, like the gyagpön and Chief of Thousand, Tongpön [Tib. stong dpön], for a 3-day meeting. I do not know what they discussed. Then Geshe Rimpoche [Sherab Gyatso] said to me that I should go to Xining. He sent me along with a mule to ride with Gyagpön and Tongpön to Xining to welcome [the People's Liberation Army]. The main official in Xining was Liao Hanshen. He was Vice Chief Committee Member [Ch. wei yuan zhang] of National People's Congress. Ngabö also had the same position. Now he and Ngabö both are not in this post. I met Liao in Xining. He told me the CCP's policies on religion and nationality.   

**Q:**  This was in 1949, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this is how I joined the revolutionary rank [he probably went as a translator]. Then I returned to the monastery. It took three days by horse from Xining. Up to a place called Donyedang were farmers and after this it was all nomads. Then I stayed at the monastery with Sherab Gyatso looking after the horses of Sherab Gyatso and grazing them. It was a one-day trip from the monastery to the pasture land. Then one day Geshe Rimpoche called me down to the monastery and I went. He said that the communists had arrived. Geshe Rimpoche's secretary was a Chinese. The Chinese had gone to Lan Zhou and brought some People's Liberation Army with him to the monastery. The People's Liberation Army said to Rimpoche, "Don't stay here. Come to Lanzhou with us. You are knowledgeable [Tib. ཡོན་ཏན་ཆེན་པོ] and renowned, so come there to check how to implement the nationality and religious policies. You have some work to do." It was winter then. So Geshe Sherab Gyatso went to Xining. The trip was very cold. Then when Sherab reached there, the People's Liberation Army told him to stay in Xining. The Xining People's Government was about to start, so I told him to stay as he would receive a post and power and he would be the in charge. The leaders of Xining came and he had a good medical checkup. They told him to stay there relax. So he didn't have any choice but to stay there. The new people's government was started on January 1, 1950. Geshe Rimpoche was appointed as the Vice Chairman [Ch. zhu xi Tib. གཞོན་པ] in the Tsongön People's Government [Tib. མཚོ་སྔོན་མི་དམངས་སྲིད་གཞུང]. There were many people and the majority were Tibetan and there were also many Mongolians in the government. At the time of the meeting of government, Geshe Rimpoche was called to attend and was asked to give a good advice. So he attended the meeting and he was very knowledgeable.   

**Q:**  How old was Sherab Gyatso then?   

**A:**  He was probably in his 60s. He had a white beard and hair. He gave a good speech and people said it was truly a Lama's advice and was very good. He said, "The actions of the communists and that of religion customs are harmonious. There isn't any contradiction. So everyone should stay relaxed. For example, it is said in the religion, 'May all sentient beings have happiness and the cause of happiness. May all sentient be free from sufferings and the cause of sufferings [Tib. སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་བདེ་བ་དང་བདེ་བའི་གྱུ་དང་ལྡན་པར་འགྱུར་ཆིག། སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་སྡུག་བསྔལ་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི་རྒྱུ་དང་བྲལ་བར་འགྱུར་ཆིག].' This is what communists are doing. We say all kinds of prayers but do not put them into practice. The CCP is saying that and doing that, so do not have any taboos [Tib. རྣམ་རྟོག] and suspicion [Tib. དྭོགས་པ] about them." That was very beneficial, and it was good that he didn't go to Lanzhou and that he stayed in Xining and got a position in the government. Then about 1 month after the meeting ended, The Northwest Military Administrative Committee [Tib. ནུབ་བྱང་དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] was about to be founded in Xi'an. They asked Geshe Rimpoche to come to Xi'an for this. So he went to Xi'an. He went straight by plane to Xi'an. We went by car. There he participated in a meeting with Peng Dehuai and Xi Zhongxun. Peng Dehuai was the Chairman of the Military Administrative Committee. Geshe's secretary also participated. We don't need to comment on his Chinese, but his Tibetan written and spoken language was also good eventhough he was a Chinese. He was called Chen Motian and he was from Sichuan. But he was a Buddhist disciple of Rimpoche and later became his secretary. I didn't go to the meeting because the secretary went there.   

**Q:**  Did you know Chinese then?   

**A:**  I knew it in a mediocre way [Tib. ཆོ་ལོ་མོ་ལོ]. I could read Chinese but not write it. After the meeting we were about to return. Yang Jinren, who is now the head of the Nationality Office [Tib. མི་རིགས་ལས་ཁུངས], was then working in the Nationality Work Committee of the Central Committee [Tib. ཞོང་ཡང་མི་རིགས་དོན་བྱེད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. He was at the meeting and he came to visit Geshe Sherab. He said, "In Beijing we have a Nationality Office. There are no Tibetans in this at all. Please can you send one of the Tibetans with you there?" Geshe Rimpoche said he will think about this and he didn't give them the answer right away. This was my first visit to China [Xi'an]. So I said to Geshe Rimpoche, "Please send me to Beijing. I will have a look and return." Geshe Rimpoche said "Okay, I will tell Yang next time when he comes." So they all returned home and I went to Beijing with Yang Jinren and was made to work in the Nationality Office. This was in 1949, November I think [his dates are a bit off]. I stayed in Beijing in 1949 and 1950, and then in 1951 they said it was time to liberate Tibet peacefully. Chairman Mao personally thought about this and made the decision. At this time Taiwan was still to be liberated. And in mainland China, Tibet was the only one left to be liberated. Tibet, firstly, was a minority area. Secondly, it was historically different from the others. Consequently, it would be the best if we could peacefully liberate it. So this was decided by the Chairman Mao. Then we said that Tibet should send representatives to negotiate this peaceful liberation. The first delegates were Shakabpa and the others. Shakabpa dilly dallied and didn't come. Since from here they reminded them many times to send the representatives, later Ngabö and the others were sent. Ngabö was in Chamdo. They sent 5 delegates .   

**Q:**  This was after the battle in Chamdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Before they came, they had some problems [Tib. གནས་ཚུལ]. Ngabö was a person who could think for the long run. He was appointed as the additional [Tib. ལས་འཕར] kalön when he was going to be sent to Chamdo. I heard that he used to be powerful when he was a Tsipön. Usually he wouldn't talk much when they were discussing important matters. Whatever he said he used to think about carefully and [would] say something meaningful. Therefore, all people were saying that Ngabö was a thoughtful person. Therefore, he was sent to Chamdo. I heard this from the people I knew in Tibet. The news would not reach there soon, but sometimes there was a broadcast from Xining and Beijing. So the people who had radios could hear it, though it was not that clear. Geshe Rimpoche also talked on the broadcasts. Ngabö was thinking that since the whole nation was getting liberated by the communists, we couldn't handle the Chinese. So we should hold peace talks. So before leaving for Kham he went to report his departure [Tib. ཐོན་ཕྱག] to the Kashag and he told the Kashag, "I can't refuse to go to Chamdo. I will go, but I can't wage war against the communists because if Chang Kaishek couldn't beat the communists how can we? It would be useless to make war. So after I arrive at Chamdo, I will go right to the east wherever the People's Liberation Army have come and I am going to hold peaceful negotiations with Chinese. If we make war, everything will be spoiled." About 1-2 months after Ngabö arrived in Chamdo it was liberated. Ngabö knew clearly the communist's nationality and religious policies because he studied hard. So Ngabö sent a letter through Bumtang Tsendrön Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. 'bum thang rste mgron rgyal mtshan phun tshogs]. At this time, the Dalai Lama was living in the Potala. According to the Tibetan government's customs, the officials who come from outside have to make the arrival report [Tib. འབྱོར་ཕྱག]. When he arrived at Tse Gungtang [Tib. ཚལ་གུང་ཐང], he sent a messenger saying that "I have arrived. When should I come for the arrival report?" He sent this message and the reply said, "Don't worry about the former customs, come at once." He told me this himself, "The kalön were waiting when I came. The kalön asked me, 'What happened in Chamdo? Did the communists arrive?' I told them, 'Yes, they had arrived.' And they asked me, 'What are they doing?' and I told them what I had seen and heard. Then the kalön said, 'You had a hard time and did well. Stay relaxed.' The next day some people were whispering that the Dalai Lama had left Lhasa last night for Yadong." Ngabö decided to send a second message since there was no answer from Lhasa. He sent Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ], who was then the gadrung of the Kashag, with a written letter. Tsögo went to Yadong and delivered the letter. Then there was an argument among the people who were in Yadong.   

**Q:**  For what mainly?   

**A:**  At the beginning, they planned to flee abroad and when they connected India, Nehru was the leader. He said, "You can come to India if you want, but we are going to regard you as an ordinary miser. You can't come as a political leader [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]." This is the world's custom. So the Dalai Lama didn't dare to go to India but stayed in Yadong. Otherwise, he was planning to go right away. The argument was about whether we should stay there or go abroad.   

**Q:**  I heard that the argument was mainly among the Tsipön and the drunyichemmo, right?   

**A:**  Surkhang was very tricky, so he didn't say anything. Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང] and Phala were the main ones openly advocating for going.   

**Q:**  Probably, on the other side, there was Shakabpa?   

**A:**  I am not sure he was there. Bumtang and the father of Shölkang, who was then the Tseja, they advocated for returning, saying, The Chinese are communists, but they are indeed Chinese and their face is the same as ours. It will be hard to get along with the white-faced ones."   

**Q:**  This was one of the reasons for not going out, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they said, "Some people were saying that they will destroy the religion, but probably they won't be able to destroy it. We should stay." Actually, it was kind of difficult to say something openly among the kudrak, but two of them said that openly. Those who said "go" cited the experience of the 13th Dalai Lama saying he could go and come back. This time, the Dalai Lama also could come back. The ones for staying said, It's not the same as in the past. In the past, the Chinese government wasn't as strong as it is now. Now, China is coming while occupying [Tib. ལེན] the world. Therefore, how could it be easy [to cope with them]? So it's better if we stay." Finally the ones for staying won the day and they decided to send delegations for the peace talk. Shakabpa dilly dallied and didn't go for the negotiations, so finally Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར] and Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད] went by sea. Kheme had met Chang Kaishek in the past.   

**Q:**  Did Tsögo arrive there?   

**A:**  After that, they had the argument. After the argument ended, he returned to Kham, and then Ngabö, Sambo and Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན] went to China. Lhautara and Kheme met Nehru on their way in India. This is what Ngabö was thinking. Nehru said, "Your going to negotiate is good. At the time of talking, they [Chinese] will say that Tibet is a part of China. You have to accept that Tibet is a part of China. If you don't accept that, you don't have any reason to tell them. They might say that they will take care of the foreign affairs, you have to accept that also. Since you are a part of China, they will take care of the foreign affairs. But, the main thing is that if many troops would be stationed in Tibet, you will have a hard time. So please consider a little bit about the positive and negative consequences for us as well [Tib. ང་ཚོའི་བདེ་སྡུག་ལ་དགོངས་པ་ཏོག་ཙམ་བཞེས་རོགས་གནང]." Nehru was probably afraid of it [laughing]. Lhautara told me about this and later he also sent me a letter saying that Nehru told them the three points. When they were holding the negotiations, the Southwest Bureau [Ch. xi nan ju] was in charge of Tibetan affairs. They issued about 10 points for the peaceful liberation of Tibet. In this it was said that the tsidrung and lay officials would be left as before; religion and faith would be as before, and so forth. So at the negotiations for the 17-Point Agreement, these 10 points were the main [ones]. There was no great argument on the other points. The arguments arose over the People's Liberation Army coming to Tibet. They were saying that they shouldn't send them to Tibet. Later we knew that it was because Nehru had instigated them. So they were not to be blamed. At this time, grain was scarce in Tibet, they just sufficed to meet their needs. The Tibetan miser were in a very difficult condition. They were worse than us. Qinghai had a poor livelihood, but Tibet was worse than this. So they [Tibetans] said, "There is no need to send so many People's Liberation Army [soldiers] to Tibet. In the past, India was under the English, so we had no choice but to handle the British. But now India is independent and there are no English, so we are friendly with India, so they might not invade us. Also, we are scarce of grain. So there is no need to send soldiers to Tibet." Really, the grain was scarce. The arguments about grains being scarce were true and on the other side Nehru had instigated them.   

**Q:**  Nehru was also scared, right?   

**A:**  Yes. On the other matters, they didn't need to talk back and forth very much. The Tibetans highly regarded Gandi and Nehru. The second argument was the dispute over the Panchen Lama coming to Tibet. The expansion of the 10 points to 17 was because of the Panchen Lama. We wanted the Panchen Lama issue to be included in the 17-Point Agreement. The Tibetans said it was better to deal with this in a separate accord or discussion. We weren't instructed to discuss anything about the Panchen Lama. Usually, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama would recognize each other traditionally. And at that time, the Dalai Lama had not recognized the new Panchen Lama, and they also had searched for a candidate in Tibet. The [Panchen's] Nangmagang also searched [for the incarnation] in Amdo, and they also had an internal argument. So the Tibetan government didn't confirm the Panchen Lama. The main official on the Chinese side was Li Weihan. On the one hand Ngabö reported like this to Zhongyang and on the other hand he sent a telegram to Yadong. He had brought a telegram code book. Ngabö said in the telegram, "Regarding the Panchen Lama, Zhongyang is telling us like this. So we have to discuss the Panchen Lama. If we don't discuss this it is not okay. The issue of the Panchen Lama is a major issue for Tibet. And it is important for the Dalai Lama to quickly recognize the Panchen Lama and make it work out." So the Dalai Lama at once recognized the Panchen Lama saying he was the real one. He said this by telegraph. So in the 17-Point Agreement it was said the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama would be the same as in the past in terms of power and title, etcetera, according to the time when the 13th Dalai Lama and the 9th Panchen Lama were getting along well. They didn't say that they sent the telegram, but they started to talk about that.   

**A:**  The Panchen Lama had come to Beijing. I met him. The events of the 17-Point Agreement are like this. There weren't many disputes.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a dispute over the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]?   

**A:**  Not much. The Military Administrative Committees were set up everywhere. Tibet was special, so the Military Administrative Committee should have been set up exclusively. Otherwise, it was set up jointly for several provinces. The dispute over this became big after we had arrived in Tibet and the discussion was whether to set it up or not. The 2 sitsab's demotion was over this. There were no arguments over this in China. The dispute in China was with the People's Liberation Army and Panchen Lama. The Panchen Lama issue was also in Tibet and ended as soon as the Dalai Lama recognized the Panchen Lama. Some say that Ngabö was forced to sign the 17-Point Agreement and others say that Ngabö surrendered to the Chinese. These are not true. I was there from the beginning and I also wrote about this. After this, Zhang Jingwu was sent to Tibet. I was his translator. It was Li Weihan who sent me. In the beginning, Zhang Jingwu planned to go to Yadong not to Tibet [Lhasa]. The main reason for going was for Zhang Jingwu to meet the Dalai Lama, give some gifts and to explain the 17-Point Agreement. Li Weihan said that, "Since you were there from start to finish, it will be good if you went as the translator." So Zhang Jingwu was scheduled to return right away from Yadong. Li said I should go with the Dalai Lama to Lhasa. Then when the People's Liberation Army arrived in Lhasa, I should return via Kham. I was to go back. But I wasn't able to return at once. I had to stay in Tibet. The reason why I was unable to return was that when I came, I flew from Hong Kong to Calcutta. The original [document] of the 17-Point Agreement went with Ngabö by land and we took a copy of it and gave it to the Dalai Lama. The gifts all were coming by sea. The planes at this time were small. The airplane was BSA. We stayed [waiting] in Calcutta for 3 days. It was unbearably hot in the summer.   

**Q:**  What month was it?   

**A:**  It was probably in July. When we left Beijing it was June, around the 10th. [Tashi: heard that Mao had a private conversation with Zhang Jingwu before leaving]. We went from Beijing to Guangzhou and stayed a few days arranging passports. Then we went to Hong Kong and stayed a few days. It took two days from Hong Kong to Calcutta since the plane first stopped at Singapore, and then the next day left for Calcutta. It took about 8 hours to fly from Singapore to Calcutta. This was the first time I saw a plane and flew in one. It shook a lot. After we arrived in Calcutta, we couldn't stay because of the heat and the gifts weren't there yet. So we went to Kalimpong to wait for the gifts to arrive. While we were in Kalimpong, a phone call arrived from Kheme Dzasa [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད་ཛ་སག] and Taklha Depön. Since depön knew Chinese, I didn't need to translate, but Zhang Jingwu told me about this. The phone call said, "Zhang Jingwu, are you staying for some time in Kalimpong or are you coming quickly? If you are coming quickly, we can meet you in Yadong. If you are staying, we will meet you in Lhasa. I am returning to Lhasa." We got the call after the Dalai Lama had made the decision to return to Lhasa. When the Dalai Lama was in Yadong, I heard that they had a lot of arguments among the kudrak in Yadong on the matter of whether we should stay and implement the Agreement or go abroad. Later, they had to roll the senriy lottery divination. Namseling and Phala happened to be brothers from the same parent and he went as a bridegroom to Namseling. They were advocating to go [abroad]. They had to roll the senriy lottery. Actually, they had to write three different questions one in each senriy tsamba ball. But they acted deceitfully [Tib. གཡོ་སྒྱུ] and just wrote the same thing, "go," in all the three balls. When they were rolling it, the Drönyerchemmo was suspicious that they might have done something to the senriy and he grabbed all the three senriy balls in his hand, and when they opened them, they found that the same letter, "go," was written on the three balls. When it was opened, they were ashamed and they didn't have anything to but to go back to Lhasa. Lhautara told me this.   

**Q:**  The main ones were Phala and Namseling?   

**A:**  Surkhang was probably there. He was very tricky and did things from behind, not from the front. Surkhang was nicknamed, "smiling at the corners of the houses," (Tib. tsigsur khatser [rtsig zur kha tsher].   

**Q:**  Wasn't the drönyerchemmo in the group wanting to go abroad? Why would he open the senriy?   

**A:**  The one who opened the senriy was Bumtang Drunyichemmo Chömpel Thubden [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་ཐུབ་བསྟན]. From earlier times, they were holding different thoughts and that time it also happened like this. Drönyerchemmo was among the people who wanted to go. So after they decided they called us in Kalimpong. We decided to go at once to Yadong even without the gifts because the main thing was the [Agreement] document and we had it with us. So we went to Yadong through Gangtok. The Dalai Lama was living in Dunggar [Tib. དུང་དཀར་དགོན་པ] Monastery. We stayed one day in Yadong and then had an audience with the Dalai Lama and a party was also given. Zhang Jingwu explained the main points to the Dalai Lama. For example, "Autonomy will be allowed and the Tibetan government will stay as it was. All the monk and lay officials will remain in office as now, and the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama will have the same rank and authority as before. And we have to do reforms, but when to do this and how to do it depends on the thoughts of the people. If the people say they want reforms, the Tibetan government should implement it. If the people put forward their remarks, then the people and the Tibetan government should discuss this and settle this." This is the main thing he said to the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama was young, he was probably 18 or 19 by Tibetan counting. He took the religious and political power in 1950 at age 18, so he was going on 19 in 1951 [actually he was only sixteen]. On the one hand, the Dalai Lama probably didn't have many relations with the outside, and on the other hand, it was said that the communists were very scary. So I am not sure whether he had this feeling [Tib. སྣང་བ]. Anyway, he was nervous [Tib. ཚ་གི་ཚི་གི] when he met [Zhang Jingwu]. The Dalai Lama didn't say much. I recall he said, "You, high official [Tib. དཔོན་པོ་ཆེན་པོ], have come from far away and must be tired. So please relax and take a good rest. My going to Lhasa has been decided. Are you going to Lhasa or not?" We didn't have any choice but to go to Lhasa because we didn't have the gifts with us. Zhang Jingwu said I am going to Lhasa. The Dalai Lama said, "Should I go first or you?" Zhang said, "You go first as you have much retinue. We are only 5, so we will come after you." So the Dalai Lama went first. We stayed one or two more days and then left. At Gyantse, the Dalai Lama stopped and gave a Kalachakra teaching [Tib. དུས་འཁོར་དབང་ཆེན] in Pegaw Chöde [Tib. དཔལ་འཁོར་ཆོས་སྡེ] which took about 5 days. So we met there, and the Dalai Lama had some work there so we arrived first in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Dalai Lama said, "Before I comment on the 17-Point Agreement, I want to wait until I see the original when Ngabö comes from Kham. Was that correct?   

**A:**  I don't recall that clearly. The Dalai Lama probably didn't say that because we had a copy of the Agreement. This was said later by Lukhangwa when we arrived at Lhasa [laughter]. When we just arrived in Lhasa, Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi gave us a dinner.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, you stayed in Trimon [Tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] House, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that dinner they talked about the 17-Point Agreement. So Lukhangwa said this about waiting for Ngabö, but I didn't translate this to Zhang Jingwu [laughter]. I did this because I thought it would create a serious contradiction because we just arrived there. I thought it would not be good if there was a serious contradiction over several words and I didn't translate it.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were really tough. If I were you, I wouldn't even think about it [not translating].   

**A:**  There were several occasions where such things happened. But I didn't translate it. The Dalai Lama didn't say anything.   

**Q:**  Maybe, the Dalai Lama didn't think in that way.   

**A:**  Yes. He was just kind of nervous [laughter].   

**Q:**  This was probably his first time meeting a high foreign leader, right?   

**A:**  Probably. Normally he was kind of nervous. I am not sure how he is now, but when he was young, he was kind of nervous. It appears that the Dalai Lama did not have much contact with outside. So probably he didn't say this.   

**Q:**  Was that at the first welcoming meeting with Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi that Lukhangwa said that?   

**A:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama had not yet come to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When you first met Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi, how did you find their attitude [Tib. རྣམ་འགྱུར]?   

**A:**  It seemed to me that Lukhangwa's [attitude] was more capable. So I thought that he might say something recklessly [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང]. Zhang Jingwu was not familiar with the Tibetans. So I thought that it may stir up a lot of trouble [Tib. མདའ་དཀྲོག་ཕུ་དཀྲོག]. So I didn't translate it. So they didn't argue very much. If I had translated it, they would have argued right away.   

**Q:**  Were the expressions of the two sitsab showing kind of like disliking [Tib. རྣམ་འགྱུར་གྲང་ཤུར་ཤུར]?   

**A:**  Lukhangwa just said that, but Lobsang Tashi was a person who didn't talk much. He had been to China during the GMD.   

**Q:**  I heard at the first meeting Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi gave a khata and asked "What is your name?" "My name is Zhang." "Oh. In past, there was an important person named Zhang who came so you have same name. He helped Tibet and then returned after his work was done, I hope you do same." Then Lobsang Tashi added, "If you bring many soldiers to Tibet it will hurt our standard of living, so do not bring them." Zhang replied, "Oh, we can talk about that later."   

**A:**  Lukhangwa talked more and Lobsang Tashi said little at this meeting. But in general Lukhangwa seemed like someone who wanted to insult the Chinese any way he could. The meal was served in the Tsuglagang. There was a square table; no round tables.   

**Q:**  Was it in Ewam?   

**A:**  I don't recall in which room it was. The two sitsab sat higher up than the rest. Zhang Jingwu and Alo Buzhang were made to sit on the side by themselves [i.e. not on the same side]. I sat opposite Zhang Jingwu and Alo Buzhang. One side was empty for serving. There was also a translator of the Kashag named Ma Yugui. Two of us [translators] were probably there. Then about a month later, the gifts arrived. And Ngabö also arrived. Then the general Assemply meeting called tsondu gyenzom was convened and at this Ngabö made the report regarding how they held the talks. The 5 of them who signed the 17-Point Agreement were at the meeting. Ngabö said at the meeting, "The work we did whether it is okay or not, please discuss about this. We five will leave while you discuss this." The five of them left the meeting. It is said that the meeting took a day. I wasn't there. I don't recall where it was held.   

**Q:**  I heard it was held in the Potala Palace.   

**A:**  Probably in the Tsuglagang. At the end of the meeting there was a kind of conclusion [Tib. མཐའ་སྡོམ] of the meeting. They called back Ngabö and the other 4 to the meeting. "You have gotten very tired holding the talks and your discussions in Beijing were good. In accordance with the Tibetan government's custom, we should give you an award [Tib. གསེང་བསྟོད]." Ngabö said, "We don't want any award. If what we did was okay, that is enough." This really happened although I wasn't at the meeting. What I heard was correct. The meeting therefore accepted the 17-Point Agreement and then Dalai Lama sent Chairman Mao a telegram. The telegram said, "The 17-Point Agreement is good. [I or we] will rejoice it [Tib. རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རངས] and we will put it into action accordingly. Later when the People's Liberation Army comes to Tibet we will help them on whatever problems they would have." They gave me this letter in Tibetan and I translated it into Chinese for the telegram. I will just talk about these events briefly. If I talked in detail we won't finish. So this is one chapter. After this there were a lot of arguments/disputes [Tib. རྩོད་པ] regarding the establishment of the Military Administrative Committee. These probably took place during the spring of 1952. The sitsab and kalön met jointly in the Tsuglagang. So we said that, "We have to set up the Military Administrative Committee and the Military Headquarters [Tib. དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང]. Soldiers are coming soon, so we have to set up the Military Headquarters because there should be someone giving orders to the soldiers [this office was actually started on 10 Feb 1952]." Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Fan Ming were also there [then]. Lukhangwa then replied saying all kinds of things thoughtlessly [Tib. ཏོ་རོ་མོ་རོ]. "In Chamdo we fought a war and the Tibetan soldiers were hit on their heads and made bloody. Because of this, if we tell the Tibetan army that [you] are going to give orders to them, they will probably not listen." There was talk of converting the Tibetan army into the People's Liberation Army. So this talk was a very serious one [Tib. འགན་ལྗིད་པོ]. Whatever his real thinking was, he was thoughtless and frank in his speech. He made it difficult for all of us to have an easy conversation. Surkhang was probably there. The meeting went on for 2 days and Lukhangwa said that on the second day. During this period, Surkhang probably came to me when he were taking a rest and whispered to me, "We have to do all the work. The two of them were just sitting above and saying things that shouldn't be said. They shouldn't have said that. In the future, don't do things like this. If the representative Zhang [Jingwu] Daibiao has something to say, he should come to the Kashag. We will discuss it and submit our recommendation to the Dalai Lama, and it can be settled." I told this to Zhang Jingwu. Surkhang was someone who was difficult [for others] to know where he stands, he was strange. So after this, discussions were blocked. So Zhang Jingwu said something to the Dalai Lama about this, and the Dalai Lama and the Kashag thought about it and demoted the two sitsab.   

**Q:**  Was that because of the Military Administrative Committee or the Military Headquarters?   

**A:**  At that time, two offices were to be set up. One of them was the Military Headquarters, which was for giving orders to the soldiers. The sitsab were against both the Military Administrative Committee and the Military Headquarters.   

**Q:**  They probably mainly disagreed on the Military Headquarters, right?   

**A:**  No. It was the Military Administrative Committee.   

**Q:**  How did they explain what these two offices were supposed to do?   

**A:**  The reason for setting up the Military Administrative Committee was that Tibet had been divided into 3 parts. The Tibetan government, Tashilhunpo, and Chamdo. In Chamdo, a military headquarters was already established since it was liberated earlier [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  At that time, it was called Xikhang, right?   

**A:**  No. It was called the Chamdo Liberation Committee [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. On Dome [Tib. མདོ་སྨད] there were probably disputes in the past from the Manchu Emperor and the Amban had taken over in Chamdo and there had probably been little interference by the Tibetan government. Therefore, they confronted the Ambans many times. So it was to have one head of all three that we were to institute the Military Administrative Committee. The main leader of this was to be the Dalai Lama. The Vice Leader [Tib. གཞོན་པ] was to be the Panchen Lama and the other Vice Leader was probably Zhang Guohua. The Military Headquarters was exclusively for the military. After much discussion back and forth, we sent a report to the Central Committee and Chairman Mao confirmed saying, "If the Tibetans don't want to set up the Military Administrative Committee, then it is okay to postpone it awhile. We don't have any choice but to set up the Military Headquarters because it has to give orders to the soldiers. But the transformation of the Tibetan troops in the People's Liberation Army should be postponed for awhile." So we only set up the Military Headquarters.   

**Q:**  According to your previous thinking, what would be the difference between the responsibilities of the Military Administrative Committee and the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  The main thing was that the Tibetan government and the Tashilhunpo Nangmagang didn't need to yield [Tib. འདུར] to each other. For having a unified organization of these units, it was decided to assign them work and give them titles in the Military Administrative Committee. When there were major matters to be discussed and worked together, it would be decided by the [Military Administrative Committee]. It wasn't anything like giving orders. So we weren't able to put the entire 17-Point Agreement into practice at that time.   

**Q:**  I also heard that at the meetings there was a dispute with the sitsab over the red flag. Do you know about this?   

**A:**  We said that although the Tibetan Army would not be incorporated into the People's Liberation Army, when the Tibetan army went to meetings, they should carry the Chinese 5-star flag. There was no talk of erecting it on buildings. While the two sitsab were in power we were not able to do this, but once they were demoted there wasn't any argument on this [They carried both flags].   

**Q:**  Did the Tibetan soldiers carry their own flag?   

**A:**  Yes, they carried their flag also.   

**Q:**  As for the People's Association, they gave a letter to Zhang Jingwu. What were the main points of the letter?   

**A:**  Yes, there was the People's Association led by Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག] and Kamika Chöndze [Tib. དཀར་མེ་ཁང་ཆོས་མཛད]. They gave it to the Kashag and to Zhang Jingwu. The main point what that there should be no reforms. Then it also said that there were too many soldiers in Tibet and foodstuffs have increased in price.   

**Q:**  What was their reason for not wanting reforms?   

**A:**  In terms of today's world they made no sense. In the letter it said that Tibet was a religious nation and everything had to be compatible with religion.   

**Q:**  Grains really did increase in price. At that time, a khe of barley was 4 dotse.   

**A:**  They wouldn't say anything without a basis. These people were tricky. In the Agreement it was not mentioned that the reform should be implemented. But it was written, regarding the reforms in Tibet, that "The Tibetan government has to do this voluntarily. If the Tibetan people say they want reforms, then they should discuss with the Tibetan government and do it. The Central Committee will not force them to do that."   

