# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0044.01   
##  : with Baba Legshey [Tib. འབའ་པ་ལེགས་བཤད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kathmandu, Nepal  
**Date of Interview:** 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Baba Legshey [Tib. འབའ་པ་ལེགས་བཤད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Baba Lekshey worked in a monastery for many years before and after the arrival of the Chinese in Tibet in the 1950’s. In this interview, he talks about the beginning of uprising and the fighting in Ba. He describes how he then fled to the mountains and moved from place to place eventully going to Lhasa and then to Kalimpong in 1956. He discusses his activities and the situation in Kalimpong at that time regarding the activities of the Tibetan emigres to oppose the Chinese.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0044_01/H_0044_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A:**  I'm 76.   

**Q:**  And your birthplace?   

**A:**  I'm a Baba and I'm called Baba Legshey [Tib. འབའ་པ་ལེགས་བཤད]   

**Q:**  When the Chinese first came in 49-50, where were you?   

**A:**  They came in 49 and I was in Kham in my homeland Ba.   

**Q:**  And what did you do there?   

**A:**  The works were done by the miser. I was like you people, descended from the kudrak.   

**Q:**  Were you a farmer?   

**A:**  I did the work for the monastery and also for the farmers. We built a very large temple with 64 pillars with a large statue in it. In 1954, when the Dalai Lama and Trijang Rimpoche went to China, we planned to invite the Dalai Lama, but he could not and as his representative Trijang Rimpoche came. These days there is this person, who is the chandzö of Trijang Rimpoche, what's his name? He knows about this.   

**Q:**  Pandenla [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལགས]   

**A:**  Yes, Pandenla knows. In that temple, Rimpoche gave a teaching for 3 days   

**Q:**  So in 1954 when Trijang Rimpoche came you were there.   

**A:**  Yes, the invitation and the preparations were done by us. For 3 days, the teaching took place in the new temple. Everyday, there were about 500-600 people working there.   

**Q:**  This is in the temple?   

**A:**  Yes, the preparations was done in the temple. It's in the monastery. There were 1800 monks. There were 7 Labrang.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  Lorong.   

**Q:**  Labrang?   

**A:**  Yes, Labrang. There were two monks who were called Lakha [Tib.?] who did the preparations. One of them is abroad. At that time, the Chinese had already begun making people to have hardships. Mainly there were the two of them who did the preparations. Trijang Rimpoche stayed for 7 days.   

**Q:**  Stayed for 7 days?   

**A:**  Then there was a very precious and learned lama from Gyalrong called Rabong Rimpoche. Some of us were the sponsor of the Kalachakra initiation which was given in the temple.   

**Q:**  Now the Chinese had come to Ba, right? And so with all the trouble and fights then you must have come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, then I came up to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  While you were there, when did the trouble and fighting break out?   

**A:**  It started on the 1st month of 1955 [really 1956]. After the New Year was over and the religious dance was performed, then on the 14th and 15th day it began.   

**Q:**  Then how long did you stay there?   

**A:**  There were 3 groups of Chinese. They were held up in one house. In the Kham area, they didn't [initially] attack us with bombs. About 200-300 Chinese were killed. We made the Chinese who had guns so that they didn't have even tea to drink and they had to drink urine and loose excrement and they were held up for 15 days in a big house. There were 4 houses and we burned 4 houses and they were held up in one house. There were about 1,000 Chinese killed. Then they [Chinese] bombed us for 8 days. Daily, they dropped 4 bombs each of which weighed 5,000 lb. Altogether they dropped 88 bombs. For example, when a bomb fell on the Tharpa Chöling [Tib. ཐར་པ་ཆོས་གླིང] [monastery he lives next to] the whole building went in the air along with the images. So we fought at Ba (Batang) and they had to drop 88 bombs. Then for two months, I fought the Chinese and went to the hills. The Chinese told us to surrender. Then there were Chinese soldiers coming down from Derge and coming up from Litang. Since we ran out of ammunition, we couldn't handle them and then I came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  So you came to Lhasa.   

**A:**  I came to Markham and stayed for a month and then went to Lhasa. At Lhasa the Chinese had already come and I couldn't settle there.   

**Q:**  The Chinese had already come.   

**A:**  No, I mean the Chinese had already got to the people. You could not say that you are the opponent of the Chinese. They say that those who ran away after the bombing, they must be caught and taken down (back). Then all the lamas divined that I should go to Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  What did you do at Lhasa?   

**A:**  Just ran away there!   

**Q:**  Yes. What about work and so forth?   

**A:**  What work! Leaving alone giving me a job, you could not even meet people. There were many Babas who were eating salary from the Chinese, about 500-600 of them. You could not even talk to your family members and relatives. I stayed at Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What Lubu.   

**A:**  At Lhasa there is the Lubu, right?   

**Q:**  You mean Lubu, the place?   

**A:**  Yes, the place. My acquaintances told me not to go to Ba but to Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  So did you just come to Kalimpong. Was it for trade.   

**A:**  Oh, what are you saying! For nothing. We had to run away from Ba and lost all of our property and fought the Chinese there for 3 months.   

**Q:**  So when you came to Kalimpong, did you have acquaintances, relatives. Where did you stay?   

**A:**  Oh, I had people I knew! At Panda [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] Kuti (House), there was the Chinese trade representative. At that time, I had money. On the way I got some musk and I had money. Oh, if I would tell you about many things, I have a lot to tell you like staying at Lhasa and how I came from Lhasa, going to Riu Sangchen [Tib. རི་བོ་ཟངས་ཆེན], and coming to Kalimpong. I did not have a pass signed by the Chinese. Without them signing, they return you back from Kalimpong. So I said that I was going for a pilgrimage since the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama were coming to India for pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  So did you get a pilgrimage pass?   

**A:**  That I did get it by the grace of the Three Jewels. Then I got to Kalimpong. And I thought that I will go to Taiwan. Other than Taiwan and America it is said that the Chinese are everywhere and there was no place to go. They said that India was China too. In 1956, Nehru and Zhou Enlai kissed each other, India liked the Chinese a lot. So one day, I went down to Siliguri. I didn't know the language. When I went in the train, my body was full of dirt and butter, so I had two relatives and we were alone and happy in the train. Then I got to Varanasi and stayed there for 15 days. There we met three monks, one from Amdo and Alo and another and I gave the train fare for them. Then we saw Lumbini and Tsamchogdrong [Tib. རྩ་མཆོག་གྲོང] and it just cost each one of us Rs.8. Then, we went to Bodh Gaya. Stayed for 15 days. I had two brothers who were monks. Then we went to Calcutta. My companion had a brocade dress and could do big business. The two of us only had a bag each. We had six rifles and pistols with us which we left in Phari. We stayed with an Amdo person and it was Rs. 2 per day. The two of them could cook well. We met one Taiwanese man. The Indian CID was chasing him. My younger brother speaks Chinese well and so he spoke to him. He asked him if he was returning. He said yes. He will send a letter home. Otherwise, in our homeland, there are many people and food was scarce and it would be hard for you to meet your expenses. Kesang Chömpel was there in Taiwan. ( TN. note: the part above is spoken very unclear not because of the language accent, but the sentences are incomplete and subjects and objects are unclear) lb /> Then I came from Calcutta to Kalimpong. Tharchin Babu was said to be there. After 3 days, it was said that there was a letter from the people from Lhasa to Andru Jinda and Kungö Gyalo Thondup, Kungö Tsipön, Taktse Rimpoche, and Khenjung Lobsang Gyaltsen. These 4 were the main ones. Then Kungö Gyentsen [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན] came. You know Gyentsen?   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  Kungö Khenjung Gyentsen and Gyalo Thondup.   

**Q:**  Were they in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, later, the Trunyichemmo nicknamed Angula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] came with Yuthok. Yuthok was a lay official and Angula, the two of them were the main ones [in Kalimpong]. Then Kungö Lukhangwa came, so I stayed with Lukhangwa. I worked as his servant for 3 years.   

**Q:**  Lukhangwa did what?   

**A:**  Lukhangwa came to Kalimpong. Stayed at Ali Billa [must be Alice Villa]. Do you know Ali Billa. It's Yuthok Kuti (house). Then there was the Ganden representative, the Ganden monk, then the Sera representative and the Drepung representative, Jayang Dawa ['jam dbyangs zla ba]. The three of them came. Then Alo Dawa came.   

**Q:**  Jayang Dawa is from Drepung?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who is the Sera representative.   

**A:**  One was called Sera Chandzö; he had an eye problem.   

**Q:**  And the Ganden representative?   

**A:**  His name was Lobsang Tempa [Tib. ལོ་བཟང་བསྟན་པ] or something. He had a goiter. He was killed [He was killed, allegedly by his student, but probably some other reason] Then as the representative of the Lhasa People's Association, Alo Chöndze came. Then as the Amdo representative there was, what was his name. He worked for Shakabpa and now lives abroad. His name is something. He was there [in Kalimpong].   

**Q:**  Gyetong.   

**A:**  Yes, Amdo Gyetong. Among the Litangba, there was Gyado Lagen [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་བླ་རྒན] [Gyadotsang, elder monk]. And myself and we 8 were the main ones. Then Jampa Tsündrü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས] came, then Thubden Nyinji [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད], and Jampa Wangdü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུས]. I stayed with them in one house. So we had a group in Kalimpong and Darjeeling and everyone got on well as we were doing it for Tibet's independence. There were representatives of the [association] Panjain and Yidön, like Bakhu Dorje.   

**Q:**  Are there any of these people around here today.   

**A:**  Oh! they are all dead.   

**Q:**  Nobody is around?   

**A:**  Nobody. Wangchuk la [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག] of Tharpa Chöling is there and there are two foreigners. Besides me, I don't think there is anyone. Kungö Gyalo Thondup is there and Taktse Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  Taktse Rimpoche went to the States in 1951?   

**A:**  In 1956-57, he was in Kalimpong. Before he went to America, he was there. Jigyab Khembo was also there.   

**Q:**  Lobsang Samden?   

**A:**  Yes, the one who passed away. Jetsun Pemala [Tib. རྗེ་བཙུན་པད་མ་ལགས] was also at home. They all got along well. I have a picture with everybody. Then the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama came and we had to get ready and I was among the representatives. And I went for pilgrimage. So that year I went for pilgrimage twice. I went to Bodh Gaya, Jagö Phungpori [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་ཕུང་པོ་རི], Varanasi. Then to Senchin and we stayed in Mumbai for about 12 days.   

**Q:**  Which place?   

**A:**  Mumbai. Stayed in Delhi for about 10 days. Then I talked about one hour regarding the fighting in Litang to Kungö Ragashag.   

**Q:**  Are you talking about the ministers? Ngabö, Surkhang.   

**A:**  Yes, the three of them. I spoke to them for about an hour. I said, "This fight is not the same as the earlier ones. This time you have to unite as much as possible and the kudrak cannot stay to one side and the miser to another. These Chinese are not like the previous ones. The whole race will be destroyed and they will rob everything." So they liked me a lot. So I told them the whole story of Ba for about an hour or two.   

**Q:**  This was at a meeting in Mumbai?   

**A:**  No, in Delhi at the meeting where all the representatives were present. And they liked me a lot. Ragashag liked me a lot and said, "They have fought a lot in Litang, so it would be good if he would be allowed to do some work." So from Delhi I came up to Kalimpong. The Dalai Lama stayed for only two days, as he was leaving. He gave a transmission [Tib. ལུང] of Mani for one day at the airport at Homes. Then it was said that the representatives should be send to Shakabpa's house. Gyalo Thondup, Taktse Rimpoche, Jigyab Khempo, Shakabpa, Khenjung, the three monk officials, Alo Chöndze and we all met. It was said that they were going to make something for the expenditures. We had not one Anna [a unit of old currency] of salary but we did the government work. I said, "I don't need it, thank you. I have no learning, but if you could do something for the representatives of the three monasteries it would be very good." So at around 6, we met at Shakabpa's house. Alo Chöndze was one there and the representatives of the three monasteries. Alo Chöndze said, "Gyalo Thondup has done some works for three years. If he would tell us about that, then I will stay at the meeting, if not, then I won't." Alo Chöndze only has such things to say. I said, "Don't say such things to the Dalai Lama. A history book has to be made. It is a difficult time today. The Chinese have done very bad things and destroyed the religion. So don't say such things to the government. [It is like the proverb] "The Kings should act as kings. The ministers should act as ministers and the trülku's should act as trülku" [Tib. རྒྱལ་པོ་འཆམ་མི་ཡིས་རྒྱལ་པོ་འཆམ། བློན་པོ་འཆམ་མི་ཡིས་བློན་པོ་འཆམ། སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འཆམ་མི་ཡིས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འཆམ] We don't have any thoughts except to serve as servants for the lamas and the geshes. So don't say such big things. So even if Kungö Gyalo Thondup would tell us about his work for three years and we had gathered here, but we cannot do the work that was said in the meeting. So don't just say these general things." [unclear] Alo Chöndze is very able as far as trade. The people in Bö (Central Tibet) didn't have discipline. The discipline in Kham is better. So Kungö Gyalo Thondup, Taktse Rimpoche, and Shakabpa and Khenjung - please don't be upset, he [Alo Chöndze] has such pride. So I will go and tell him not to talk like that since we have to do work for the independence of Tibet." So I went. He was paid Rs 400 for his rent and he was staying near Phünkhang's House.   

**Q:**  Phünkhang's House Arunachal?   

**A:**  If Phünkang's house is here, then there is another one here. Below Pandatsang Kuti [not correct. Must be Sandutsang House]. So I took a brick tea and a khata and I told Alo Chöndze, "Don't keep talking in this general way. The Dalai Lama is leaving tomorrow and so talk properly." He said, "Oh! No, no, no! You don't know. The two Khentsi; [Shakabpa and Khenjung] and Gyalo Thondup are doing all "2-faced work." So I said, "Okay, I can't trust your talk. So you and I should not talk." Then I was sitting and doing my prayers, when Jampa Tsündrü came. He said "Oh, you said you are going [to see Alo Chöndze] and you are still here and so what is the reply [from Alo Chöndze]" I said, "What reply, he is only speaking bad things. So there is no way I can speak with him. So when you go down please tell them I said sorry. I can't speak with him." He [Jampa Tsöndru] told me to come down to Shakabpa's house in the evening. So I said that after my prayers, I will come down. So I went down. So Shakabpa said, "Its good that you went to speak [with Alo Chöndze] and Kungö Drönyerchemmo Phala has said that you are going to get Rs. 100 as the salary per month. When the Dalai Lama is going to Drashö's [Tib. བྲག་ཤོད] place [Bhutan House] You will have an audience in the Dalai Lama's room. We have 4 brothers from the same parents. So I got an audience with the Dalai Lama and I offered 5 tolas [0.5 kg] of gold. So I took my wife and my brothers and the audience was very good. Then I left (laughter) and Alo Chöndze was there and he said that there is a public audience and so come. I said that I am hungry and going to eat in a restaurant and I will go later. So I ate and stayed at Alice Villa. Then Surkhang, Ragashag and Ngabö didn't say a word to Alo Chöndze because he might have said bad things. So they didn't take notice of him. Then he [Alo Chöndze] came up. He is shameless. Then I told him everything bad like, " Screw you! [Tib. ཕ་རོ་མ་རོ]." Then he said that he is not going to serve [the government]. Then Thubden Nyinji came to me and said, "Don't stay talking like that now, come up and let us discuss." So I came up. So I told Alo Chöndze, "Don't keep talking like that. Speak nicely. It is like the proverb I mentioned above about the kings. Kungö Lukhangwa, the two Khentsi are on the top, so we should try to do our job properly. Since we also have foreign countries to lean on." He said,"Oh,if you have great things to say, we can go to Mustang? [Tib. གློ་སྟོད] [ Then I told him, "I had killed a hundred or two Chinese and have come up. Did you ever stone a Chinese? You are saying that you stayed in the jail for a year for the sake of the people, but, this is like the proverb, "Giving alms in Ganden and making a big deal in Sera." [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལ་འགྱེད་བཏང། སེ་ར་ལ་ཡུད་བཤད]. This is useless to talk like this." Then he said, "I left my parents and came up from Kham hoping to find a partner." I said, " Yes, you came to get married and I had experienced 88 bombs and had come up to serve the Kungös for Tibet's independence and you came with your wife and you wanted to sit with the Kashag. You should not think like this." So we two had an argument and I said, "That's all I have to say and that in the future I am not going to come to you." Then there was Kungö Dzasa Tsarong, he had not returned to Tibet yet. The Dalai Lama has returned to Lhasa and the Chinese wanted to invite him to China. For this reason some rituals had to be done. So Kungö Lukhangwa gave Rs. 1000 and from the others, the kudrak and all people, a fund of 20-30,000 was collected. At Tharpa Chöling monastery, there were altogether about 300 monks who had come for pilgrimage. Kungö Lukhangwa called me and said, "Legshey, you should be our representative and be the one in charge [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ] of doing the rituals. I tried to take leave, but he said I must do it. So I said okay and for 25 days the 300 monks gathered for prayers. Everyday we read the kangyur one time and altogether we read it 10 times. There were about 20,000 rupees left over and this was sent as a contribution for the golden throne offering at Lhasa. Then to the 108 countries of the world we sent letters saying that Tibet is independent. At a house called Para, with a Bengali, we met for about a month. We did not even have tea to drink. [read: tea was not supplied]   

**Q:**  Where did you meet?   

**A:**  At Para. You know the way to your house.   

**Q:**  To Dhurpin.   

**A:**  If the road to your house is this way [above] then isn't there another road [straight]. At this place, there is a house and we rented it and met for a month. There we wrote the letters. The matter of the letters, in the evening we consulted Kungö Lukhangwa. Jampa Tsöndru and other Tsendröns showed the letters to Kungö Lukhangwa in the evening. So for a month we sent letters to all the various countries.   

**Q:**  Who wrote the letters?   

**A:**  There were many. I don't know the names (laughter). Thubden Nyinji, Lukhangwa, Shakabpa, they were all good in Tibetan and they wrote the letters. For the English, there were interpreters like Mishing Babu and many others. Jampa Tsöndru did a lot of work. It is said that it was sent to 108 countries, but I didn't keep count, mind you. To the various countries; and there was Gyalo Thondup and Lhamo Tsering was good in English and all. And so, isn't that just about it?   

**Q:**  I have stayed in the states for a long time and so I can't understand your speech very much. So if I question you there will be many repetitions. So, you came here first in 1956 right? So when you came here was the organization already started?   

**A:**  No way!   

**Q:**  No? Wasn't there the Dedön Tshogpa?   

**A:**  Only in name.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there an organization in 1954-55 with Shakabpa and Khenjung?   

**A:**  They were just talking perhaps and the Chinese Communists were very strong. They stayed in Pandatsang House. You couldn't dare to talk like that. There must have been something.   

**Q:**  So in 1956, after the Dalai Lama came then all the work started?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So previous to that there wasn't much?   

**A:**  No, just a little.   

**Q:**  Now you stated that there were meetings at Shakabpa's house. So who cames there. You had an organization, right? Did you have an organization or not?   

**A:**  In the organization there were the 8 people.   

**Q:**  The organization had 8 people?   

**A:**  About 12-15 people.   

**Q:**  What are the names? Say it one by one.   

**A:**  The 4 monk officials. Then there is Kungö Gyentsen Tarka [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་སྟར་ཁ].   

**Q:**  You mean Tseja Gyentsen?   

**A:**  Yes, he was there. [Shelling note: This must be Khenjung Gyentsen Tarkha as he mentioned above, not Tseja Gyentsen la. "Tarkha" is his nickname which means walnut because he is a short and fat person]   

**Q:**  The main one who did the drönyerchemmo's work?   

**A:**  He writes well.   

**Q:**  I see. So he was there too?   

**A:**  Then Trunyichemmo Angula?   

**Q:**  Trunyi what?   

**A:**  Trunyichemmo Angula.   

**Q:**  Oh, Trunyichemmo Angula.   

**A:**  Yes, Angula. Then there was - what's his name- Kungö Yuthok, Kungö dzasa and Rimshi both the Kungö were there.   

**Q:**  Both who?   

**A:**  Your father and Kungö dzasa [grandfather].   

**Q:**  My father was there?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes.   

**Q:**  My father, I asked him and he doesn't know anything about it. .   

**A:**  Yes, he came just a little bit. Your grandfather used to come a lot. When we sent letters to all over the world, your grandfather was there.   

**Q:**  Did he also sign?   

**A:**  Yes, he did.   

**Q:**  Then he returned in 1958, right?   

**A:**  I told him many times not to return because the Chinese are shameless, but he left all of a sudden and I heard about him after he died.   

**Q:**  [my father says he has never been to any meeting or was part of the organization. I think what happened here was that many elites were seen together at parties at Shakabpa house and so "common" people thought that- Oh, all these Kungö were in it together. My father said that he may have also signed to be in the Kyidu, but he doesn't remember. So many people usually come for one donation or other. It may not be significantly different from petition drives in the West. All signatories are not equally involved.] Then who were the others?   

**A:**  Taktse Rimpoche, Gyalo Thondup, Shakabpa.   

**Q:**  Then Amdo Gyetong.   

**A:**  Yes, Gyado Lagen.   

**Q:**  Then the monastic representatives.   

**A:**  Yes. Then Yidön.   

**Q:**  The Yidon Kyidu ( association) members.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Only one from Yidön?   

**A:**  Yes, one.   

**Q:**  Who was that?   

**A:**  Someone called Dorjela.   

**Q:**  Dorjela?   

**A:**  Yes. His name was Bakhu Dorji.   

**Q:**  Is he alive these days.   

**A:**  He is dead. Then there was a Gaba, who was known as Gatrug [Tib. སྒ་ཕྲུག].   

**Q:**  What was his name?   

**A:**  We just call him Gatrug. Then there were two from Panjai [Panjhé]. He was in the Gangtok Parkhang printing house.   

**Q:**  Is he is Gangtok?   

**A:**  He is in Gangtok.   

**Q:**  Is he dead?   

**A:**  He's not. He was a young person.   

**Q:**  Where in Gangtok?   

**A:**  There is a Parkhang, he's working in that. Then the representatives of the 3 monasteries.   

**Q:**  Now you all met right? So what do you talk about? What was the main reason?   

**A:**  Regularly, we, lower ones don't talk that much. The higher ups and the monk officials decided.   

**Q:**  One of your main tasks was to get together and say what the Chinese have done to foreign countries, right?   

**A:**  Yes the letters were sent. We have to try and do something for the independence. You see, we all have to try and see if we can do something and we discussed it at meetings and wrote letters and saw what was done good and what was done bad. If they had started like this, it would have been good. But till today, I don't see any government has accepted this. I don't know if you guys have seen it . Even you guys who are serving America and doing something for Tibet's independence, it is difficult, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, Yes.   

**A:**  But if you guys start something, it will be good. Tibet will not be lost. But if you cannot start something and just hang around, thinking only about a full stomach and the monthly salary, then slowly Tibet will be lost. It's very difficult. Times are bad. So everybody should do their utmost. In the year 1962, the Dalai Lama had a difficult time. Kungö Yuthok and Surkhang were all there probably. About 40 of the Chushigandru people went to Dharamsala. I did not go. I sent a letter saying the Dalai Lama has been put through a lot of hardship. Those who were assigned to talk [give orders] should remained there as before. Otherwise, Tibetan independence will be very difficult. I said that there is a group called Tamang. Previously they were the Tibetan cavalry [Tib. ཏམག [རྟ་དམག]). Now, they have become Nepalese. Then there are the Rai who are Khamba descendants with flat noses. They are all Tibetans. Then there are the Lhabchi [Lepcha] they were also Tibetans. So we will be nothing except refugees in India and so everyone should do well. So I did send such a letter.   

**Q:**  This was in 1962 right?   

**A:**  Yes. And I sent it with Andru Jinda. And he gave it to Phala. Phala said that Legshey criticized the government and he gave me a scolding. They did not accept it. The aristocrats still had their ancient influence. There is no place to tell the truth and justice. This is the caused of the foreigners taking over our territory. Your father is good both in Tibetan and English. Even if I have something to tell in the mind, but there is no way to say it. I just said it boldly. Earlier Thubden Nyinji came with somebody from some school. I was 60 years old then. He asked me what I was doing? I said I was getting ready to go. He said, "Where"? "To the lord of death [Tib. གཤིན་རྗེ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ]" I said. In 1972, I took leave from Kungö Gyalo Thondup and said that I am devoting myself to religion. Then Gyalo Thondup said, "You should read the foreign newspapers. You will see that they are getting married in their 60s and 70s. So at 60 years, at Bodh Gaya, I took the gelong vows in front of the Dalai Lama. He said, "We have been praying before tens of thousands of years to get you receive the gelong vows in Bodh Gaya." I said, "Thank you very much." Trijang Rimpoche also told me to close the door and read your Kangyur. So I came up and did that. It has now been 22 years since I devoted myself to religion. I read the Tanjur [Tib. བསྟན་འགྱུར] twice and Gyetong [Tib. བརྒྱད་སྟོང] one thousand times and Kangyur nine times. Now, I don't have any work other than reading scriptures, prostrating and offering butter lamps and water offerings. Last time, some English and Japanese came to interview me. They asked me what I did when I was young? I told him that in my homeland, we have fields and also nomads and I had been serving my parents till the age 16 and I went to school and studied writing. When I was 16, I got married. Till the age of 28, I had 9 children. At the age 38, I went to trade in Dartsedo. In that year, I fought with the Chinese and I ran away. From the age of 38 till 60, I served the Dalai Lama and served honestly day and night. At the age of 72, I asked for leave. All of my 7 brothers had died. By the grace of the dharma, me, the oldest, is left. Then they asked me, "What am I thinking about the dharma?" I said, "They had killed hundreds of thousands of people and lamas and destroyed many statues and scripture and stupas and temples. I pray for them to go to heaven and may there no be war and famine in the country." Then the Japanese man said, "You are the one who didn't spoil your human birth. According to your accomplishments, you will get a salary for that in the world." But, I said, "I don't ask for a salary. If I would get a salary, I would have to work and then I can't practice dharma." Then they gave me some food stuffs.   

**Q:**  Now let me get back to the fifties. You must have said it but I couldn't understand you much. When you first started the organization, it is said that Yuthok, Phünkang, Trunyichemmo Angula, Shakabpa were all-together.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes. He was there also. The one who sold the house to Tshatrütsang [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་ཚང]. He has two sons. What's that Kungö's name?   

**Q:**  Is one of their sons is still staying here now?   

**A:**  Yes, the one he brought from Tibet. He was a lay official. The two sons have a good job in Dharamsala. His name is something. The one who bought the house above Ganden Villa.   

**Q:**  Trendong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང]?   

**A:**  Yes! Trendong. He was there before he became a monk.   

**A:**  At first, they were together and later it is said that they did not get along with Phünkhang and Alo Chöndze.   

**A:**  That I told you. That he said if Gyalo Thondup says about his works in 3 years, then I will stay. Otherwise I will not.   

**Q:**  You have mentioned it, right? But I don't understand you very well.   

**A:**  No. you won't.   

**Q:**  What was the problem that they did not get along about?   

**A:**  The reason was that in 53,54, and 55, Alo Chöndze said that he had done some work for Gyalo Thondup, Shakabpa and Khenjung in India.   

**Q:**  Alo Chöndze said that in 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So he was saying that they must mention that work. There is no need to, right? And Kungö could not remember all of that, right? But he was saying that this must be mentioned, otherwise he was not going to stay. So it was only Alo Chöndze and the representatives of Ganden and the three of them. There were no problems with the others. It was said that Phünkhang Lhajam was challenging Gyalo Thondup, but I have not seen them not getting along.   

**Q:**  Did Phünkhang Lhajam come for the meetings?   

**A:**  No, but I think she was meddling [Tib. ཇུས་གཏོགས] in that. If I were to tell you, you all will be disappointed. They didn't have a good loyalty but they got there for the money and they would rob money from each other and they didn't do proper work for the religion. If you ask another Khamba, I have mentioned it [in the tape]. I had told Kungö Lukhangwa the main points many times. These days they are saying they can't understand anything I say since my Khamba dialect is supposedly difficult.   

**Q:**  It is pretty difficult.   

**A:**  Since you all haven't traveled much, except to school and Kalimpong. But if you traveled to Kham, like Sawangchemmo [my grandfather] who has traveled everywhere, actually my Khamba dialect is not the more difficult one. But if you haven't been anywhere, then you don't know .   

**Q:**  Yes, Yes. Now regarding Yuthok Sawangchemmo and Trunyichemmo Angula. The former first came to see off the Dalai Lama, but later he stayed. Why did he stay back?   

**A:**  The main person was Lukhangwa. Then Yuthok and Angula. Then Shakabpa and Khenjung, then the 4 monk officials. So it was said this was customary.   

**Q:**  So they were all supposedly together.   

**A:**  Yes, they got along.   

**Q:**  But most people, they just talk only about only three people, the Jenkhentsisum.   

**A:**  You don't need more than three meeting! The Kashag also had only three and three of them would talk. Then there were the other officials below like the gembo (headmen). So the three made the decisions. What they said, I did the work.   

**Q:**  So Yuthok and Trunyichemmo Angula were there acting as leaders?   

**A:**  Probably, well not really. Yidön, Panjain [2 kyidu of Kalimpong], the Kyidu in Darjeeling, they were all a tight group of independence supporters.   

**Q:**  What was done about the finances of the organization.   

**A:**  There wasn't anything!   

**Q:**  No money at all?   

**A:**  Nothing.   

**Q:**  What about salary?   

**A:**  There was no salary.   

**Q:**  What salary was given to those who worked there?   

**A:**  No salary (laughter).   

**Q:**  Not even a little?   

**A:**  Kungö Phala spoke well saying that I did well and I get Rs.100 a month.   

**Q:**  Who gave, Phala?   

**A:**  Its from Phala to me to collect it from Shakabpa. I collected for two years.   

**Q:**  Rs. 100?   

**A:**  . Rs 100 was said to be the best then and they told me, "You need to drink melted butter and good butter tea, so we give you 100 Rs." So they must have had [some source] Ganden monk and Alo Chöndze did not have any [salary]. At that time, I told the Kungö that you should treat the representatives of the three great monastery and Alo Chöndze, so they gave them each a rubber mattress and one year's salary Rs. 1200. So they were given one year's salary.   

**Q:**  Who did?   

**A:**  Shakabpa gave it. If you get a letter from Lukhangwa, then Shakabpa will give the money.   

**Q:**  Shakabpa gives the money?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The letter is given by Lukhangwa.   

**A:**  Lukhangwa has to make the decision, right? So the representatives of the three monasteries and Alo Chöndze got Rs 1200 in three years.   

**Q:**  Three years? One year?   

**A:**  Every year there is 1200, right? Only one was given. The three spoke against the government, right? And they got a rubber mattress each.   

**Q:**  Rubber mattress?   

**A:**  Yes. I told the Ganden monk and Sera and to the three, "Its bad. I spoke to the Kungö and they promised to pay you Rs. 1200 and they have told Shakabpa. And now you people are speaking bad things to the government and that is not good." [gov't probably refers to the officials at Kalimpong.] Later, things went very bad with the three of them. Almost as if they didn't even have tsamba to eat. Alo Chöndze said that he needs Rs. 3,000 for his son's fees since at Homes [Dr. Graham's School] they would not give the [admission?] letter.   

**Q:**  Homes?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  His son was going there?   

**A:**  Yes. So the representative of the monasteries and I went to see Kungö Yuthok. He spoke with the three of them. I said, "Kungö please don't be angry. In our Tibet we have discipline but these representatives of Lhasa don't have any discipline. I am a Khamba [it is like the proverb] "Kings should act as kings, the minister should act as ministers and the beggars should act as beggars." I can hope to be nothing but a beggar and only serve and I only think about the independence of Tibet. Alo Chöndze said that he has done so much in Lhasa, but I have not seen that. The Rs. 3,000 for fees is high, but please give this." Kungö Yuthok gave this and he spoke very well to me. He said, "Legshey, you get along well and we like you. I didn't come to India just like that, but for the independence of Tibet." So Kungö Yuthok swore to me like this. I said, "I trust you Kungö, but I didn't get the chance to talk. Later, Kungö Gyalo Thondup told me to go to Taiwan. I said I don't want to go since its not good for Tibet. He said, "You don't have to go just like that, but to help Kungö Yuthok." I have many friends in Taiwan, military commanders, but I said I am not going.   

**Q:**  When was this? In the 60's?   

**A:**  1978-79.   

**Q:**  Yuthok was in Taiwan.   

**A:**  Yes. Didn't he die there?   

**Q:**  Surkhang died in Taiwan.   

**A:**  Not Surkhang, but Yuthok.   

**Q:**  Why were you supposed to do in Taiwan?   

**A:**  To assist Yuthok. He was sort of like the representative there. I requested that they send me to the military and I was the one who sent the soldiers to Dehradun, Mustang and ATV in Delhi. Kungö told me that I can go to become a soldier and you don't need to be an ordinary soldier. You will get a rank in the military. Then I was told to go to Darjeeling to serve his [Yuthok's] wife, but I also refused.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama came to India and some were saying that he should stay and others that he should return. What talks did you have regarding this?   

**A:**  We probably asked him to stay, but the people who told him to go back might have talked about this.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was to return, Ngabö or some other kudraks were to be done away with somewhere in Sikkim and some war was to be started to make the Dalai Lama not to return.   

**A:**  That's all just talk and nothing is true. Sera Chandzö and all went to Gangtok. They asked me if I wanted to go and I said no. I said that I am doing my own work well. It won't work out if you only flatter people. I didn't go. So there was such talk.   

**Q:**  What were they going to do. Get rid of Ngabö, start a war or get rid of some kudraks.   

**A:**  No, No, No.   

**Q:**  There is some talk like that.   

**A:**  No, No, there wasn't. They were talking about the religion and serving the Dalai Lama only. Nobody dared to say anything because the Chinese had a lot of spies. There were spies probably on the Dalai Lama. There were spies on the two tutors and everybody.   

**Q:**  Then there was some talk about starting a war so the Dalai Lama could not return. Did you hear about that?   

**A:**  No, I did not hear anything. Regarding the 300 loads of gold, Pandatsang Yamphel [Tib. ཡར་འཕེལ] and those people said a lot that it should be taken back to Tibet. The Chinese said that it should be taken back. He said it would be useless if you don't take it back. Kungö Khenjung said that he is not going to give it and so did I and so did the representatives of the three monasteries.   

**Q:**  What didn't he want to give it.   

**A:**  The gold, 300 boxes.   

**Q:**  In Gangtok there was gold, right?   

**A:**  That's already sold, didn't you know. He wanted these sent to Tibet.   

**Q:**  It was the trade representative who wanted to send it?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The trade mission was Chinese.   

**A:**  Yes, there were about six of them. There were two cadres from Ba; one was called Ngawang Namgyel and other called Wang Minde and the Chinese was called Wangye. Those Baba might be 2-faced and would have treated me nicely because we were from the same place, but I didn't go there.   

**Q:**  Which other persons are there if I want to ask. Maybe people in the Panjain and Yidön Kyidu (Associations). Yabshi Trunyila [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལགས] was there right?   

**A:**  He was not in he kyidu and wouldn't know much, he's a real lama, lama type [honest]. You ask him, he will know something. He wrote the letters for Gyalo Thondup, so he might know the contents.   

**Q:**  Who else is there? Amdo Gyetong?   

**A:**  He would know well, he worked for Shakabpa.   

**Q:**  Then there is Alo Chöndze.   

**A:**  He isn't there, right?   

**Q:**  He's still alive.   

**A:**  Where?   

**Q:**  Australia   

**A:**    

**Q:**  Who else is around?   

**A:**  Nobody.   

**Q:**  Even if not in the Tshogpa (organization), there maybe someone who knows. Some one who did some work. Maybe a messenger.   

**A:**  Nobody.   

**Q:**  Maybe some one who worked for Thando Rimpoche's [Tib. དར་མདོ] Labrang?   

**A:**  Nobody. Rimpoche knows something and we spoke last year. He might know something about Alo Chöndze, but he wouldn't know much about the talks in the upper level. [read: few years ago]. He died last year [few years ago].   

**Q:**  Was he in the organization.   

**A:**  His name should be there.   

**Q:**  So he was not there regularly.   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  You were there all the time.   

**A:**  I was there. I was staying with Kungö Lukhangwa and the tsendrön.   

**Q:**  Where did you meet?   

**A:**  Wait a minute! Wait a minute!   

