# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0037.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** November 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 71  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was an Amdowa who was the brother-in-law of the Dalai Lama and the Commander of the Bodyguard Regiment from 1954-59. In this interview, he discusses the selection process for the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama, and about how the Qinghai Panchen Lama candidate was accepted during the 17-Point Agreement. He also discusses political disagreements surrounding the Tibet Military Administrative Committee and how the Panchen Lama was accepted by the Tibetan Government. He also explains the Nanjing Tibetan Bureau Office and briefly talks about the 17-Point Agreement.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0037_02/H_0037_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  As I mentioned to you just now, there were many things regarding the Panchen Lama in the letter that I just read to you. So let me ask you about that, what do you think?   

**A:**  As you mentioned just now, the fact that a conversation took place between Li Weihan and Fan Ming [in the 1951 talks] that we wouldn't know [about] is probably true. However, as I see it, according to the situation at that time, mostly it's a lie. What <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and Lhautara said, although Sambo did not go into detail, what little he said is true. What Lhautara said was said in a diplomatic way [Tib. མཁས་པོ] keeping in mind the other's [Chinese] view. However, in his version, I don't think he lied, but there was some patchwork [Tib. བཟོ་བཅོས]. What was said in the Fan Ming article I have never heard and it is not true. Especially the part where he said that photos were shown, etcetera. No photos were shown at all. It's possible that they brought a photograph, but it must have been the Guomindang's Tibetan Mongolian Office's [Tib. བོད་སོག་ལས་ཁུངས] representative called Guan something. If you look in the books, you will find [his name]. He was the head of that office. At that time, certain people, like the official kudraks of the Panchen Tshang [the Panchen's organization] in Qinghai which was led by Lhamön [Tib. ལྷ་སྨོན] and Che Jigme [Tib. ཅེ་འཇིགས་མེད] requested to the Guomindang, and Guan specially invited them. At this time, the Guomindang were in a difficult period, right? However, they sent a representative, the head of the Tibetan Mongolian Office, and they had a ceremony there. If one goes according to Tibetan history, the tradition began since the time of the 8th Dalai Lama. How it happened is [that for the choosing of] the Dalai Lamas, the Panchen Lamas and the Khalka Jetsün Thamba [Tib. ཁལ་ཁ་རྗེ་བཙུན་དམ་པ], it was said that the golden urn would be used. The idea actually came from our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> divine lottery system. During the time of the Manchu Emperor Qianlong, after the Gorkha Nepalese War, Tibetans asked for China's help so the Manchu Commander Fu Zhunchang came. The Gorkhas surrendered and the Manchu made some 20 odd rules/articles, with Tibet. In one of those rules/articles it was stated that the Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama and big lamas like the Khalka Jetsün Thamba must be selected by being picked from a golden urn. However, the Tibetan Government selected three candidates and for about a week, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a> and other big lamas gathered in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>, and in front of Buddha's statue performed the rituals for a week. After that, the two Ambans, the Kashag and all the government officials gathered, and it seems the Ambans would shake the golden urn and then the Panchen Lama, probably with chopsticks, picked one of the balls and the clerk of the Amban read the result saying so and so's son was selected. So that's how the use of the golden urn came into being. However, this system continued later for just one or two [of] the Dalai Lamas and not for the majority of them which were chosen by the Tibetan government. For example, regarding the 13th Dalai Lama, the government decided firmly that no one else but the one born in Dakpo [Tib. དྭགས་པོ] was the Dalai Lama. However, they asked the Manchu Government to approve this saying that it was he. But they had to report [it to] the Manchu who then approved it. Regarding the Panchen Lamas, except for one or two of the Panchen Lamas, the majority were decided [in Tibet]. So what should I say, whatever was told from below, that was accepted [by the Manchu]. The Manchu really didn't have much [involvement, power]. It was mainly in the hands of the Amban. So the 13th Dalai Lama was not selected by the golden urn. Regarding the 9th Panchen Lama, I don't know the story. The way this actually began, I think I told you yesterday. The 2nd or 3rd Khalka Jetsün Thamba, after the death of the Khalka queen, probably the younger queen had a child and it was said that he was the reincarnation of the Khalka Jetsün Thamba. However, they had to petition the Dalai Lama and without the confirmation of the Dalai Lama, recognition was not given. So after this, it seems that the Khalka Jetsün Thamba was also selected by the golden urn. Now regarding his [MCG's letter], now I don't quite recall.   

**Q:**  During the time of the 17-Point Agreement, the Tibetan Government said that the real Panchen Lama was in Lhasa and they did not accept the present Panchen Lama [the Qinghai candidate]. So regarding this, the Chinese did not know quite what to say about it. So Li Weihan asked [Fan Ming] what the situation was regarding the Panchen Lama. So Dzasa Che Jigme and the Panchen Lama's younger tutor were asked about it and they related about the selection and the process and about how finally the Chinese government had to decide it, and how they said that this system should be followed. So [Fan Ming] gave this report to Li Weihan, saying this was the process and it seemed that the Kashag had to agree. So after 3 days, the meeting resumed with Li Weihan taking the report given by Fan Ming and speaking with Ngabö. What they [Tibetans] said was that during the time of the Qing dynasty, the Chinese Government decided this, but during the time of the Guomindang, since we were independent we would not accept it. So when this conversation took place, Li Weihan seems to have said, "Is this discussion between two countries or between the local and the central government? If the Panchen Lama is not accepted then you consider yourself to be an independent country. If that is the case, then there is no use in talking. All we have left to do is send the soldiers in." So there was such talk.   

**A:**  That is what happened. At first, when we got there, we discussed the 17-Point Agreement and there were a lot of disagreements here and there. At one point, this is what happened. They said that they wanted to establish a Military Administrative Committee. The Central Government was going to do this. They said that the first leader would be the Dalai Lama. When this was said, Lhautara enquired, "What is this Military Administrative Committee and what is it supposed to do? What is it's duty?" Li Weihan got angry and said, "What are you saying? Are you asking me the main questions [Tib. རྡོ་ཁ་ལེན]? The Military Administrative Committee has the leadership for both the military and politics." Lhautara said, "If that is the case, then does the Dalai Lama have all the power?" Now Li Weihan got more furious saying, "What are you saying about whether the Dalai Lama has power or not? Whatever it is, it is in the hands of the Chinese government." So he banged his fists on the table and said, "Do you want to talk about a peaceful liberation of Tibet or do you want a forceful liberation. If you want a forceful liberation, then we will wire the forces at the border and the forceful liberation will begin right now. As far as your life is concerned, there will be no danger. After the liberation of Tibet has begun it doesn't matter if you want to leave later or right now, but we will send the soldiers to escort you to the border. So you make this choice." This encounter necessitated a recess and for a few days there was a break [no discussions]. During this period Ngabö called all of the delegation and the staff and inquired about what we should do. He said, "Now given this attitude of the Chinese, there is really no point in talking or not talking. Whatever happens, it's in their hands. Whether they want to kill or cut, it's all in their hands." Everyone said, "Yes, it is as you have said," and so it was decided like this. In the meantime, Phüntso Wangyal [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ], went back and forth [discussing this]. Probably he was sent by Li Weihan or whoever. Finally, after 3 or 4 days, the talks resumed. So now it was whatever they wanted to say, right? It is as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> had said in his book. He had written, "We were like a petitioner in a courtroom and the Chinese representatives were like those who passed the sentence." It was just like that. There was just listening and offering some suggestions. Other than that, there was nothing. Finally, when the 17-Point Agreement was about to be all ready, Li Weihan had this to say: "The business between the Chinese government [Ch. zhongyang] and the local government is now about [to be] concluded. But the most important thing left is to decide on the matter between the local government and the Panchen." Regarding this, Ngabö said, "We representatives do not have the authority to decide this. Besides, this is an internal matter of the Tibetan Government. So there is no problem for the government to discuss this with the Labrang [entity] after the 17-Point Agreement is concluded." The Chinese said no. This matter must be decided on here. They said, "It is very important to have the Panchen Rimpoche recognized. Then the powers of the Panchen Lama must be discussed. We said that we cannot decide this matter. When we arrived in Beijing, after two days the Panchen Lama came to Beijing from Qinghai. When this happened, Ngabö, Kheme and the delegates did not go to receive him. The Chinese insisted that they had to go, but we said that at that moment we had not recognized this candidate and that there were two other candidates who were in Tibet, so altogether there were three candidates. The ones in Tibet were not found by the Tibetan Government, but by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and the Tibetan Government. So there was one candidate in Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད] and another in Litang. They were called up [to Lhasa] and the Qinghai candidate was also asked to come. This was during the Guomindang period. But the Panchen Lama's people [refused to send him and] kept him there [in China where they were in exile] and said that only he was to be recognized. The Tibetan Government said that this was not possible and that it had to be done according to tradition. Then a divine lottery was done to see who would be the Panchen Lama. They [Labrang] did not listen and then the communists came into power." This story was related by Ngabö. He said that unless the Tibetan Government decided this, we could not do it ourselves. Then he related the story of how the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lamas were recognized. That whoever was the elder, he took the responsibility for the recognition, etcetera. All this story was explained to them clearly. So we said that without an order from the Kashag and the Dalai Lama, we were not going to go [to greet him]. However, we would send some staff members, the younger ones like Sambo, myself, Rinchenla, Bumtang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས]. So we went to the railway station to receive him. After that, we had the talks on the Panchen Lama. There was a lot of sharp [Tib. རྣོ་ངར་ལྡན་པ] arguments back and forth. Kungö Kheme or Lhautara, Sambo and myself formed a small team [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆུང]. On their side, there was Zhang Guohua and others. We had difficulties in coming to an agreement. What Zhang Guohua said was this, "The reason why we are liberating Tibet is because of the Panchen Lama." We said that if that was the case, then that's a different matter. So the team fell apart. From our part, we reported to Ngabö. After 2-3 days, they sent Song Zhiyuan, the general secretary of the Southwest Military Administrative Committee. He was one of the Chinese representatives. He met Ngabö and Phüntso Wangyal was the interpreter. They spoke all day until night, discussing back and forth. There was no agreement that day. Finally, Ngabö said, "If you want to talk about this subject, I am not going to reply. I am not going to talk about it at all. According to our tradition, this is how things work. If you want to do according to tradition, then we can discuss. If not, then you can do whatever you want." Finally, that day Ngabö couldn't make the decision and called all the representatives and told them about all of the discussions regarding the Panchen Lama. "It is now difficult to decide. I am a man under arrest so I am going to stay. If the discussions break down, then you all should leave. They can do whatever they want with me." Finally, this was what was decided. Then it was a day or so later, I'm not sure, [when] Song Zhiyuan approached Ngabö and said, "What do you think if we do it this way? What if we said that the power and the status of the 13th and the Panchen Lama 9th will remain? Regarding this, the present Panchen Lama, it would be good if the Tibetan Government recognized and requested the Dalai Lama." Ngabö said, "That's alright. There's no problem to do that because we can send a telegram and request that there seems no problem regarding the power and status of the 13th and the 9th the Panchen Lama when they were on friendly terms. Other than that, concerning a lot of other issues, I am not going to discuss those at all." So, it is as was stated by Sambo, a telegram was sent to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a>. After two days, we received the reply. The reply said, "The representatives of the 5 Sogang [Tib. ?] [labrang perhaps] of the Panchen Tshang came to Tromo and requested that the Qinghai candidate may please be recognized." So the Dalai Lama did a divination and this was confirmed." When we received the telegram, the next day we went to call on the Panchen Lama. As a Tibetan Government custom, we offered a mandala representing the body, speech, and mind, and we accepted him. What they said about that we said, "Yes. Yes," "Les, les [Tib. ལགས་སེ, ལགས་སེ]." That is all total lies.   

**Q:**  That they showed the picture, etcetera.   

**A:**  Yes, that they showed the picture and we kept quiet, no way. This thing about the Dalai Lama's Office [Tib. དོན་གཅོད] in Nanjing. At that time, Nanjing Officers had run away to Guangzhou [??] and we were in India at that time. What's his name, Tsador [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར་བ] Kungö and Jampa Ngawang [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ངག་དབང], who was then Ga Yongdrung's [Tib. དགའ་གཡུང་དྲུང] husband, had arrived in India.   

**Q:**  You mean the one in Kalimpong? The Khenjung?   

**A:**  No, Khenjung was her later husband. At that time, they were all in Kalimpong. This thing about them going to Xining is just absolute lies. At that time, it was a period of turmoil and they were talking about photographs. It is just such "shitty" lies [Tib. སྐྱག་རྫུན་སྐྱག་ནག]. If one tells the real situation [it is good], and even if one exaggerates a little, that's acceptable [given the situation], but this is just such a tremendous lie. Talking about photos and just saying "Les, les," nothing of that sort happened. To tell you the truth, at that time Ngabö and Phüntso Wangyal were the real actors on the stage. If the two could be interviewed then it is really [good]. If not, there is a speech given by Ngabö in the TAR. The Information Office [in Dharamsala] has that. If you can get that document it is clearly spelled out. Even if it is not that detailed, the main concern is very well mentioned.   

**A:**  From the Panchen and the Chinese side, mainly it is from the Chinese side, they said that "Things cannot be done according to the earlier period. In the earlier period it is as you have said, but if possible we want equal seating." The Tibetan Government, Kashag, said that this would not at all be possible. It was not said very clearly, but probably the attitude given was that there could be a little bit difference in the height of the thrones. Finally, it was decided with the Dalai Lama seated and, now what he [MCG] is referring to, about the Dalai Lama standing next to the throne is not about the Panchen Rimpoche, but about Zhang Jingwu when he came to Lhasa with a portrait of Mao. They said that the Dalai Lama had to stand next to the throne and accept the portrait. It was about this problem. So the narration is mixed up. When the Panchen Lama came to meet the Dalai Lama, it was all done according to the old tradition with him prostrating and everything. The seating heights were all according to tradition. [Note: This is incorrect.]  

**Q:**  What is said here [MCG's letter] [is] that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> and the Kashag had an agreement.   

**A:**  One says <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a>, but it is all done according to Chinese policy. The Nangmagang is the Panchen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> (the Panchen's organization).   

**Q:**  So there wasn't anything about the Dalai Lama standing near the throne when the Panchen Lama came?   

**A:**  No. Nothing like that. I have not heard about it, though I was not personally involved with that. Later, what was said is as I have said. Then after the audience, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama met each other in a room and leisurely met. So it was very good [cordial]. The Panchen Lama respected the Dalai Lama and on these matters I know very well. Later, the Dalai Lama's personal attendants [Tib. གསོལ་གཟིམ་ཆོས་གསུམ], the Simpön Khembo and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] One of the three monk attendants of the Dalai Lama. He was in charge of religious offerings/rituals.">Chöpön Khembo</a>, they all said so, saying that the Panchen Lama respected the Dalai Lama a lot. When the Panchen Lama first came, they said that he was sort of reserved and after he met the Dalai Lama, it was very [cordial]. Mainly, at this time they were both very young.   

**Q:**  In the first article [of the 17-Point Agreement] it was said that the imperialist forces would be taken out of Tibet and Tibet would return to the motherland. Regarding this, it was said that there were no imperialist forces in Tibet. The Chinese replied that there were, but the Tibetans were not aware of it. In the end, the Tibetans said, "If the imperialist forces are in Tibet then you take them out."   

**A:**  No, it was not said like this.   

**Q:**  So this was what was said and when this was first said, do you remember what was said? Regarding the first point.   

**A:**  When they said that there were imperialist forces, Ngabö said, "There are no imperialist forces in Tibet. During the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, there were relations with the English and more recently some relations with the Americans." So they said, "No, definitely there are imperialist forces." So they talked about the withdrawal of the imperialist forces. On this, we said that we wouldn't accept it. Anyway, the 1st article is something that they had made. Anyway, the 17-Point Agreement point was like this. At first, they gave 10 points. Then there was a lot of discussion and it became 17 points. For example, the power and status of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama was something extra that was added.   

**Q:**  Yes. When you first went, there were 10 points, right? Now these 10 points, it was not able to change them, right?   

**A:**  The 10 points, all of them were included [in the 17-Point Agreement]. So there were some extra points. Some offspring were born, so from the 10 points, 7 children were born.   

**Q:**  Now how did this come about? After discussions?   

**A:**  No. At that time.   

**Q:**  During the discussions?   

**A:**  Yes. For example, they said that there was freedom of religion. So, there were discussions back and forth and an extra article came out regarding the income of the monasteries remaining as before. Then the Dalai Lama and officials would not be investigated regarding their previous actions, and that there was freedom of religion. Then later, some extra articles came into being, like the power and status of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama should be as it was when they were on good terms. So these were extra.   

**Q:**  Then in the 2nd article, there was the help that was to be given by the local government to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> to come to Tibet to protect the borders. So regarding this, not that much was said, I think.   

**A:**  There was talk on this. We said that on the borders we wanted to keep the Tibetan Army as a substitute [Tib. ཚབ་བྱས] [for the PLA]. They did not at all agree to that.   

**Q:**  It is mentioned [MCG's book] that there is no need to leave a huge number of troops on the border. If there is a foreign invasion, then [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes, that is right. In the future, if there are invasions by other countries, then we will ask [for more troops].   

**Q:**  Then it was asked what the term "local government" meant. What MCG said [was] that since the Tibetan word "government" was there, the Tibetans thought that it may not be so bad.   

**A:**  It is not like that, but really I don't know about that. Ngabö made some reply. But regarding the Military Administrative Committee, Lhautara asked what it was and Li Weihan got angry and said that it was the combined power of military and politics.   

**Q:**  Then there were side agreements?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was one about the army?   

**A:**  Yes. About the number of soldiers. One was about the status of the Dalai Lama if he went abroad and returned.   

**Q:**  Then there was something about the currency?   

**A:**  Maybe. I don't know about this. Actually, regarding all this, if [MCG] could meet Ngabö, because he has a fantastic memory. I was at this time a staff member and sort of an interpreter. I know a bit here and there but not in detail.   

