# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0037.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was an Amdowa who was the brother-in-law of the Dalai Lama and the Commander of the Bodyguard Regiment from 1954-59. In this interview, he discusses political talks in China and transportation issues, including Sursur Dzasa and Thubden Chömpel's trip to Delhi. He became a senampa and worked in the Foreign Office as a rimshi and then worked as the Commander of the Gusung Bodyguard Regiment. He describes his involvement in the Youth League and the Snowland Football Team, and the appeal of communism among the young people in general. He then discusses the demotion of the two sitsab, the Chinese military, the reforms and the influence of the Khamba's revolt in Tibetan history. Finally, he talks about the Cultural Revolution and his earlier visit to India with the Dalai Lama during the Buddha Jayanti.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0037_01/H_0037_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What I want to ask you is that, as you know, we are writing a 1950-59 history book, so I would like to ask you concisely what you did from 1950-59, whether you were in India or Tibet.   

**A:**  From 1950-59 I was mostly in Tibet. When the Chinese came in 1950, I was in Kalimpong with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>. Shakabpa was to go to China to negotiate. There were Shakabpa, myself and Taring, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Thubden Gyalpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱལ་པོ]. The staff officers were Leja Taring, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> Lobsang Nyendra [Tib. བློ་བཟང་སྙན་གྲགས], and the lay official Driyü [Tib. འབྲི་ཡུལ], the husband of Shakabpa's younger sister, and as the representative of the three great monastic seats, a geshe. We were in India trying to go to China, but could not go. We were in Calcutta and around there.   

**Q:**  Yes, Calcutta but since the Chinese Embassy was in Delhi, you must have been there?   

**A:**  Yes, in Delhi also. This was later, towards end of 1959 [he means 1950] [we] arrived in Kalimpong from Lhasa and were supposed to go to China and commute between Calcutta and Kalimpong. Then we couldn't go. I don't remember very well, but it was around the 9th or 10th month. Then we went down to Delhi and met the Chinese representative there. He was not the ambassador, but only the chargé d'affaires. After about one or two months he became the ambassador . So we were supposed to go to China, but in the meantime, Chamdo was lost.   

**Q:**  I see, so Chamdo was taken while you were in India?   

**A:**  Yes. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Rimpoche resigned and the Dalai Lama took over the religion-political reigns of the state. We received orders from the government telling us that there was no need to go to China and so we proceeded to [return to] Yadong. So that's about what happened in 1950.   

**Q:**  I see, so you were at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and that was the time representatives were sent [to Beijing] via India, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Now Ngabö was already under arrest. At Lhasa, the capital, there were the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and the acting kalön [Tib. ཀཙབ] Thubden Ramyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས] and Shasur [Tib. བཤད་སུར]. Ngabö sent a message saying that it would be good to negotiate with China and representatives were sent. Since Ngabö was already at Chamdo, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Rimshi, Tenzin Thöndrup [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ] and Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན] [were sent]. It seemed that they were first considering negotiations at Chamdo. Later, after the Dalai Lama arrived at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, representatives were sent to the Chinese Embassy in Delhi. Sursur Dzasa [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར] [Surkhang Sawangchemmo's father] and the Drunyichemmo Thubden... something... I forgot.   

**Q:**  You don't mean the one [Thubden] with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>?   

**A:**  No. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> was sent via Lhasa, but from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> Surkhang Dzasa, who was at that time probably the head of the Tibet Foreign Office, [and] as his colleague, Drunyichemmo Thubden Chömpel [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཆོས་འཕེལ], were sent via India. His family was called Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང]. The staff officers were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Rinchen [Tib. ས་འདུ་རིན་ཆེན] and myself. The four of us arrived in Delhi and met the Chinese ambassador for discussions. So it was decided that representatives would go to Peiking. From Yadong, Magji Dzasa Kheme Sonam Wangdü [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད་བསོད་ནམས་དབང་འདུས] and Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར] were appointed. As the staff, it was myself and Sandu Rinchen. We were to go from India via Hong Kong to Beijing. From Chamdo, it was mainly Ngabö, and via Lhasa Sambo and Thubden Lengmön. So there were representatives from two groups.   

**Q:**  Later, the 17-Point Agreement was signed and from 1951-52 the government sort of agreed to work together [with the Chinese]. This later did not work out at all. I want to ask you this very broad and general question. Why did it not work out?   

**A:**  From one perspective, it is difficult to sort of answer this. On the other hand, there are many reasons. From one perspective, the 17-Point Agreement was not very just. The Chinese sort of made it under threat. A treaty really should be drawn up between equals. This was not so. The other side came with guns drawn and one side with both their hands up, and therefore, obviously, it was not just. Secondly, when the 17-Point Agreement was signed, the representatives needed to consult the Dalai Lama and the Kashag. This was not possible. Then the Tibetan people were not agreeing. So there must be agreement from the top as well as from the bottom. So from the beginning, the 17-Point Agreement had no meaning or force. That's the main reason, but then there are so many others.   

**Q:**  Well, when the meeting at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> to discuss things was over, there was a feeling that there was no choice but to accept the 17-Point Agreement. That was around 1951. So what about in '52, '53, '54? Why did things go bad?   

**A:**  So, it's what I already told you. It is like a sickness, a cancerous growth that with or without surgery it is still incurable. That's the reason.   

**Q:**  During this time, it is said by some that the Kashag just could not even meet or discuss things without the Chinese knowing about it. How was it at that time?   

**A:**  I doubt there is anything [true] concerning that. It's probably just bazaar talk. There weren’t such things in the Kashag. Well, some say Ngabö told the Chinese. I don't think so. He's not such a man. From our Tibetan way of thinking, it is his own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> [that he happened to be where he was]. He's a truthful man, not at all the type that would go and report things to the Chinese. I have met Shasur and Surkhang before and later too, none of this happened. However, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, Lukhang and Losang Tashi did not see eye to eye with the Kashag. The Kashag took a calm and diplomatic approach with the Chinese since relations were already established with the Chinese while the sitsab were confrontational. For example, when they first came to see the sitsab, they told the Chinese, "If you come to fight with empty stomachs, the only thing you can get is to be defeated" [Tib. drogaw tongba khini mag gyabna phamya mando yaw mare]. If so many of you Chinese come, then there is no food. Tibet does not have the provisions. So this is not good." While the Chinese were trying to be diplomatic, the sitsab in return said, "Unless the sore that is on the head heals, one cannot become friends with the enemy. Given what you have done at Chamdo, how can we immediately become friends?" So the Kashag was being diplomatic and naturally, the Chinese were playing it up [ the difference between Kashag and sitsab].   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> not think that now the 17-Point Agreement has been signed and there was no choice but to work with the Chinese? Did they not consider this or was there some other agenda, some other group that was supporting them, telling them not to agree to the terms? Maybe a group in India?   

**A:**  This I don't known. But I don't think there was anything like that. There were a few people's representatives, but I don't think it was like a truly organized group in the Western sense of the term. They were saying that they were acting as substitutes for the Tibetan people and that they did not accept the 17-Point Agreement. So I think the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> agreed with the stance of the people's group. This group was saying that "It is not acceptable to have so many Chinese soldiers. The 17-Point Agreement has to be altered. Until there is such an agreement, the Chinese soldiers must withdraw to the border." So it seems that the two sitsab thought in a like manner. The two sitsab must have thought that the 17-Point Agreement had already been signed and there was not much that could be done. However, the two sitsab were good, honest and straight-forward. As far as the government and the people were concerned, the two of them were heroes. My personal opinion is that there is no question as to their bravery, but it did not fit in with the reality of the situation. They were forcing their way against something that could not be done.   

**Q:**  So you are saying that they were forcing the issue too much?   

**A:**  Yes. However, to have been able to do that much was really something. They sort of had decided to sacrifice their lives.   

**Q:**  Was what they had done was something out of their own belief or were they influenced by the public?   

**A:**  Nothing for themselves [the use of the word ger (private) in the question led to the misunderstanding], it's 100 percent sure that they did not do it for themselves.   

**Q:**  No, that's not...   

**A:**  For the public.   

**Q:**  When did this people's movement start? Right after the Chinese came?   

**A:**  Yes, the Chinese had already come.   

**Q:**  The Chinese came in 1950 and then the soldiers....   

**A:**  No, they had not come in 1950, it was '51. After the 17-Point Agreement and the Chinese... The few people who were probably more conscious must have consulted each other and decided to form a group.   

**Q:**  A lot of soldiers had come and the food situation was aggravated. Was this the reason why the people's group rose or was it some other...?   

**A:**  Yes, to some extent that was the reason. One reason, yes. But the main reason was that until now, we had run our own affairs. We were sort of independent. Now we came under the Chinese. That was the real reason. Other reasons were that there was a lot of inflation, with prices rising every day. When the Chinese came, they had no food with them and there were talks about the government helping them.   

**Q:**  In 1950, were you working as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  Then I was not a depön. I don't know if you know this or not, but when the Depön Midrag and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> [the highest strata aristocratic families] joined the government, they were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> rank. So, I was a senampa.   

**Q:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a>, 4th rank.   

**A:**  After the 17-Point Agreement, I worked in the Foreign Office [Tib. ཆིསི་ལེགུང]. Kyidula had passed away and I was appointed in his place as a rimshi. I became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> just before the Dalai Lama left for China in 1954. Before me, it had been held by Phala, but he became the Chöpön [Khembo] and I took his place as the depön.   

**Q:**  In the 17-Point Agreement, there was talk about the Tibetan Army becoming the Chinese Army. Anyway, there was some talk about the military. What happened to it later?   

**A:**  In the 17-Point Agreement, in one article, there was something about the Tibetan Army joining the People's Liberation Army. It did join. But all did not go into the Chinese Army. The military camps were separate, but the uniforms were same.   

**Q:**  The uniforms and...   

**A:**  Same as the People's Liberation Army. However, they did not wear it. They gave a winter and a summer uniform. The Bodyguard Regiment wore the [PLA] uniforms, but the others did not. They wore their traditional Tibetan uniforms, but their officers wore Chinese uniforms.   

**Q:**  In 1951 and after that you must have met the Chinese leaders.   

**A:**  Yes, very often.   

**Q:**  What would it be about?   

**A:**  I don't really remember, whatever was discussed at particular times.   

**Q:**  Let's say in 1951.   

**A:**  In 1951, maybe some bits and pieces but no really important matters.   

**Q:**  Let's say ,for example, they maybe saying that the two prime ministers were no good and that the people's agitation was not acceptable. Did they say such things?   

**A:**  Yes. They were saying these things, but I was not a part of it.   

**Q:**  Were you not in Lhasa at that time?   

**A:**  I was, but I had no dealings with that. But I did meet quite often with the Chinese. For example, a youth organization [Tib. Shünu Detso] was formed after they arrived and so sometimes I used to go there. A football team was formed called Gangchen polay ruga. Whatever organization they formed, I was there. The reason was that at that time we were sort of quite "attracted" to the communist ideas. That's how young people think, isn't it? From the government side, and the prime ministers, not much... [Means not much direct contact with Chinese as far as government matters were concerned.]   

**Q:**  The youth and women's groups were formed. How did that come about? Were there such groups from China or did the Chinese tell them to start, saying that it was a good thing?   

**A:**  This obviously, the Chinese started mainly. The Tibetans on their initiative would not do it, nor would [they] know how to. They invited contacts to dine and then started giving lectures, and so that's how they started.   

**Q:**  At that particular time did the youth members believe that the Chinese had come and something new was there? That they were joining something new? That they were happy to join it?   

**A:**  Of course.   

**Q:**  Did some see the Chinese coming as something positive?   

**A:**  Yes, even take yourself, for instance. If something new is to be done, it is always the youth. Anything new, the youth takes up. Take myself for example. Among us youth, when something new came up, we thought it was good. The youth have a lot of heart [read: positive outlook, idealistic, optimistic]. For example, whether it is the Chinese or the West, the youth are always enlisted in the army. The reason is that their minds are yet unclouded, ever ready to jump in and fight, full of bravado. But as time goes by, one begins to think why and learn to have better judgement. So the message that the Communists brought was that of a modern system, that it was great to do these new things, new reforms. And so the youth thought that it must be really true. What the Communists have going for them is their great emphasis on the modern message and reforms. That's where they benefited.   

**Q:**  Is there someone who specifically was assigned this work? For example, the Chinese military had come. Besides the military, what other organizations had come?   

**A:**  Well, whatever they had in China they had in Tibet. For example, in India, it's the same. Even in a family, one needs chopsticks, cups, spoons, etcetera to eat.   

**Q:**  Yes. For example, then those who are specialists in social ideas, etcetera, they all came?   

**A:**  Yes, all kinds.   

**Q:**  So, when the Chinese came, how were they organized, where did they meet, their office, etcetera?   

**A:**  This, well the Chinese came and so they stayed in their barracks.   

**Q:**  No. For example, how many military camps were there?   

**A:**  Oh! I don't know. They said 18 divisions came. But how many soldiers there were, it's hard to say in the Communist system. For other countries, we know how many soldiers are in a division, right? If there were, for example, 3 or 4 thousand in a division, in the Communist system [Chinese], they don't have this. They do have the name division. Mostly, they had more than the division [official] number. At times they had less. The purpose was to conceal it. At times they themselves didn't know.   

**Q:**  So the years, 1952, 1953, were you always in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  During this time, the people's agitation, when did it start?   

**A:**  Now I.... It began as soon as the Chinese arrived. Now, are you talking about Central or Eastern Tibet?   

**Q:**  No, I'm talking about the People's Association [Tib. མིམང་ཙོནདུ].   

**A:**  That was there a long time ago.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came?   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  Later on in 1955, 1956 in Eastern Tibet, there was a lot of trouble and the Khambas came up to Central Tibet, right? Now, let me ask you this very general question. If this had not taken place, then do you see a different scenario for Tibetan History? If the Khambas had not come to Central Tibet and begun the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> movement in Southern Tibet, if this had not occurred, then...   

**A:**  If this had not happened then things may have been different. [They] probably would have been different. Now the problem in the Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> area was mainly caused by the democratic reforms. If they had not started the democratic reforms, then there would not have been problems in Kham and Amdo. And if there had not been this problem in Kham and Amdo, then the problems in Ü <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> would not have arisen. The situations were each caused by the other. If the Kham and Amdo rebellion against the Chinese had not occurred, then the Central Tibet [Tib. ü་ཙང] rebellion would not have taken place. And if the Central Tibet rebellion had not taken place, then the 1959 problem could not have occurred. [He was trying to point to a cause and effect theory].   

**Q:**  Let's say that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> problem did not occur, but in Ü-Tsang there was this People's Association. Wasn't it that strong? For instance, like to do military encounters.   

**A:**  It probably would not have been that powerful. I doubt it. The most important thing is the Chinese policy. What really happened in Central Tibet was that the Chinese made the two prime ministers [Tib. སིཙབ] forcefully resign. This sowed bad seeds which injured the people and made them realize that the Chinese were no good. If the Chinese had pursued a clever policy in which they left the Kham area alone and tolerated the prime ministers, though it is hard to say how long it would have lasted, but it would not have turned so bad so soon. However, when things like the Cultural Revolution came, then it would have become intolerable. For example, the Panchen Rimpoche was very close and had good relations with them. He was sort of brought up by them, like a child. But during the Cultural Revolution, he became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལོག་སྤྱོད་པ; ch. sandong fenzi 煽动分子?] A (political) reactionary.">logjöpa</a>, a reactionary, with all sorts of labels, and he started to speak boldly against the Chinese. Then [he was] taken to China and put behind bars. There was no alternative, so the same would have happened to the Dalai Lama. One can't say one was weaned and so bad things would not happen. Even during the Cultural Revolution, let's say we forget about the Panchen Rimpoche and His Holiness, even the left and right hands of Mao such as Liu Xiaoqi and company got it.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese think that Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> was on their side of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་ཆུ] The Upper Yangtse River which formed the boundary between political Tibet and China in the 1930s and 1940s">Drichu</a> border and therefore, since it was in their territory, then they could do whatever reforms they wanted to?   

**A:**  I don't think so. I think what they felt was that all territories belong to China. So all of Tibet is considered part of China. So it is inevitable that the reforms would have come to Tibet anyway. Even if the uprising had not taken place, a year or two down the road the reforms would have been implemented.   

**Q:**  When His Holiness came to India in 1956, were you also there?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there as part of his entourage.   

**Q:**  So, it is said that there were a lot of discussions during this time.   

**A:**  For this you should ask <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> Kungö Gyalola. He can tell you exactly. He was part of it. We were sort of on the side.   

**Q:**  However, I do not really know about this, so which places did the group visit?   

**A:**  From Gangtok, Siliguri-Bagdogra to Allahabad and then they changed planes to Delhi. After the meeting ceremonies were over, the Dalai Lama went to Bharatnagar and also to Mussoorie I think, now I don't remember much. He also went to the south.   

**Q:**  So when they were discussing things weren't you there?   

**A:**  No, I was not there. I was only an entourage person. Regarding important matters, there was the Kashag consisting of Surkhang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, and Ngabö. They were there and...   

**Q:**  What I heard was that there were two factions, one wanting the Dalai Lama to stay in India the other to return to Tibet. My father told me briefly a long time ago about Ngabö saying there was no alternative but to return since there was no support from the outside.   

**A:**  Yes, this is true [about two factions and what Ngabö said]. What Ngabö said was if there was support, then you could stay, but if not then you wouldn't survive in another's country.   

**Q:**  Did Ngabö say, if you have support then show us proof?   

**A:**  This he must have said. Sure, one would obviously say something like that. Even we in politics, if someone says he got something we would naturally ask, "What have you got?"   

**Q:**  Who was part of the entourage?   

**A:**  Oh! Many.   

**Q:**  The ones who discussed things were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> Kungö Gyalola and...   

**A:**  Gyalola and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> were together. They were the ones who were staying in India. They were the ones who wanted the Dalai Lama to stay. Now among the Dalai Lama's entourage, there must have been some who supported them.   

**Q:**  Who was in the entourage?   

**A:**  So many, around 100.   

**Q:**  Wow! So if I want to ask, there must be some who are around. Was Kungö Tarala there?   

**A:**  Kungö Tarala was not there. I don't think anybody is around. However, the main discussants were the 3 kalön, Drunyichemmo Phala, and Jawdang, the one who passed away in the States. That's about it. Usually [when] there were meetings, yes those [were] in it. The 3 kalön were the main ones. If they couldn't decide, then Phala was there, since it was the drönyechemmo's work to inform the Dalai Lama on all matters and takes orders. Jawdang was Drönyerchemmo [actually he a <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>] and so below the Kashag in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a>, the main people were the drunyichemmo and the tsipön.   

**Q:**  It is said that in the 1950's in Kalimpong there was this group consisting of Gyalola, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, Ganden Villa Khenjung, Phunkhang and Yuthok. What was this group about?   

**A:**  I don't know about it at all.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  For this ask <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Gyalola.   

**Q:**  Last time I was not able to interview him regarding this. Only about the time from 1951-52 that he briefly came to Lhasa. Then he left for Delhi.   

