# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0037.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 8 April 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was an Amdowa who was the brother-in-law of the Dalai Lama and the Commander of the Bodyguard Regiment from 1954-59. In this interview, he details how some of the aristocrats wanted to offer their estates to the government, but couldn't implement it.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0037_04/H_0037_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Hello! How are you?   

**A:**  I am fine. What are you doing now?   

**Q:**  I am just concluding my interviews with some people and my contract is going to end this month. When I interviewed the Dalai Lama, he told me something. So regarding this matter, I thought of asking you. The Dalai Lama told me that in the 1950s, you were talking about offering the estates that belonged to the aristocrats to the government. How did that happen?   

**A:**  Was that in 1950?   

**Q:**  That was probably in 1954-55-56.   

**A:**  In 1952, after the Chinese arrival, the Dalai Lama gave the order to hold a meeting on reforms (Tib. lekjö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས་ཚོགས་འདུ]) and the Kashag held the reform meeting. It was for reforming the estates and the dzongs of Tibet which wee now to be managed by the government [Tib. གཞུང་འཛིན] [all the revenue would go to the government]. At that time, the meeting was held and the main leader was Ngabö. There was also Drunyichemmo Bumtang [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ་འབུམ་ཐང], and Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> [Tib. རྩིས་དཔོན་རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང]. And among the Standing Committee [Tib. རྒྱུན་ལས] there was Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང]. There also were two representatives from all the ranks in the monk and lay officials system: the fourth rank Rimshi [Tib. རིམ་བཞི], and the Senampa, the fifth rank Letsenpa [Tib. ལས་ཙན་པ], and the seventh rank Kyüma [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ]. At that time, discussion were held at the meeting regarding the way things could be reformed. Some of the lay officials said that it would be better to offer our estates to the government. We were among the officials talking about that. Phogpön Phala [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན་ཕ་ལྷ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> Senampa [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག་སྲས་རྣམ་པ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] and I had been discussing that and we were saying it would be better to submit a report.   

**Q:**  Did you say that at the meeting of the Lekjö?   

**A:**  We talked about that at a sub-group meeting [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆུང], and we also said that at the main meeting.   

**Q:**  Was that the sub-group that consisted of the fourth rank officials, the Rimshi and Senampas?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did they say when the meeting was held?   

**A:**  After that, some people said, "They just said that they are going to offer their estates because they owed a lot of loans and they were unable to manage themselves." So they didn't put it into action.   

**Q:**  Were there some people saying that we shouldn't offer the estates to the government?   

**A:**  Yes, there were.   

**Q:**  Were those people like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>?   

**A:**  There wasn't any particular person saying that. They said that it was meaningless talk [Tib. ཆོ་མེད་པ].   

