# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0037.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** July 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was an Amdowa who was the brother-in-law of the Dalai Lama and the Commander of the Bodyguard Regiment from 1954-59. In this interview, he details the discussion that took place regarding the 17 points in the Agreement. He also discusses the recognition of the Panchen Lama, especially as a political factor for the Chinese. And he discusses religious freedom and the monastic agreement with the Chinese, and the portfolios of the kalön in the Kashag.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0037_03/H_0037_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Kungö, you know English well, right?   

**A:**  No, I don't know it well.   

**Q:**  Oh I remember something, so let me ask you this. Goldstein returned to the States about a week ago. He did not get to meet Ngabö, but he did meet Phüntso Wangye. What Phüntso Wangye said was that Kheme Dzasa was very strong during the discussions [in Beijing in 1951]. That he was sort of on a par with Ngabö. Was that the case?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. He was Ngabö's assistant.   

**Q:**  So mainly, the two had discussions and   

**A:**  Everyone was discussing. It was not just the two of them. Ngabö was the main one. Then Kheme, then Lhautara, then Khenjung Thubden Lengmönla, then Sambo. They were the main representatives. However, when they needed to discuss, they called me also. This was to make me have some mental preparation when I would talk with them [in Chinese]. It seems that was one. Another thing, which they later said was that according to the wishes of Ngabö and the others, they felt that if I knew something then I would be able to directly inform the Dalai Lama. Perhaps this was the case because since I was the interpreter, there was no need to invite me to their discussions.   

**Q:**  Speaking of Ngabö and Künsangtse, was the former really taking charge or was Künsangtse on par with Ngabö?   

**A:**  He was not equal to Ngabö. Anyway, Künsangtse's character was such that he was the type that gave opinions diplomatically [Tib. མཁས་པོ] and he would not be outspoken to Ngabö. Whatever was in Ngabö's thinking, he would speak on that level.   

**Q:**  Yes. . So that was how the first day went by.   

**A:**  The first day, at first, Premier Zhou Enlai introduced the Tibetan and the Chinese representatives to each other before dining. He said, "You all have come to discuss. There are 5 representatives from Tibet and the Central Government main representative is Li Weihan." The reason being, he was the head of the Minorities Committee as well as the head of the Ministry of United Front [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་སྒྲིལ, Ch. tong zhan bu] that has relation with all. Compared to the Minorities Committee, this office is more powerful. It has connections with every office. So he was the head. Besides, [he] is from the same region as Mao and they had very good connections. He is among those who earlier went to study in Paris with Zhou Enlai and others.   

**Q:**  Yes. So Zhou Enlai introduced...   

**A:**  Yes, introduced us. Then the next day or the following, Li Weihan, Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua, and Song Zhiyuan, the General Secretary of the Southwest Military Administrative Committee. So there were the 4 of them. Among the interpreters there was me and an Amdowa named Phüntso Tashi from the Chinese side. The job of Phüntso Wangyal was to correct or add things that we had forgotten or made mistakes. Mainly, the two of us spoke and Phüntso Wangyal corrected us. On that day, we met Li Weihan and he produced the 10-point memorandum right away. He said that we had to discuss these points and on these points, we could express whatever opinions we had. ... From our side, we had certain articles from the Tibetan Government side which was brought with us. Kheme brought it with him and he gave it to Ngabö. They had given a 10-point article, right? So it was said that we should also give ours. Ngabö said not to, let us leave it for the time being. Now, my suspicion is that Ngabö and a few of them met before the discussions and they gave him their opinions. Maybe Phüntso Wangyal knows about it. When Ngabö and the others met outside of the discussions to discuss some things internally, Phüntso Wangyal was the interpreter. For example, when Li Weihan and Ngabö met alone, Phüntso Wangyal was the interpreter. Previously, I suspect that they already had discussions. So when we said that we had the following articles, Ngabö said it would not do and took precautions [Tib. སྦི་གསང་བྱེད]. If they had discussed it with Kheme, Kheme would not have brought the article up on that day.   

**Q:**  So, some [document] was brought with them, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And so was it not in agreement with [the Chinese views]?   

**A:**  Yes, not in agreement. The reason being that our document said that it was a patron-priest relationship and that we wished the areas occupied at present to be returned. That all the Chinese soldiers should be withdrawn from Tibet and that at the borders, we would place Tibetan soldiers. That would not be okay with them, right?   

**Q:**  Earlier, we were saying that they were going to make a prepared statement. Then on the 13th, Li Weihan brought the 10-point statement and told the Tibetans that they had to accept it, and there was a long silence, etcetera.   

**A:**  Li Weihan said, "You can state whatever opinions you wish and we can discuss, but it must be based on the 10-points and cannot go beyond these points."   

**Q:**    

**A:**  Regarding the Panchen Lama, a few days after we arrived there, it was said that the Panchen Lama was arriving and that we had to go and receive him. They said that they [China] had accepted the Panchen Lama and that we had to accept. Ngabö said that "In Tibet, there are two candidates and the one at Tsongön [the one China accepted] is also a candidate. Until now [traditionally] the 3 candidates come to Lhasa and a divine lottery [Tib. senriy] is held. Whether it will be the one from Pagshö, Tsongön or Litang who will be decided by the lottery pick and that one will be recognized by the Tibetan Government. This is our government's policy." They said that this was not acceptable and it was as you have just read [from Goldstein]. They said that "The Guomindang Government has also accepted him and after the liberation of China in 1949, the Panchen had telegram exchanges with Mao and Zhude. We have accepted him and you have to accept and you have to go and receive him." We said that we could not go. So supposing he was to arrive the day after tomorrow, the night before, the matter was settled. Ngabö said,"If we don't go to receive him, it will not do. However, the actual representatives cannot go since our government has not recognized [him]." Since Sambo was the younger representative, he was asked to go and he said [to me] "You Sey [Depön = Yabshi Sey] also go." And Rinchenla was also sent. So there were the three of us. Also a coded telegram [Tib. གསང་ཏར] was sent to Tromo saying that regarding the Panchen Lama's arrival, we had done such and such, and it stated that it would be very difficult if we didn't recognize [him]. Before the telegram, on May 2, there was a meeting in which Li Weihan and others said and insisted that the Panchen Lama must be included in the 17-Point Agreement. Ngabö said that the relations between the Panchen Lama and the Tibetan Government were an internal one between a labrang and a government. That it was not like between the Tibetan Government and the Central Government. So he could not accept this. So then a small team was convened. In this group, there was Kheme, the main one from the Tibetan Government. Then there was Lhautara, myself and someone else. From their side there was Zhang Guohua I think, and Song Zhiyuan and another person. We met but we did not reach any agreement. Kheme was very tough or firm [Tib. མཁྲེགས་པོ]. What Phüntso Wangyal was saying about Kheme being very firm, must have been during this occasion regarding the Panchen Lama. The reason being that Ngabö had already said that we could not accept him. Finally, Zhang Guohua said, "The main reason why we came to Tibet, to liberate Tibet, is because of the Panchen Lama." This escaped his mouth and for this reason, the matter remained unsettled. The next day or so Song Zhiyuan met alone with Ngabö and Phüntso Wangyal was their interpreter. They discussed from morning until night. Finally, Ngabö said, "If that is the case, if you say this, then I refuse to discuss anymore. To say that we have to recognize him before the Tibetan Government does, this is not at all acceptable." So the next day or so, this was the reason why they were saying that the matter must be in the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  You mean the May second discussions.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Regarding the Panchen Lama, did the discussions take place earlier?   

**A:**  Yes. Whether to recognize him or not, that question was discussed earlier. And a telegram was sent and a few days later the reply was received. It read that the 5 or 8 great labrangs of Tashilhunpo came to Tromo and requested that the Qinghai candidate be recognized. And the Dalai Lama did a "divination" [Tib. ཐུགས་དམ] which thought likewise and so it was alright to accept him. The next day Ngabö and all of us made the 3 mandala offering [Tib. མེ] and prostrated, and only then did the recognition procedure start. Regarding the power and status of the Panchen Lama, Ngabö and Song Zhiyuan met in a small group. Whether to recognize or not, the discussions took place earlier and the telegrams were sent and the reply received. So the two are separate issues. Just now, what you are saying is mixed together.   

**Q:**  In here [MCG] it says the Panchen Lama issue was discussed on May second. So this was discussed earlier?   

**A:**  Yes, earlier.   

**Q:**  Outside the context of the meeting?   

**A:**  In the smaller group.   

**Q:**  "At the next meeting..." Regarding this, have you heard anything?   

**A:**  Something like this did not take place. The reason being [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  Let me see. Yes, this is based on Sambo's interview.   

**A:**  Regarding Mao, it was after the liberation and not before. Actually, before the liberation, the Guomindang in the Spring of 1949 held the enthronement ceremony [Tib. ཁྲི་འདོན] for the Panchen Lama in Kumbum. At that time, the Guomindang head, Guan Jiyu or someone was the head [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] of China's Tibet-Mongolian Office [went]. At that time, the Shanghai and Nanjing areas were already lost. Jiang Kai Shek had already bowed and left for Taiwan. As his acting President, Li Zongren and the others moved their government to Guangdong since it was close to Hong Kong. From there they sent an emissary to Qinghai for congratulations. That winter Qinghai was lost, and immediately the Panchen Lama sent a telegram [to the communists] and then from there a reply was received. Previous to this, the Panchen Lama was unsure as to whether he should go to Taiwan or stay. They had very good relations with the Guomindang and so they were asked to go to Taiwan. Finally, they decided to stay and sent a telegram [to Mao]. So there was no previous connection with Mao and things like that. The telegrams that were sent and all were around [the fall] of Qinghai in the winter [of 1950].   

**Q:**  What it says in here is: "Before the liberation of Qinghai."   

**A:**  Yes, so that was not the case.   

**Q:**  Maybe it is my mistake. I see, it says that the Panchen Lama had accepted Mao before the liberation of Qinghai.   

**A:**  This was not the case because, at that time, the Panchen Lama had his feet in two places. The Panchen Lama would not know anything at that time because he was 10 or 11 years old, right? Under him was[his exile entourage led by] Che Jigme and Lhamön Yeshe Tsultrim [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས]. They must have done a divination [Tib. མོ] as to whether they should go to Taiwan or not, right?   

**Q:**  So   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And so Tromo accepted, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  . So before the Agreement was signed, it took some time to deal with the question of the Panchen Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it did. The reason being in one article it said that the power and status of the Panchen Lama has to be included in the 17-Point Agreement. So regarding this there were a lot of arguments. So Ngabö said, "If you insist so much on this issue, then we are not going to talk anymore." So they thought about it and the next day they approached us and said, "What do you think if we include in the article the power and status [will be the same as] at the time of the 9th Panchen Lama and the 13th Dalai Lama?" Ngabö said, "Well, there doesn't seem to be any problem in that." It was at that time things changed. Otherwise, they were saying that the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama were of equal status and things like that. That the Panchen Lama is patriotic and never [colludes] with foreign [elements, imperialists]. Who is one who loves his country. So they have made so many such statements. That if these things were not included [in 17-Point Agreement] then it would harm other matters in the Agreement. Since this was the case, the final thing that Ngabö said, as we discussed at night was that "The Chinese are very much persistent on the question of the Panchen Lama. They are also telling me this. In the small group they asked that and even to me. Phüntso Wangyal was the interpreter and they came and such and such things happened. I said this and they said such and such. Now they are sort of threatening us saying that if this matter is not solved then other matters will be difficult to leave in the Agreement. For this reason, I said, 'I have nothing to say in this regard and so you do whatever you want. So if you all wish to go to India do so. As for myself, whatever they want to do with me, I am staying. They will not let me go.'" So this is what was said and so from this we knew that they were going to follow a very tough line. Li Weihan was not involved in this. Only when things began. Mainly it was the meeting between Song Zhiyuan and us. Song Zhiyuan must have gone to Li and discussed things. Finally, Song Zhiyuan must have said, "Now regarding this, we should take a different approach since the Tibetans are a bit difficult and it seems it's difficult to get them to recognize [the Panchen Lama]." Finally, they came the next day and said, "What if we say in the 17-Point Agreement the power and status of the 13th Dalai Lama and the 9th Panchen Lama?" So it was said that "Oh, this is okay. There is no problem regarding this."   

**Q:**  Kungö, what should one say, the reason why they insisted so much on the Panchen Lama -- there seemed to be a long range plan, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes.   

**Q:**  For example, later when they had the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, Tashilhunpo was a separate entity, Chamdo too. What to say, there must have been some plan way back then, right? To make a division between the two lamas. Do you think that was the case?   

**A:**  Yes. That's it mainly. They wanted to separate Tibet into Tsang and Ü [Tib. དབུས]. After the Chinese came to Tibet they followed this exact policy. The only problem was that they were not lucky [Tib. ལམ་འགྲོ་མ་ཕྱིན་པ་རེད]. They made [were going to] make a Tsang Autonomous Region [Tib. གཙང་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས] and an Ü Autonomous Region .   

**Q:**  Then there was Chamdo in the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

**A:**  The Liberation Committee [Tib. བཅིངས་འདྲོལ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] since they say that it was liberated first.   

**Q:**  Later in the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, 14 offices were begun and Chamdo also had votes, right? Then there was Tashilhunpo and the local government, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Three separate entities.   

**Q:**  Before the 17-Point Agreement began there was a lot of talk in the beginning, right? [the preamble] Was there much discussions about that?   

**A:**  Yes, much.   

**Q:**  There was much talk about the Tibetans forming one nationality and returning to the motherland and a lot of talk like that, right? Before the articles even began.   

**A:**  Yes, the Chinese said this from their side. That Tibet is part of China and cannot be separated. For many years the English imperialists tried to divide us and now under the leadership of the communists, we are happy that you have returned to the motherland and many things like that. That one should not listen to the Guomindang and the imperialists. Many things like that.   

**Q:**  So at first all of these things were in Chinese right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And so you and Phüntso Wangyal La had to translate this?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So when you translated this long story like, and so what did they -   

**A:**  They mentioned a little of all of these things [the preamble]. Only later, when it was written down, they made clear statements. So the preamble was not discussed.   

**Q:**  Nor regarding the 1st article ... [MCG] says that this ends the de facto independence of Tibet. This means the outside world was not accepting it and the 1st article shows that Tibet was not independent, right?   

**A:**  The Chinese had accepted that earlier Tibet was independent. Isn't it? Because now we have returned. Otherwise, there is no reason to mention this. The reason why they had to say this was because from 1911 to 1949, to 50, we actually stayed independent. The Chinese were also compelled to say this because during this period it [Tibet] remained separate, but now we have returned after that [period].   

**Q:**  Yes, what they were saying is that the imperialists fooled [Tibetans] and took them away. So now they are to be roped back [to the motherland].   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So Tibetans said that there were no imperialists?   

**A:**  Yes. That there are no imperialists.   

**Q:**  The Chinese were insisting that were, but that the Tibetans were unaware.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Finally, the Tibetans said, "If they are there, then you take them out."   

**A:**  No, something like that was not said. Probably this is Sambo talking. Sambo usually like to joke around.   

**Q:**  From this point then, Tibet sort of became part of China, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  MCG continues -That they still felt that Tibetan administration was in Tibetan hands. What was said about the Local Government helping the PLA. The second article. So from the first point isn't it pretty much finished then?   

**A:**  Yes, finished.   

**Q:**  According to MCG there wasn't much discussion about this.   

**A:**  Yes, that's right.   

**Q:**  So there wasn't much discussions and the Chinese said that there was no need to keep a large force on the border.   

**A:**  We said that.   

**Q:**  No, if some enemy should come then they would send the military. So maybe they said that they were not going to keep a large force on the border.   

**A:**  No. No. We told them that. We said that, "At the borders we have the Tibetan Army and so we would like to keep Tibetan forces. If in case some foreign powers invade, then we will request you to send the military." The Chinese said that this would not do at all since this would only be done by the PLA.   

**Q:**  Then the Tibetans asked what "Local Government" meant. The Tibetans were misled because the word government [Tib. གཞུང] was still there. What was said about it?   

**A:**  No. There was anything about it. Because it had already now become a "local government." Isn't it? Once the Central Government was recognized, it was automatic that it became a local government. So regarding this there was no talk. What the talk was about after the 17-Point Agreement was signed, they said they were going to start a Military Administrative Committee. It was set up in all the places in China. Regarding this, Lhautara asked, "What is the purpose of the Military Administrative Committee?" Li Weihan said, "This is the administration that heads [Tib. འགོ་འདོམས] both the political and military." Lhautara once again asked, "Is this necessary? Because in one article you said that the Tibetan Government, and the power and status of the Dalai Lama, will remain as before. Now if you start this, then wouldn't that mean that the Dalai Lama and [the Tibetan Government] will be without power?" Li Weihan got angry. He said, "What are you saying. Whether the power of the Dalai Lama exists or does not exist, this Military Administrative Committee must be started." So he got angry and said, "The way you guys are asking questions, is not alright. Do you want a peaceful liberation of Tibet or a forceful one? If you want a peaceful liberation, then you have to listen to what we say. If you want a forceful liberation then that's very easy. We have our soldiers at the borders. All we have to do is send a telegram and that will be sufficient."   

**Q:**  Then what happened after that?   

**A:**  We did not discuss this for a few days. All the Tibetan Government representatives were shocked, right? Then Ngabö said, "Let's just leave it. Let's not talk about it."   

**Q:**  So at night did you meet?   

**A:**  Yes. Then a few days later Phüntso Wangyal came to see Ngabö and also communicated with the Chinese. Finally, the talks began again.   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. We did speak about it last time. Regarding the 3rd point, see MCG. At that time, did the Tibetan understand that the word Zhongyang means China?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. [Depön disagrees with the statement regarding Tibetans having no strong objection because of the word "government." He also says Tibetans understood clearly the word zhongyang meant Central Government].   

**Q:**  Point 4. Not much to talk about that, right?   

**A:**  Correct.   

**Q:**  Point 5 and 6 [are] regarding the Panchen Lama right? MCG says Tibetans objected.   

**A:**  Correct. As I said earlier, there were a lot of arguments. They said not to include it in the Agreement.   

**Q:**  It is said here [MCG] that the Chinese said if the Panchen Lama's power and status [were] not included, then the Dalai Lama also would also be left out.   

**A:**  No, this was not said. They said that if the Panchen Lama was not included, then the Agreement could not be reached. They threatened us.   

**Q:**  Then they asked whether you wanted the Dalai Lama's name removed.   

**A:**  No, nothing like that was said. Not at all.   

**Q:**  No?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Now this must have been said by Sambo or somebody.   

**A:**  I don't think he would have said that. I doubt it.   

**Q:**  Point 7 is on religious freedom etcetera, etcetera.   

**A:**  Yes, this was in their temporary constitution.   

**Q:**  Regarding the income of the monasteries, it was said that Zhongyang would not meddle in it, and at this time a tsidrung asked about it since the exact word for income was not there in Chinese.   

**A:**  Yes, at first they had written "Religious Freedom" [Tib. ཆོས་དད་རང་མོས]. There was nothing about the income. Lhautara was the one who said that it would be good if one included monastic income in there. They said that that was okay. The reason being that Lhautara was a drunyichemmo and so the drunyichemmo look after the affairs of monasteries and tratsangs. This was not included in the 10 points. All it said in there was religious freedom.   

**Q:**  So they agreed with that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then Point 8. The Tibetan Army was to change to the PLA, etcetera. There were a lot of discussions and Tibetans did not want the army to disband.   

**A:**  It was said that the army should be kept at the borders and there was no need for the PLA.   

**Q:**  The Chinese compromised and suggested that this should be signed separately in the side agreement.   

**A:**  I don't think this was about the military. No it was not.   

**Q:**  There were 7-8 points dealing with the military, the most important being the continuance of the 3,000 Gyajong and Bodyguard soldiers while others disbanded. Is that right? There seems to be other separate agreements. Regarding the military [answer not finished].   

**A:**  Yes, there is one relating to the military. It said that there would not be more than more or less 40-50,000 PLA in one corps [Ch. jun, Tib. ཡས་མས]. One was that the Dalai Lama might not accept the 17-Point Agreement and leave from Tromo. And so it was stated that if he returned, his power and status would remain. Then it was said they would start a Tibet Military Headquarters [Tib. བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང]. In this, one or two kalön could be appointed there as assistants [Tib. ལས་རོགས] or Vice Commanders-in-Chief.   

**Q:**  What did you say they wanted to start?   

**A:**  The Tibet Military Headquarters and there would be two kalön appointed as one or two Junior Commanders-in-Chief. Later, it was Ngabö and Ragashag who were appointed. This was in the side agreement. Then another was the 3000 soldiers with the rest being sent away. But they said that they would give them compensation so that it would not harm their livelihood. So there were a few. One probably had to do with the [Tibetan] currency.   

**Q:**  Let me ask you this. In 1954, the Dalai Lama went down to China and returned in 1955. In the Tsidrung Linga, or Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག], what took place was announced for a few days. Kündeling spoke and Surkhang spoke about the military, about disbanding it. Later some soldiers got together and had a meeting, and when the Dalai Lama went to Tsurphu [Tib. མཚུར་ཕུ], they petitioned directly to him. Later it was decided that things would remain as before. So how did this come about? Did the soldiers themselves - on the one hand it was in the Agreement, but this was done away with later.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, it was in the Agreement. Later, the Tibetan Government had difficulties with giving salary. This was not decided by the Kashag. In the Agreement, 3,000 were to be retained. Later, when it came to giving salary, there wasn't enough. At that time, the kalön received portfolios. Ramba Kalön Lama was head of foreign affairs and things like that. Surkhang was in charge of salary and internal matters. Ngabö was in charge of matters dealing with the Chinese and the Reform Office (Tib. Lekjö Tsondu [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས་ཚོགས་འདུ]). Since there were problems meeting the soldiers salary, Surkhang expressed his opinions to the Kashag saying that it may be best to keep 500 Bodyguard troops and some Trapchi and police at Lhasa and Shigatse to protect the local area [Tib. ས་གནས་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ]. This was thought to be alright and the Kashag said that it was okay. Once the matter was settled, the various regiments heard about it. Surkhang related the situation, but all the soldiers said that this was not acceptable. They appealed directly to the Dalai Lama at Tsurphu and the Dalai Lama told the Kashag that for the time being, it was best to leave things as they were.   

**Q:**  The soldiers said that they would remain even without salary, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They said that "Even if we have no salary it is alright. But we are going to serve the Dalai Lama." Now it is difficult to stay without salary, right? In the Payroll Office, Surkhang was the main person. Then there were Künsangtse and others. They discussed this I guess. They may have said, "Oh, since even at the borders there are Chinese soldiers and we have to provide salary to the soldiers [Tibetans], is there any use in [keeping that many]? So instead, let us keep what we need, like the Bodyguard troops and some around Lhasa and return the rest home. Is there really any need?" They may have thought like that. And then somebody may have said, "Oh, yes, that is a good idea," and so they may have decided like that.   

**Q:**  Yes. Yes. Point 9 was on school and education. Point 10 was on Agriculture, industry etcetera. I guess there's not much to say about that, is there?   

**A:**  No, nothing.   

**Q:**    

