# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0037.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** London, England, Great Britain  
**Date of Interview:** 27 September 1997  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. stag lha, phun tshogs bkra shis  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 75  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Taklha, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. སྟག་ལྷ, ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was an Amdowa who was the brother-in-law of the Dalai Lama and the Commander of the Bodyguard Regiment from 1954-59. In this interview, he discusses his work in the Foreign Office. He describes the changes in the Tibetan military and relationships between both armies after the arrival of the Chinese. He mentions the issue of the Dalai Lama going to see a show at the Chinese Military Headquarters. He talks about his visit to the Chinese Headquarters, about the rules for the visit and his shock at their insistence that there could be no armed bodyguards accompanying him. He also discussed what happened after he returned to Norbulinga, specifically his meeting with Phala and then Gadrang and then how the three of them went to the Dalai Lama and recommended that he not go, but he disagreed and insisted he would go. He also discusses other political disagreements regarding the sitsab and the Chinese in 1951 and 1952. And he discusses his important visits to China after Deng Xiaoping came to power in China and Hu Yaobang was implementing a new Tibet policy to try to resolve the Tibet Question. He discusses his meetings in 1982 and 1984 and then his meetings in 1987 when Wu Jinghua was the Party secretary in Tibet. He also gave his views on why these talks to resolve the Tibet Question failed.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0037_05/H_0037_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When you talked with Paljor La, you said that you worked in the Foreign Office [Tib. ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཁུངས] of Tibet until 1954. After 1951, what kind of work did you do in the Foreign Office?   

**A:**  In 1953, after Zhang Jingwu came up to Lhasa, the Foreign Office of the Tibetan Government was merged with the Chinese [Foreign Office]. Zhang Jingwu came up in 1951. In 1952, Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and I went to Beijing. In 1953, when the Foreign Office of the Tibetan Government was merged into the Chinese Foreign Office in Lhasa, it was called, "The Tibet Foreign Affairs Department [Ch. xi zang wai shi chu]." In the past, the persons (jointly) in charge of the Tibet Foreign Office were Liushar and the father of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Surkhang. When the office was merged together, Surkhang had already passed away. At the time of the merging, under Liushar, Kyibu's [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྦུག] brother was a kind of secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཆེ]. After Kyibu passed away, I was appointed as the secretary. There were also several [Chinese] cadres.   

**Q:**  What work did you do? After the merging, did you work together?   

**A:**  We were working together and the office was located near Ramoche in the Somphü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད] House. This is the place where they hold the Foreign Office even nowadays. At that time, the Chinese bought Somphü's house. Before that, the Foreign Office of the Tibetan Government was held in the Jokhang. After that [purchase], we brought all of the documents and moved them to that place. Our daily work was to contact India, Nepal and the Bhutan. Secondly, we collected all the documents, like the maps of the McMahon and the border demarcation documents that the countries had in the past.   

**Q:**  That was probably in 1953 when the office was merged together, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to China in 1954, you were the Regimental Commander, the Depön of the Bodyguard Regiment of the Dalai Lama [Tib. སྐུ་སྲུང་མདའ་དཔོན], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were the soldiers in the Bodyguard Regiment wearing Tibetan uniforms?   

**A:**  All of the soldiers in the Bodyguard Regiment were wearing the English style uniform. The other regiments, like the second, Khadang, and the third, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a>, were wearing the Tibetan uniforms.   

**Q:**  In 1954, didn't they wear the Chinese uniforms?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. In 1955, after the Dalai Lama came back from China, the soldiers wore the Chinese uniform.   

**Q:**  Since then, the soldiers and the Depön wore Chinese uniforms, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you hold the same flag after that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the other regiments wear Chinese uniform?   

**A:**  They didn't. They were given the Chinese uniforms, but they didn't wear them. They were wearing the chupa. But, their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and the other commanders wore the Chinese uniforms. Before that, the Bodyguard soldiers were wearing the English uniform, so they were changed into the Chinese uniform.   

**Q:**  When you were working as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, what relations did you have with the Chinese Military Area Headquarters [Tib. དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང]? They weren't positioned to be above you, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You were kind of separate, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was called the Tibet Area Military Headquarters [Ch. xizang junqu]. Sometimes, we were called when they held the ordinary meetings. Those were not their internal meetings. Most of the time we were invited to the parties. They didn't make military strategies [Tib. དམག་ཇུས] for us. We were doing that by ourselves.   

**Q:**  At one time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> was in the Military Headquarters, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> and Nagbö didn't have any power. They were just given the names or titles.   

**Q:**  You didn't have relations with the two of them, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we did, but they didn't know anything about the secrets. Nagbö was a little bit better than Ragashag.   

**Q:**  The Military Headquarters was the leader of the Chinese soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but it was written in the 17-Point Agreement that the Tibetan soldiers should be converted into the People's Liberation Army gradually. But it was unable to convert it.   

**Q:**  This is a question regarding the 17-Point Agreement. As far as I know, the matter regarding the Panchen Lama was raised twice.   

**A:**  Before they started talking about the agreement, the Chinese said that the Tibetan Government should recognize the Panchen Lama. Then they [Tibetans] said that they couldn't do that and they sent a telegraph to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and the Dalai Lama said it was okay. Is that correct?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This was before the negotiation, and just before the negotiation was concluded, they raised the matter regarding the power and the title of the Panchen Lama, is that correct?   

**A:**  Yes, they said that this should be mentioned in the Agreement. They said the other matters were okay, but it was not alright if we didn't mention about the power and the title of the Panchen Lama in the agreement because the importance of liberating Tibet is for the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  You sent a telegraph regarding the recognition of the Panchen Lama, but you didn't send a telegraph regarding the power and the title, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we also didn't ask anything about the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  Some people were confused about why the recognition and the power was mentioned together.   

**A:**  No, it wasn't, because after we arrived at Beijing, we were told that "The Panchen Lama will come the day the after tomorrow. All of you should go to welcome him to the Railway Station." At that time, Nagbö and all of us discussed that saying, "We haven't recognized the Panchen Lama and according to the policy of the Tibetan Government, there were three candidates two of which were in Tibet and one in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, so we are not going to recognize it until this [candidate in Qinghai] goes to Tibet." But the Chinese insisted on saying that we have to go to welcome him. So Nagbö and us discussed and decided that Nagbö and the Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད], the representatives, would not go to welcome the Panchen Lama and instead three of us, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Rinchen [Tib. ས་འདུ་རིན་ཆེན] and I were sent to welcome the Panchen Lama. This was to show that we didn't accept the Panchen Lama. After we received the telegraph saying that the Dalai Lama had recognized and approved the Panchen Lama, according to the Tibetan custom, Nagbö and us went to offer the Mendredensum to the Panchen Lama and formally accepted the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  In the side notes, there were two important points. One was that if the Dalai Lama couldn't stay in India, he could return to Tibet. There was another point regarding the soldiers. Was that exclusively for the Tibetan soldiers or was it related to the Chinese soldiers?   

**A:**  It was regarding the Chinese soldiers.   

**Q:**  What was the number of soldiers mentioned in the side note?   

**A:**  It was mentioned that more or less one army, jun [Ch. jun] [would be in Tibet]. There are 10,000-20,000 soldiers in one army.   

**Q:**  That was the 18th Army, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They didn't mention about the number of the Tibetan soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They planned to convert them gradually, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Our government, the American Government was very strange on the relations with the Tibetans. The leader of the American Embassy in Delhi wrote several letters without signing them. The letters were sent in 1951 after the Dalai Lama went to Lhasa. They thought of telling the Dalai Lama to come to America. One of the copies was given to the Dalai Lama's mother and one copy was given to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> [for delivered to the Dalai Lama]. I heard that since both of them were in Kalimpong, they sent the letters through you [to Lhasa and the Dalai Lama]. In 1952, they received the verbal answer from the Dalai Lama via a Sikkimese Princess. I am not sure whether it was Kukula or Kula. I saw in the American document, that they got the answer through you. How did that happen? Did you deliver the letter in person to the Dalai Lama or did you deliver it through Phala? At that time, was Phala the Lord Chamberlain, Drönyerchemmo?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> in 1952. I don't remember much about that. I probably took the letter because I went back to Tibet with the Dalai Lama from Yadong. After that, I came back [to India] a few times. I don't remember how I delivered the letter.   

**Q:**  How did they have the relations with Kukula? Did she go to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I probably had the relations with Kuku La because I knew a little about that she had relations with the American CIA.   

**Q:**  Is Kuku La Phünkhang Lhajam [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་ལྷ་ལྕམ]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama gave the answer, did he say that in person and tell her to deliver it? Or did he give the answer through the Kashag?   

**A:**  It was not given through the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Did Phala know about that?   

**A:**  He probably knew about that. If it would be given through the Kashag, I am not sure what would happen [Tib. གནས་ཚུལ་ག་འདྲ་ཡོང་མིན་མ་ཤེས]. Kukula probably had the relation with Harrer and Harrer had relations with the American Consulate in Calcutta. I just heard about that.   

**Q:**  At one time, Yuthok Kungö [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་སྐུ་ངོ] and Harrer saw a signed document in the American Consulate in Calcutta, but they couldn't take it by hand. It was strange. It was meaningless [Tib. ཆོ་མེད་པ] work. You were the Regimental Commander of the Bodyguard Regiment of the Dalai Lama. In 1958, the trouble of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> took place and they opposed the Chinese and made war. The Chinese were always telling the Tibetan Government that they should eliminate them because according to the order from Mao Zedong, it was said that "It won't look nice if we [Chinese] make war first. It would be better if the Tibetan soldiers would make war." Nowadays, the Tibetans living in India say that even if we sent the soldiers, they wouldn't fight [against the Khambas]. But when I was in Tibet, one of the old government officials insisted on telling me, "If I would send my soldiers to make war, they will go to make war." He was not a pro-communist person. He had suffered for many years in Chinese prison. I don't remember his name. He was in Dingri. "So I think if you told your Battalion Leaders [Tib. རུ་དཔོན] that this is important so you should go to make the war, that they will fight the war."   

**A:**  Yes. I don't think all of them would do that, but they would not have any choice but to do that [Tib. མ་བྱེད་རང་བྱེད] if the order was given. Maybe all of them might go to the other side. For example, the Chinese told the Kashag that they should send the soldiers. The Kashag said, "If we send our soldiers, they [Khambas] were saying that they were the Volunteer Guardian Army for protecting religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླངས་དམག] and their motive is good. So it won't be alright to make war against them. So what would be the good method?" The Chinese said that they should send the soldiers. Finally, the Kashag told the Chinese, "If we send the soldiers, would they fight against them [Tib. ཕར] [Khambas] or would they fight towards us [Tib. ཚུར] [Chinese]?"   

**Q:**  What do you mean against them or towards us?   

**A:**  I mean the soldiers had guns. So they said, "Would the soldiers fire at the Khambas or would they fire towards us?" When they told the Chinese like this, the Chinese said, "If so, don't send the soldiers."   

**Q:**  I think that most of the soldiers had loyalty [Tib. ཞེན] to the Tibetan Government.   

**A:**  Yes, they did. Most of the soldiers liked the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> very much, but if the government gave them the order, they didn't have any choice but to do it. At that time, some of the soldiers in the Bodyguard Regiment carried weapons and ran away surreptitiously many times, and the other regiments also had the same thing.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment probably sent some soldiers specifically.   

**A:**  Some of them were specifically sent and there were also soldiers running away. At that time, all the people didn't like the Chinese. But they didn't have reasons to say why they didn't [like] the Chinese. They were just saying the Chinese were not good.   

**Q:**  Yes, there were just a few people who liked the Chinese in the past and also nowadays.   

**A:**  They had more loyalty to Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  Many people have written about this many times, but I think it would be better to ask you. Regarding when the Chinese invited the Dalai Lama to the show, some people said that the Chinese told the Tibetan Government that they were not allowed to take a single bodyguard. Some people said that they should take fewer bodyguard troops than usual. What did they actually say?   

**A:**  I was called to the Military Area Command Headquarters on the day before they were going to invite the Dalai Lama. It was in the early morning. When I went there, some military officers, like Wang, told me, "Tomorrow the Dalai Lama is going to come to the Military Headquarters." Before that, I didn't know the date of his visit so I asked them, "Is it tomorrow?" They said, "Didn't you know that? You are the Regimental Commander of the Bodyguard Regiment." I said, "I really didn't know that." Then they said, "He is going to come tomorrow." Usually, we would take 25 bodyguard troops when the Dalai Lama would go to the Tibet Autonomous Region to hold meetings and when the meeting was held inside, we would station the guards outside. The Chinese said, "You can't do like you did when the meetings were held in the Tibet Autonomous Region because this is the Military Headquarters. You should know that. It is not alright to take the soldiers as usual." Then I told them, "It is not alright to do this. If we do this, the Tibetan people will feel suspicious. We better not to do this." The Chinese said, "It doesn't matter. They [Tibetan] will not come and do something." After talking back and forth several times, they said, "You can take about 2 soldiers, but they can't carry guns." I told them, "Please don't say that. It doesn't matter if they carry guns." Usually, I was very friendly with those military officers. There were two military officers. One was called Wang Gang and the other was called Yan Fu. Both of them were Chiefs of Staff [Ch. can mou zhang]. Then they said again, "You can take two soldiers, but they can't carry weapons. If you are going to carry weapons, you can station your people up to the stone bridge (Tib. དོསམཔ [རྡོ་ཟམ་པ]). They can't come beyond the stone bridge because it is the Military Headquarters."   

**Q:**  How far is it from the stone bridge to the Military Headquarters?   

**A:**  It is about 200 steps. Then I told them, "It is not alright to do that. I can't make a decision on this. I have to report this to my superiors [Tib. གོང་རིམ], like Phala [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ] and the Jigyab Khembo Gadrang."   

**Q:**  Before that, had the Dalai Lama gone to the Military Area Command Headquarters?   

**A:**  No, he hadn't. Similarly, the Chinese also told the Kashag about that [visit]. Usually, each kalön would take 2-3 servants, but that time they said that each kalön could take only one servant and they couldn't carry guns.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you suspicious [about these arrangements]?   

**A:**  I wasn't. Then I came back and reported to Phala Drönyerchemmo. Then the two of us went to report this to Gadrang. After that, the three of us went to report to the Dalai Lama. He said, "It doesn't matter. You don't need to feel suspicious about that."   

**Q:**  Did Phala tell the Dalai Lama that this was not good?   

**A:**  Phala did not agree [Tib. འདོད་པ་མེད་པ] to that [arrangement]. He was saying that it was very dangerous.   

**Q:**  Did Phala tell the Dalai Lama that it was better if he didn't go there tomorrow?   

**A:**  He didn't. He just told the Dalai Lama, "The situation was like this when Depön went there. So if you go there, probably, I wonder if there might be a danger." The Dalai Lama said, "There isn't any danger at all. We are definitely going [Tib. འགྲོ་རྐྱང] tomorrow."   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know that Fan Ming and Zhang Guohua had different thinking and they had different policies?   

**A:**  I knew a little bit about that because usually, I knew them.   

**Q:**  They had a serious problem.   

**A:**  Fan Ming's thought was to separate Tibet into two parts. Central Tibet, Ü [Tib. དབུས], and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང], and to establish two Autonomous Regions. This is the root of the matter and Phüntso Wangyal knows about this clearly.   

**Q:**  Fan Ming said that nowadays, there would be no trouble if we had made two autonomous regions at that time.   

**A:**  The people who came from Sichuan and who came from the west and the north were different. Even on the matter of welcoming the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama when they went to China, they had a lot of trouble. Some people said that they should be welcomed in the same way. Some people said it was not alright to do things the same because the Dalai Lama is higher. Finally, Mao Zedong made the decision and said that one person could not have two heads. It was not comfortable to have two heads.   

**Q:**  When I think about the history from 1950-59, there were many mistakes. I think at the beginning, the two prime ministers [Tib. སྲིད་བློན] made some mistakes. Their policy was a meaningless one. The Chinese would not like it. And many people were thinking that it was meaningless to kind of make enemies. They should have acted tactfully. I think it was a great mistake. What do you think about this?   

**A:**  I have also the same feeling as you said. But, we should understand the two of them. They didn't know the situation of the outside [world]. They were holding the thinking of ancient Tibet. Usually, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was a tough and a very conservative [Tib. ཀླད་པ་མཁྲེགས་པོ] person. He was doing whatever he thought and never [yielded] to other people. For example, once Zhang Jingwu gave a party and invited him, but he didn't go and sent a representative. I was also there on that day.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was about one year after Zhang Jingwu came to Tibet. Actually, he should [have] gone to the party because it was for the friendship and it was common custom. Actually, he should have talked tactfully with Zhang Jingwu, but he was also tough at that time [Tib. མཁྲེགས་པོ]. He didn't act tactfully, so the Chinese military officers were agitated. Actually, at that time, the policy of the Party in Tibet was kind of relaxed [Tib. ལྷོད་ལྷོད]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> always verbally fought when he met the [Chinese] people.   

**Q:**  He was special, and the people looked at him and they became enthusiastic, and there were troubles one after another.   

**A:**  But he was a hero.   

**Q:**  He was brave.   

**A:**  He sacrificed himself. It was definitely like this, but I can't see whether their policy worked out and it was meaningless. Actually, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> should be promoted from among the kalön, but the kalön didn't want to stay in Lhasa and they went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, so they promoted the persons who were under them and later they couldn't demote them. It was kind of unlucky.   

**Q:**  Were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> the Acting Prime Ministers [Tib. སྲིད་བློན] or were they the Acting Regent [Tib. སྲིད་སྐྱོང]?   

**A:**  They could be the Acting Prime Ministers or the Acting Regent.   

**Q:**  But what was their position at that time?   

**A:**  They were Acting Prime Ministers. From the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, the system of appointing the Prime Minister was started. The regent, or the Gyaltsab [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཚབ], was appointed after the death of the Dalai Lama and until the reincarnation would come. After the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama came and celebrated [taking the political power], they were called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, not the sikyong.   

**Q:**  Someone had insisted on saying they were the Acting Regent and I thought they weren't. Now I am writing an article regarding the present situation. So there are some new things to ask you. In 1982, the Tibetan Government and the PRC held some talks. I think that was a very good opportunity. But it didn't work out at all. What was the reason for that?   

**A:**  At that time, we also had a great hope about that. It was the time when Hu Yaobang was there. He was thinking to have relations [with us]. When we went to Beijing for the first time, the Chinese who I knew were saying, "Regarding the issue of Tibet, there are two groups among the leaders of the Central Government." One of the groups was saying that it was not alright to have relations with the Dalai Lama. The group led by Hu Yaobang was saying that "We should have the relation with the Dalai Lama. So you should know about this."   

**Q:**  Where was Deng Xiaoping standing with [this]?   

**A:**  He was supporting Hu Yaobang.   

**Q:**  At that time, who were the representatives from the Chinese side?   

**A:**  At that time, there was Hu Yaobang.   

**Q:**  Did Hu Yaobang come in person?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. We formally talked with the United Front Ministry [Ch. tong zhan bu]. At the first visit, we talked with Wu Lanfu.   

**Q:**  Was he the Mongolian?   

**A:**  Yes, he was a very nice person. In 1982, when we went there, Wu Lanfu was the Minister [Ch. bu zhang] of the United Front Ministry. Yang Jinren was the head of the Nationality Office [Tib. མི་རིགས་ལས་ཁུངས་ཀྱི་སྤུཨི་ཁྱབ]. He was a very bad person. When we were talking, Yang Jinren was seizing most of the power. Later, Yang Jinren was in charge of both the Nationality Office and the United Front Ministry. At that time, the main leader in the Party was Xi Zhongxun. He was the Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji]. He was in charge of Tibet and the minority nationalities and he was a nice person.   

**Q:**  I don't have any document, so I don't know clearly. But it seems to me that Hu Yaobang's policy was to leave a small number of Chinese in Tibet. It was to become like autonomy where people could practice religion freely. The other matters could be changed, but, the power of the Party would be there continuously. So a genuine autonomy was impossible. Was it like this?   

**A:**  Hu Yaobang was thinking that the Tibetans should manage their autonomy under the control of the Central Government and Tibet could have its own religion and culture.   

**Q:**  But the Communist Party would be there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese said, "If the Dalai Lama would come back, he should stay in Beijing. He doesn't need to go to Tibet."   

**Q:**  Did they say that in 1982?   

**A:**  Yes, they said, "He can visit Tibet as an inspection tour [Tib. གཟིགས་སྐོར] whenever he wants to go. But, the Dalai Lama may not meddle into the affairs of Tibet [Tib. ཐེ་ཇུས་མ་བྱས་ན་འགྲིགས] because the young people in Tibet have come up [to the leading post]." They can do that. At that time, we said, "If the Dalai Lama didn't go to Tibet, it would be meaningless [Tib. ཆོ་མི་འདུག]. But whether he would work or not, is a different matter. If the Dalai Lama would live in Beijing, there isn't any difference than staying abroad. If the Dalai Lama could go to Tibet, it doesn't make [any] difference [as to] how the work in Tibet would be done." Then the Chinese said, "If this is the case, the Dalai Lama can come and go for an inspection tour [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར] and then he can go to Tibet gradually. But he can't stay permanently in Tibet." They were acting tough on this matter. When Hu Yaobang was in power, the Dalai Lama sent a telegraph to Hu Yaobang. At that time, he was the Party Secretary and then he became Chairman of the Communist Party. So they were very glad to receive the telegraph. But, some people were saying that Hu Yaobang was not the Party Secretary of the Central Committee, but he was the Party Secretary of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  At that time, they were saying that the government of the Tibet Autonomous Region would be there, but the Tibetans would manage the government, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I didn't hear from their [Chinese] side because they didn't tell us about that. But I heard from outside that the Chinese were willing to talk about the detailed steps, but you people were just talking about the past history like about the priest-patron relation. So the Chinese didn't like it. Was that correct?   

**A:**  It wasn't like this. We didn't say that we wanted independence. When we went to China in 1984, the Chinese said, "we have put forward 8 points for Taiwan and we also did this for Hong Kong." They explained to us about that. We told them, "You need to give us more than you gave Taiwan because Taiwan and the Chinese are the same nationality and Taiwan is a province. Tibetan nationality is a separate nationality. Before the liberation in 1951, Tibet had been governing [Tib. འཛིན་སྐྱོང] ourselves and we didn't have any relations with the Guomindang. So you have to think about Tibet [getting] more than Taiwan." They said, "It is not alright to do that. Tibet has already been liberated, but you are trying to come back from the dead and restore the feudal system. This is impossible." Then we said, "We are not doing this. Now we are living in a democratic country, India. So we are more broad-minded than you. The Dalai Lama sent us here." But they didn't accept that. Later there was a great change in the Chinese thinking.   

**Q:**  In 1984, the Chinese held their second work meeting and Hu Yaobang's power became reduced.   

**A:**  In 1987, the Chinese wanted me to go to China and I went there. At that time, when I just arrived in Beijing, the students were opposing in An Hui Province and Feng Lizhi was expelled. At that time, Hu Yaobang became like that... Yan Mingfu was a very nice person. He and Phüntso Wangyal were friends. At that time, they heard that I was coming and when we discussed the matter, it was very good. At that time, the leader of Tibet, Wu Jinghua, came to China purposely and he was talking in a very good manner. After that, there was a great change.   

**Q:**  How was Wu Jinghua? I think he was a good person.   

**A:**  He was a very nice person. He had too much loyalty or concern [Tib. ཞེན་ཁོག] towards the Tibetans. So they didn't let him stay in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Since 1987, the situation became worse and worse. Did they talk about starting the talks again in 1987?   

**A:**  Yes. In that year they were thinking in the same way. At that time, I went to Qinghai and when I came back to Beijing, it was the time of the Chinese New Year. Xi Zhongxun invited me to a party and he said, "You should leave soon and go report to the Dalai Lama." So I came back. After that, Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ] went to China. Since then, I don't have anything to tell you.   

**Q:**  Have you talked with the Chinese many times since 1982?   

**A:**  Yes, we talked many times.   

**Q:**  What did you talk about?   

**A:**  The main thing was that the Chinese said, "The Dalai Lama should come back."   

**Q:**  Did they mean to come back permanently?   

**A:**  Yes, they said, "It is better to come back. It is meaningless [Tib. ཆོ་ཡོད་མ་རེད] to stay abroad and we will arrange the livelihood of the Dalai Lama's subordinates [Tib. གཤམ་འོག]." The main thing was that they were talking about the Dalai Lama and they didn't say a single word regarding the previous system of Tibet.   

**A:**  Now it is difficult.   

**Q:**  Did you talk with the internal people saying that if the Chinese reduced their numbers in Tibet and if we would have the monasteries and the religion, and if the Dalai Lama would stay in Tibet, it would be okay?   

**A:**  Yes, we talked about that. But, among our people, although they were thinking like this, most of the people had strong [enthusiasm] for independence. They were saying, "If we don't get independence, there will be a danger if the Dalai Lama would go there because there are Chinese soldiers. So one day, they could do whatever they want." Some people were saying that there is a difference between the Chinese in previous times and the Chinese at the present time.   

**Q:**  Did you people have the power to accept less than independence?   

**A:**  No, we didn't.   

**Q:**  In 1984, you said that we wanted more than Taiwan, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we told them, "You should consider us more than Taiwan." They said, "Why?" We told them Taiwan is a province and their nationality is Chinese. But we have signed the 17-Point Agreement." The other minority nationalities didn't have that. Another point was that we told them, "You made the same autonomous region for Tibet, Xinjiang and Inner-Mongolia. This is not alright because the other nationalities didn't sign any document with the Central Government when China was liberated. But, we signed a document. Secondly, before the liberation, Tibet had one's own government and you had accepted that, right?." They said, "Yes, there used to be a government. But now, it is liberated and there is nothing."   

**Q:**  The Chinese are stubborn.   

**A:**  We also told them about getting all the Tibetans united together. The Chinese said, "It was already finished in history." We said, "It is not finished. For example, in 1951 after signing the 17-Point Agreement, Nagbö delivered a letter to Zhou Enlai. It was written in the letter, 'We would like to seek permission for all the Tibetans to live together in the future.'"   

**Q:**  Did Ngabö write the letter?   

**A:**  The letter was delivered in the name of Nagbö as the delegation of the Tibetan Government after signing the Agreement. They didn't give a written answer and gave a verbal answer saying, "It is not alright to do that right now because Tibet is not liberated yet and the others are liberated. In the future, after several years, we can talk about that and it will be okay." In 1987, we told them about what we did in the past.   

**Q:**  In 1984, after a while, they didn't make any decisions, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many times did you meet with the Chinese?   

**A:**  It was probably three times in 1982 and 1984.   

**Q:**  At that time, I heard that the Dalai Lama was going for an inspection tour [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར]. Did they [Chinese] talk about that or [did] you people talked about that?   

**A:**  The Chinese welcomed the Dalai Lama to come and we also told them that he would come.   

**Q:**  Why was he unable to go?   

**A:**  Later, we were wondering what would happen if he would go. So he was unable to go.   

**Q:**  Actually, it would be good if we could go. Now, the situation is not good.   

**A:**  Now, it has become difficult. According to your point of view, For example, Deng Xiaoping   

