# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0034.01  
##  : with Lobsang Panden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Unknown  
**Name:** Lobsang Panden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1921  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lobsang Panden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན] was a Khamba from Litang who fought in the uprising there and then came to Lhasa. In this interview, Lobsang Panden first discusses the Chinese arrival in Kham and Yönrupön's bravery during his surrender. He also describes going to India in 1957 as a bodyguard to the Dalai Lama and how he took a secret letter from Shakabpa, Gyalo Thondup and Khenjung (Jenkhentsisum) to Andru Jinda (Gombo Tashi) in Lhasa and about a plan to start fighting there to prevent the Dalai Lama from returning to Tibet from India in 1957. He also talks about the shootout at Sharsingma when Athar was trying to return from India to Tibet (in 1958).   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0034_01/H_0034_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Let me first ask you this - what did you say your age was now?   

**A:**  Now [I am] 72 years old.   

**Q:**  You were born in Litang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in Litang itself. I was next to the monastery. For example, like the marketplace in Lhasa, so I am above the marketplace.   

**Q:**  In 1949, Communist China defeated the Guomindang, so how did they come to Litang? Were there Guomindang troops there, and did fighting break out? Were they saying that they wanted to liberate [Litang]? What were they saying?   

**A:**  Earlier, when the soldiers came up, it was said that Mao Zedong was there. So they came like bandits and they were divided into two groups when they came up from China. So when they came up to Sadam [Tib. ས་ཐམ], Gyaltang [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཐང], Mili [Tib. སྨི་ལི], Dartsedo and Minyag, and one of the groups talked and implied that they were going to go to Lhasa. Then they came to Litang. Before that, the monastery, which was the strongest, the owner of both religion and politics, said that they must be challenged because Chinese Communists are just terrible, and they challenged them. So they came up to our lands like Magendrong [Tib. ?], Minyag Rangakha [Tib. ?], and Othosumbo [Tib. ?]. And they came to Litang and set up regiments, and for a month there was fighting, but they could not be challenged. They came from everywhere, from Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲེང], Ganze [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས], and Nyarong. So in this way, the Litang monastery was lost. Or should I say that the soldiers in the monastery all took to the high hills like Sorong [Tib. ?] and the fighting went on. At that time, the Chinese said very sweet things. They said that "We are not here to stay. The reason for this war is that we have come to tour the area. We have not come to fight and steal wealth." By this time, they had already occupied the Litang monastery. [They said,] "We are just using this route and all we ask for is some food if you have [any], but don't fight, for we will not harm even one person." So it was said that this was good because if we fought now, then it would not be all right. At that time, there were regiments set up there, but they were not attacking them. They occupied the monasteries and whatever there was to eat, they ate that and left. They did not take anything with them. For the shoes that were torn, they took materials from thankas and patched their shoes. They stayed for a week and left. I thought that they would go to Lhasa, but that was not the case. They went towards Ba [Tib. འབའ], which would lead to Chamdo. Then they went to Nyarong where there was some fighting. Litangbas are unprincipled [Tib. མ་རབས], and young adults ambushed the Chinese in the forests. They killed them and took their guns, and except for the wounded, the Chinese left. And it did not even take two weeks. They went to Nyarong, then Ganze and towards Kyegu [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ], and the former Communists went to Siling [Tib. ཟི་ལིང]. It happened during this time that it was said that many Chinese commanders were killed. The later Communists came and dug up the bodies and there were many trucks full of bones, and they said that they were killed there. So those Communists returned to China and they disappeared. The later Communists came liberating one place after another, and they came to Dartsedo. From there it is 5 days on horseback to Litang. If one goes towards Ganze, then it's another 5 days. When the Chinese came, they were not talking about liberation at all. They said, "We are friends and must be good to each other, and there is no use in fighting. Whenever you want to fight, you will not be able to overcome us." So they said all the sweet things and at first, they traded. So what they traded in at first was - We Tibetans had no brains, they traded in all the religious items, like images, trumpets, cymbals, drums and etc. They send so many trucks from Dartsedo, and they went all the way to Lhasa. After that, they traded in jade, turquoise, [and] corals. The jade costs only 3-4 dayan. Then it increased, and they took over Litang and the other places in a peaceful way. After [that] they took over Litang, and took over the monastery for about three years. At that time, I forget the strange name of the Chinese commander. He came to Litang and said, "You all can't stay like that. Since the early days, the monastery has been the head and you can't stay like that. If you don't do things well, then you will be liberated. If that happens, then it will not be good at all." So we said, "We don't know anything about any liberation. Ever since the early days, the Litang monastery has been here, and it is here to stay. We don't know about any liberation. We cannot be liberated. If such a liberation takes place, then Tibet and China will not get along well. We will never accept that." So they left it like that and postponed [the liberation] for about a year. But the Chinese started increasing [in numbers] and getting stronger, and they had taken Chamdo and Lhasa, and even the areas within the Zaleb [Tib. རྫ་ལེབ] la mountain pass in India. So from the Litang area, so many dayan were being brought up. About 500-600-1000 animal loads, gyab [2 loads per gyab]. Now, whoever it is, nobody dislikes money, right? For example, if a yak costs 50 dayan they would pay 500 dayan.   

**Q:**  They gave that?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. In the beginning, they [were] deceiving people. They [would] buy [things like] that. If a sheep cost 15 dayan, they would give about 50 dayan. So they said a lot of sweet things and this went on for about two years. And when they bought yaks, they bought a thousand and left them in the two nomad areas of Yönru [Tib. གཡོན་རུ] and Othok. The former being the place of the famous leader Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན]. So they used these animals for transportation because in those days there were no road to Chamdo. Then, as time went on, they said that the area must be liberated. The monastery couldn't stay like that without being liberated. We said that we never wanted to be liberated. The reason being that Litang Monastery had existed in that way ever since - Even during the time of the Chinese Guomindang, we had stayed like that, and the Chinese had stayed with the Chinese. This was the case and we never ever wanted to be liberated. So things continued for a few months. One day at a meeting, all the prominent people of Litang Monastery were invited. They said that liberation had to take place. That all the 18 provinces of China had been liberated and now up to the areas within the Zaleb La Pass in India were going to be liberated, and they couldn't leave Litang Monastery un-liberated. We said that we didn't ever want to be liberated. There were 4 chandzö bugba, or the chabu, and the drönyerchemmo, and the 2 shengo, and there were 18 Gesang [Tib. ?]. There were about 80 prominent people. They set a date saying that there was going to be a meeting on that day and that "If you do not come up with plans for accepting the liberation, then things will not be good for you. On that day, you have to make a decision to accept or not accept [the liberation]." So when they spoke militantly, we said that we didn't ever want liberation. They were called to Chagodrong [Tib. ?], where the Chinese had their main office. This place was about a mile from the monastery. When they returned [to monastery] they said, "Now what should we do? Our Litang Monastery cannot be left like this. They [Chinese] said that they are going to liberate [it]. If they do that, then that is the end. If there is not going to be even one person left, then what are we going to do?" When they asked this, Khargya Ngawang Tengye [Tib. མཁར་རྒྱ་ངག་དབང་བསྟན་རྒྱས] was the Drönyerchemmo, and Deyong Atrin [Tib. དེ་ཡོང་ཨ་འཕྲིན] was the Chandzö Bugba. They said that even if there was not even one person left, we didn't ever want liberation. So, on asking what they were going to do, it was said, "When the time comes to go to the meeting, no one is allowed to say it , but each one will carry a Mauser pistol in their pouch. They will be militant, and at that time we must make a decision. Even if the monastery and the country would be completely destroyed, there is nothing to be surprised about since it was done for religion. But, liberation, we don't ever want it. Isn't this the case?" So when they met and discussed this they all said, "Yes, that is exactly correct." So in a few days time, it was the meeting time. When they got to the meeting, it was said that the behavior of the previous Chinese was completely different from that of the present one and it was frightening. Now, we were not there, but those who had been there said that. When some of them looked outside they found that they were totally surrounded, and plans had been set to capture them all and they had set up the guns. So at the meeting they were asked, "Now, what are you going to do? Liberation must take place. So are you going to accept it or not?" Deyong Atrin answered, "We will not accept liberation. There is nothing to be surprised [about], even if Litang Monastery is destroyed, [or] if one has to fight the enemies of the Buddhist faith. If you are going to allow us to stay and work as usual and pay the taxes, and if Tibet is Tibet and China is China, then we will stay nicely. If not, and if you insist on liberation, then we don't ever want to be liberated. Do we want liberation? We don't want liberation, and what are you going to do about that?" Khargya Ngawang Tengye banged his fists on the table and took out his Mauser pistol and said that we didn't want liberation and we will fight until not one person was left. The leader said, "No, no, it's not like that. You don't have to resort to such things. We can gradually discuss and solve things." Then they [the Litangbas] said, "Let's go!" And groups of 10 persons left the meeting and they were not able to capture anybody. Although they had made full plans to arrest [people], they were not able to do so, even [when] there were soldiers around there and they had planned to arrest them. Then they all went to the monastery and said, "Now, what shall we do?" They said, "Now there isn't anything to do. Now we must make war. There is nothing to be done, even if we all die." Then they said that they had to call all the representatives of the Ngari Shingkham, which meant all the areas, and we must decide. So they met at the monastery and they called people between the ages of 18 to 60. And so everybody was grouped for war in the Litang monastery. Litang Monastery had arms and all households were armed. The larger households had 3-4 guns and the smaller ones [had] at least one gun. In the earlier days [in Tibet] it was like that. Even if they were religious, they had a complete set of weapons. So when they all got together, the two nomadic chiefs Yönrupön and Uthogpön - You remember the famous Yönrupön? Yes, his son Trebo [Tib. ?] Sonam Gyatso [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ] and 30-40 riders came to the Litang monastery meeting. The Chinese knew about this. He said that, "We now have to fight. They have already cleaned up the 18 provinces of China. If we fight and cannot win, and there is not even one person left, that too is all right, since there is nothing else to do." [This was said] by the two nomadic chiefs, Nangopön and many others. They decided to gather the people and make war. Then Yönrupön returned to his nomad territory, and when he returned back to the monastery, the Chinese had dug trenches in the places- in the hermitage Tshakha Ritrö [Tib. ཚྭ་ཁ་རི་ཁྲོད], in Tsachuka [Tib. ཚྭ་ཆུ་ཁ] and in Dzodunglha [Tib. ?]- where there is a large plain. The Chinese had made the soldiers lay down in the trenches and prepare an ambush to kill Yönrupön with all of his people. When he arrived at the plain, they started shooting and one of his [Yönrupön's] servants was killed. Yönrupön would not get hit with weapons. So he dismounted his horse and shot towards the bunkers and his men were able to kill all of the Chinese in the trenches. Then they went to the monastery. There were only 14-15 people with Yönrupön. The monastery was ready for war and then the fighting began. It continued for about 15-16 days and then more Chinese reinforcements arrived. So the Chinese could not be challenged. Tens of thousands of troops came from Nyarong, Chantreng, Sadam and Gyerong, and they totally surrounded the monastery and they blocked the way out. Then they also started the bombardment and when they bombed a place near to the monastery, I heard that the shrines in the monastery fell down. They fought like this for two days, and countless Chinese were killed. Several of our people were also killed. Then it was decided that, "If they [Litangbas] do not leave the monastery and remain here stubbornly, the whole monastery will be destroyed. Who cares if we die. Let us leave the monastery and no matter how many die in the process, it doesn't matter." There was Khargya Ngawang Tengye, Deyong Atrin, Tayang Phüntso Thöndrub [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དོན་གྲུབ], and there were many young heroes coming forth. So they said that we had to leave the monastery. On considering how, they said, "There are tens of thousands of Chinese troops surrounding the monastery with many layers, but we must decide and we must die. When the time comes to die, one will die. So we can't just sit here like this." Yönrupön Sonam Gyatso and Dakpo Trebo Lo Thöndrub [Tib. བློ་དོན་དྲུབ] were related. They said, "The two of us when we entered the monastery's walls, we had already made a pledge. We had decided that if we have to part from this monastery, then we will do so only when we are dead. So you guys leave. The two of us are not going out." When they said that, the "ministers" [Tib. བློན་པོ] said, "Chief [Tib. Pön [དཔོན]), what are you saying? Unless you leave you are going to die. There is nothing wrong in leaving, such things do happen. So you must leave." The two replied, "No. The two of us, when we got off our horses and when we reached the main gates of the monastery, we two brothers made a pledge. So now we are not going to do anything to break the pledge. Tomorrow all of you leave, but we are not going to." The next day, a group left from the east gate, the Shargo Gochen [Tib. ཤར་སྒོ་སྒོ་ཆེན], another half left by the gate toward the Drongbo [Tib. གྲོང་པོ] [town], and another half by the gate below the monastery, by the stupa Tsempa Toktok [Tib. ?]. So they said that "No matter how many die, we must leave and leave the bodies, but pick up the guns. We must leave the monastery, for they have already bombed it for two days, and if they do it once more, the monastery will be destroyed." So just before dawn, the four groups left together. We were outside and not in the monastery. The shooting started and many Chinese were killed, as were monks and laymen also. Countless horses were killed since people came out riding the horses. Those who were killed were killed, and all the others took to the hills. The whole area was filled with corpses and dead horses. After they were killed, the people of the town were all in the monastery and all of them were arrested. The commander of the People's Liberation Army troops was called Jalagchen [Tib. བྱ་ལག་ཅན], who had webbed fingers. He was the biggest commander. Shiwa [Tib. ཞི་བ] Khamtsen was the largest khamtsen of Litang Monastery.   

**Q:**  What Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Shiwa. Litang Monastery had 8 khamtsen and 16 mitsen. So it was the biggest one of them all. Then the better ones were kept separate and tens of thousands of others were herded like animals. Then the leaders started to fight . The two brothers were staying in the quarters of Gusho Goso [Tib. སྐུ་གཞོགས], who is staying now at Sera Mey . So the two started to fire their guns and the Chinese found out. So the Chinese started shooting and told them to surrender or they were going to die. No way, the two continued shooting and killing Chinese. For 2-3 days, the people were locked up in the Shiwa Khamtsen along with the two brothers. So this Jalagchen commander got angry and said that he had fought all over the world and "I have not fought a war like this. Tens of thousands of my men were wasted away. Today, I am going to burn all the people in the Shiwa Khamtsen." So they brought kerosene and butter and piled them near the gate of the assembly hall of the khamtsen, and it was said that they were going to set it on fire. The brother of Yönrupön, Lo Thöndrub, was wounded with four gun shots. He said, "The situation is not right. If so many people burn, then the work is finished." So he said that he was going to surrender. Yönrupön said, "I am Yönrupön and I am going to surrender. But if I do that, then I am going to surrender to a leader since a leader must surrender to a leader and there is no custom that a leader would surrender to a servant. So whoever is the big leader of the Chinese, I will completely surrender to him." So they told the Big-Webbed-Hand commander that "Yönrupön is talking very nicely and he wants to surrender. And he wants to surrender to a leader and not a servant, so you must go." So the leader went. Yönrupön had two Mauser pistols and a Parmerly rifle in one hand. He loaded one pistol and tucked it under his dress, and took the other one in his hand. He turned the two guns upside down and held them with the muzzles. He came out to the place called Lhachen Jongma [Tib. lha chen Jongma?] in the Litang monastery where there is a Buddha image about 4 stories high. So there was a piece of flat land there. At this place, the Chinese leader came in an imposing manner with 5-6 soldiers, and behind [them] soldiers surrounded the place with machine guns. So Yönrupön brought the two guns to the Chinese leader and said, "Now things are done well and I am Yönrupön. I am a leader and so are you. The two of us worked for the people and such things happened. Now you are very good and I will surrender to you." He bent down to shake hands and with the other hand he reached into his pouch and shot the leader 6-7 times in the chest. Then the soldiers fired their machine guns, and he pounced and killed the gunner and took over the machine gun. Yönrupön was shot 14 times, still, he was standing. Then he was killed and so was the commander. Then the others were arrested. The corpse of Yönrupön was kept on a door leaf for a week. His brother also died. Yönrupön's body was displayed for a week and they told the people to witness [take note of] it. They said "If we could have arrested him, and if this person came with the Communists and changed his brains [philosophy], then he is the type that would have taken over the world. See, now, this is all he got. He killed our most able commander and one or two assistants, and he himself died. Such was the bravery of this person and it is such a loss." So Litang Monastery was lost to the Chinese. After that, there were many encounters with the Chinese soldiers with riders who were outside [the monastery] and coming to attack the Chinese at the monastery and then retreating. There were people like Asi Trinley [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས], Sorongzangka [Tib. ?], the people in Dhob, Chantreng, Ngabö and all, took to the hills. Now, Yönrupön is dead. There were more than 300 people with Uthog and Jungpapön [who] came out. It is said that on the banks of the river Dzikö, they fought and killed tens of thousands [of Chinese]. Gyadotsang Wangdü [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་ཚང་དབང་འདུས] was one among those who came from the Maymiri [hills]. So in this way, they gradually came to [Central Tibet], and from this time on, Litang Monastery was destroyed. Then the traders from Dartsedo and Chamdo came up to Lhasa. So then they said that they should not stay in Lhasa. Andru Jinda [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་སྦྱིན་བདག] was the main person and they said that when it was concerned with the enemies of the Buddha, that was all that one could expect. And so they decided that they had to do something. We were not there when they had the meeting, but a number of meetings took place and the golden throne offering was started. The Chinese had already occupied Lhasa, and so it was said that they couldn't have a regular meeting. And after much discussion, Chushigandru was started, as you know. Then the Dalai Lama went to India and 27 of us young Litangbas came to India. The ones who were the leaders were Lhasey Gyalo Thondup [Tib. ལྷ་སྲས་རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ], Kungö Shakabpa, and the late Khenjung and Lukhangwa. So one day, the 27 of us were called and told that the Dalai Lama was coming, and so we all had to go. So for each one of us, the "government" gave [us] one maroon chupa, a yellow raw silk shirt, and one boot. They told us that we had to go to India. Even though we wanted to go, we did not know the language. There was a person who was something during the 2nd world war. His name was Bagdro [Tib. བག་དྲོ] and he was working for Gyalo Thondup. I met him about 6 years ago and he said, "Oh, we met. We are friends." We took him as an interpreter and all of us went. The government paid all of the expenses. On wondering where we had to go, he said that we were to go where the Dalai Lama went, and then we would do things as the time came. First, we went to Riwalsar, Tsopema [Tib. མཚོ་པད་མ], and went around everywhere for a week. Then we went to Amritsar where we stayed for 3 days in a large dharamsala [a religious house where one can stay for free]. Then we went to Delhi since the Dalai Lama was to come. Preparations were made in a big hotel. We went wherever Bagdrola took us, we didn't know the language and didn't even know how to ride in a rickshaw. Then we went to Bodh Gaya where the Dalai Lama was to be. There they told us that we did good work and had gone everywhere. However, we were told that there was a lot more work to be done. After that, we came up here [to Kalimpong]. Then I was told that I must go. I asked for what reason since the Chinese were everywhere and I was a person that knew nothing. At that time, the Chinese were not so bad. They were not suppressing us militarily. They were deceiving people, since the Dalai Lama was here [India]. They told me that I was not to tell anyone, but that I was to go and take a letter, and there was no need to talk to anyone. "We have trust in you 100 percent, but you have to decide to even sacrifice your life." They told me that this letter was for Tibet and its people [Tib. བོད་རྒྱ་ཆེའི་མི་དམངས]. So I said, "Okay, there is nothing for you to worry about."   

**Q:**  Who was the one who told you to go? Khenjung?   

**A:**  It was Kungö Shakabpa, Khenjung and Gyalo Thondup. They said that I must go and if I wanted a companion, then I would take one. So as my companion there was Litangba Sidar Trinley [Tib. སྲི་ཐར་འཕྲིན་ལས]. He was sent. They told me not to tell him. They gave me this letter. It was not possible to carry it on my body. I had a rather large snuff-box, a yellow one. So I put the letter at the bottom of the box and filled it with snuff. Then the lid was closed and I put it in my pocket. I didn't know how to take snuff, but I pretended as if I did and thought that maybe things wouldn't be too bad. If I was caught, then I would sacrifice myself. I had a Mauser pistol. They could catch me at Sharsingma [Tib. ཤར་སིང་མ] or at no other place. But wherever I would get caught, I would throw the snuff-box in the water. If I carried it on my body, then if I was caught, then the letter would be found when they searched me. I didn't know what was in the letter. So I told them to tell me what to do since they had the brains. So I was given some money and the two of us each had a horse to ride. Then we went to Sharsingma. When we crossed the bridge at Sharsingma and went into the Chinese office. Though in the earlier years we were brave and smart, this time I was wondering what to do and I felt that my heels were not even touching the ground. We then had to show the pass. So I thought to myself that the destination had been reached, and if it was time to die, then that time too had arrived. As soon as I entered, there was a young adult, like a flower, with many stars and fat. He looked at me and spoke to me in Tibetan. "Gen la, where are you going?" I said, "I live in Kalimpong and I am not that well off. I have sent many loads via Phari and I don't know whether they have reached Lhasa or not. So I am going to check this out. If the loads have been sent, then I'll return right away. If not, then I'm going to Phari to make sure the loads were sent." He got up and shook my hands and said, "The way you speak, are you from Litang? We are from the same homeland." I said, "Yes, I'm from Litang and I live by doing some trading. Are you a Baba?" He was speaking in the Baba (Batang) dialect. He said, "Yes, I'm Baba and we understand each other well. Very good, very good. Have a good journey." He signed and so I left the office. Since he was friendly, the apprehension subsided. Then I was wondering if they still might make a phone call, but I just took off. Even though I had a gun in my pouch, there was no fear now. We went non-stop for 4 days and arrived in Andru's (Gombo Tashi's) courtyard. We were told to go to Andru. When I got there, Jinda (Gombo Tashi) was looking and said something to the servants. They said, "Abo, let's go, let's go up." They took care of the horses. Jinda said, "Ya Abo, you have come. When did you come?" I said, "Over four days." "Don't lie [that was extremely fast]," he said. "It's not a lie, I have been sent in this way," I replied. He asked what I had and I said I had it in my pouch. He asked, "Who sent you?" I said, "The three of them, Gyalo Thondup, Khenjung and Shakabpa. They told me that I must go." Andru asked, "What did they tell you?" I said, "They did not tell me anything except to say that I was a reliable person and that I had to go, and that I must be prepared to sacrifice my life. So whether I was able to [succeed] or not, I decided right there and said all right and I came." Then he said, "Wow, wow, it's good," and he laughed. Then he told me to stay and said that at night we had to go back. I said, okay. That night, with one servant and myself, we went. I think it was near Künsangtse's [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ] House, I don't know. It was close to Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche's house. Your father will know. There was an aristocrat. [Shelling note: this is Khenjung Kelsang Ngawang] He read the letter and said it was good. He said that I must go soon. So he asked what we were doing there and if we were prepared or not. I said we didn't have anything ready except for about 20-30 young ones. So only later the contents of the letter were known. He told me that I must leave and return immediately, and [asked me] if I could leave tomorrow. I said, "I can go right now if I am told to go." He told me that I could not ride a horse, [and] to take a gun and go immediately by vehicle. He said, "I have to go tomorrow, and if you don't take your gun, then you will get into trouble." He immediately wrote a letter and told me to take care on the road, and that things would not be quite all right around here. When I went back, Jinda also said that I must go. What they had written in the letter was that they had decided to start a fight. There is a Trapchi Depön, now I have forgotten his name.   

**Q:**  Is he in Dharamsala?   

**A:**  I think is he in Dharamsala, could be Tratönla [Tib. བཀྲ་དོན་ལགས], or something.   

**Q:**  Is he Trapchi? A depön?   

**A:**  Yes, he is the depön. The biggest one.   

**Q:**  Oh, oh. Tashi Berala [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ་ལགས].   

**A:**  I think he is the one. He, a soldier, and the Chushigandru were going to start fighting in Lhasa. Once that started, then 70 odd people were to start a fight when they got to Sikkim. This was in the letter. From here, they planned to make war right away. The 70 young ones were to be the bodyguards of the Dalai Lama, and he was to be told that there was fighting in Lhasa, and they were to sacrifice their lives and not let the Dalai Lama return, saying that they could just not let him go [from India]. . So when there was a plan to start a war, some officers disagreed, saying that this could not be done, that we just could start a hotchpotch [Hin. zabazasdhi] war. So after some discussion, there was no war at all [means in Lhasa]. I was sent by a vehicle [motor] from Lhasa and reached Markyang [Tib. མར་རྐྱང]. From there the vehicle would not go at all since it was too cold. Then I got to Shigatse and got some food, and then arrived at Phari. At Phari, I got some tea and then I was taken straight to Sharsingma. There, as I was going to the Nathula [Tib. སྣ་སྟོད་ལ] mountain pass, the Dalai Lama was already coming this way. So nothing could be done. Later, it was said that that was the plan [to start a war]. So I came to this side [Kalimpong] and stayed. Among the 26-27 persons, the majority were Litangba. We said we couldn't stay like that and discussed. Then it was said that we had to go to America. There were about 7 who went and were trained, as Athar has mentioned [the 7 went to Saipan Island for CIA training in 1957]. The people like Athar and Lhotse, who were in Darjeeling, have now passed away. They were trained in wireless transmissions. Then there were young ones who were dropped in Litang, in the north, and at Jara Pembar [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར]. Expenses were paid and arms were given. They had totally sacrificed their lives, including carrying pills [cyanide]. So Athar went to Tibet and on the 16th of the 6th month of 1958, Chushigandru gathered at Drigutang. So both Athar and Lhotse went there [to Tibet] once. They were there to train, they stayed amidst the rocky mountains, and they made the soldiers gather and the two of them sent the wireless messages. Finally, they both came back again. Then there was another who had been trained in the States. I can't recall his name. His family members were all heroes. He was called Bugö [Tib. བུ་རྒོད] or something. They came to Kalimpong and there we had fed two horses and a mule, we fed them at Majhula Khoti, and we were saying that we needed them to ride hither and thither. But the Chinese knew all the internal secrets, right? So they went to Gangtok and to Nathula. As soon as they reached the bridge that I had crossed earlier and reached the Chinese office - Athar was an unusually clever [person]. He told Bugö to stay with the horses while the two went to show the passes. They said that the Chinese were unusually different. Everywhere they had their bren-guns ready. Then, as they looked towards the Phari side from the Yadong Governor's Office, the Drojikhang [Tib. གྲོ་སྤྱི་ཁང], and they saw that the soldiers were coming on the bridge. Then Athar said, "Don't go up. Don't go. Let's get out of here!" Immediately they took their guns out and they ran. The two got on their horses and Bugö rode the mule. On the other side of the Drojikhang, there is a gate. The two got through and came to Sikkim, but Bugö rode the mule and it could not run and the saddle slipped and overturned and he was shot in the shootout. He managed to get to a house on the hill and told the Yadong woman there, "Ama, I was shot two or three times. Here, take this, as this will be helpful to you. There is nothing left for me except to die." He gave her a bunch of 100 rupees notes and a large gold amulet saying, "Here, you wear this, okay?" Just then, the Chinese caught up, and shot him and took his body away. Later, this elder Yadong woman came here and told the story. She said that to that day, she still cries and that he was so thoughtful for her and not for his own life. So after he was killed, the two (Athar) returned. Later they did. So in this way, and as I have related, Chushigandru started. And as for me, I guess I should be thankful for the government who said that I could go to the States if I wanted to. "You have done a lot and so you go to the States." So I was thinking about going. But those in the States sent me a letter saying, "Don't come. They are dropping stones from the sky." It was like dropping stones from the sky and [they] disappeared not knowing where they were dropping." So I said, "I am very grateful that you want to send me to the States, but I would like to remain here." So I was told that I could stay and that whatever work I wanted, they would help me and not just leave me hanging. So it was like that. My boss, Jinda, was killed in our homeland. His name was Tsewang Dorje. He's the one in the photograph up there. The young one.   

**Q:**  He went to the States too didn't he?   

**A:**  Yes. He was the main one, the first one. [See Athar's interview]. So I thought that if I went, it would just lead to my death. So I decided to work hard here and stay. So I stayed here and as Kungö had said, the government said that if I wanted to work, they would help me. So I thought that I couldn't just leave everything, as so many had died. Tsewang Dorje died, also Rinzin [Tib. རིག་འཛིན], Droma Goley [Tib. སྒོལ་མ་མགོ་ལེབ], Phuchung [Tib. ཕུལ་བྱུང], Gelek [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས]. All together, about 23 young Litangbas died. Athar is the only living one. All dead - and also Lotse.   

**Q:**  He too passed away.   

**A:**  He died. Otherwise, they all died. Most of them in a house in Tö [Tib. སྟོད]. Radrü Ngawang's relative, Gelek, also died. Droma Goley too. Countless others died. And so, it is something like that, Kungö. Even though I was not in big meetings, I heard from our elders and what I heard I have told you Kungö. I told you all of these things honestly. All that I have said is the truth. And it is helpful for the government, like [what] you, Kungö, are doing. So whatever is done, now Tibet is in a bad and poor situation. And truly, it is up to the younger generation as us old ones are finished. And I have been among the weaker ones [in service]. It has now been 31 years since I served the Tibetan people, but I don't count the years. At first   

