# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0062.01  
##  : with Namseling Jamchung Chökyi [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང་ཆོས་སྐྱིད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 22 January 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Namseling Jamchung Chökyi [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང་ཆོས་སྐྱིད]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** ca. 64  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1930  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Namseling Jamchung [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང] was the wife of the well-known Rimshi Namseling. In this interview, she recalls how after the 17-Point Agreement was signed her husband became depressed, and about how he took a keen interest in politics and had connections with Sambo Depön, Depön Trepala, Tsögo, and Kundeling as well as with the People's Association and the sitsab. She also discusses his involvement with Andrutsang Gombo Tashi and with Khenjung of Jenkhentsisum in India, and about his mission to Chushigandru in Lhoka in 1958.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0062_01/H_0062_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  If we start from 1949, in October in 1950, Chamdo was lost. Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When you stayed in Lhasa, what did you hear? Probably, everyone heard that the Chinese were saying that they are going to liberate Tibet, right? So was the situation tense and did you think of going to India or what?   

**A:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama was yet to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. After Chamdo was lost he took on the political and religious power and after that he went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and at that time, the 17-Point Agreement was signed, right? At that time, everyone was holding their breadth in Lhasa and my late Kungö [Note: this a term of address and reference for aristocrats and here refers to her husband] went to the office daily. When things were not going well he used to come back with a long face and would ponder a lot. When I asked him what was the matter, he used to say, "You should not interfere; women should not interfere in government matters." At that time Chamdo was being lost and he just could not sleep. Previous to this he did not smoke opium. When Chamdo was lost he had sleeping problems for a very long time. Treatment at the Medical Astrological Institute [Tib. མེནཙིགང] was not helpful. In Lhasa there were a Guomindang Association or something in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] House. It was said that there were communists in there too and he worked on that and appointed two Wöbaling [Ch. he ba liang] [Muslim] people named Youyou and Jo Tsering as spies. It seemed that the two smoked [opium] and they told him that if he smoked a little bit, it would help him. So since that time he got hooked on it. At that time he was very worried. At that time, what work was he doing? He was a tsipön and he also went to the Legjö (Reform) Office and others. He had to go to many offices. I don't remember. Generally, some of the households take a keen interest in politics. For example, my father was not interested. Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> take a keen interest in politics from early times? . Yes, he took a keen interest and there were others who also took an interest such as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Depön, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Depön [Trepala], and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Dzasa. The latter did not come often, but Kungö used to go and see him. Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] also used to come. So they discussed a lot. During those occasions we were not permitted to be in the room. Even tea need not be served. All he ever thought about was the government and never about family matters. I used to talk to him about certain difficulties regarding family expenses and he used to get very angry and say, "What are you talking about? The government is in a precarious situation like the proverb, "Goat's excrement pellets on a doorstep" [Tib. ཐེམ་པའི་སྒང་གི་རིལ་མ], so what are we compared to that. If the government survives then we do, if not, then we don't." So he never took any interest in private matters. In 1951, when the 17-Point Agreement was signed, what did he tell you about these matters? I don't remember anything that he told me. He went to Yadong in the entourage in 1950. When it was said that Chinese were coming, I was in the latter stages of pregnancy and fled to Lhoka. In Yadong, there was an argument about whether the Dalai Lama should return or not. Yes, I heard there was a lot of arguing about this and Kungö seems to have been on the side that said the Dalai Lama must go to India. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> were the ones who said that he should go to India. Later I heard that Lhautara was also there. [No] He had gone to sign the Agreement. I heard that Lhautara wrote in his book that Tsipön Namseling was the one who came forward saying that the Dalai Lama must leave though there were others behind him. [He wrote] That Namseling banged his fists and there was a big argument. I asked them if I can get the book, I didn't. This book is sold by Tenzin Gyentsenla [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས]. Not that one. I heard that there was one written in Tibet by himself. I don't think it was a real book that was in Tibetan. It was in a Chinese book called the [Tib. རྒྱུ་ཆ་འདེམས་སྒྲིག] which had a set of 11-12 volumes. You can get it from the library. Probably, he wrote an article in 1982-83. When my late Kungö returned from Yadong, he was on the verge of tears when I offered him a greeting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf. So at that time, Zhang Jingwu, etc., had come to Lhasa and the Dalai Lama had also returned and many Chinese soldiers arrived. Since the 17-Point Agreement was signed, the Kashag had to implement the points in the Agreement, but they didn't get along well with the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and there was the Water-Dragon Year People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ]. That was the one that Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག] was in, right? No, that was later on. It was the one with Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] and Tsha Trunyila [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལགས]. Yes, it seems that Kungö was also in that. At that time, did your Kungö have some work with the sitsab in that [People's Association]? Probably, he had. Chandzö Thamjö Sonamla used to come often to our house. Kungö often went to see the two sitsab, but he never told us what he did. Did he go with Thamjö Sonam to the sitsab? No, he wouldn't. Thamjö Sonam would come to our house and Kungö would go to the sitsab. He also went to see Chemmo [Drönyerchemmo] very often. But he never spoke about it. When officials came to our house for discussions, servants would not go in to serve tea. Andrutsang Gombo Tashi [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] used to come to our house. This was in 1957, right? Yes. He used to come even before 1957. Even Alo Chöndze, Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར], and Lhabju used to come and see Kungö. He had a lot of connections with them and the Water-Dragon People's Association. Later Thamjö Sonamla's wife and daughter were sent to India At that time, Kungö got money from the government and gave it to them. They were sent to India. When was that? Was that after their association was banned? It was after that. I think this took place after Thamjö Sonamla died. It was like the government sort of saw to their needs when his wife and daughter were living alone. I heard that there was a kind of group of Drönyerchemmo [Phala] that contained Namseling, Depön Tashi Perala [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ་ལགས], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsen la [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས] and Tema Jokala [Tib. bstan ma 'cog pa lags]. Who else was there? I don't have anything to tell you about this. Who came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> to see your Kungö? Did they have good relations before 1957? Yes, they had. When it was said that the Chinese arrived in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, Andru Gombo Tashi would come to tell Kungö about what they were doing and what was their policy. Why did they come to tell your Kungö? Was he close to Drönyerchemmo? They had to do it secretly, right? Probably, he couldn't go to see the Chemmo, so Kungö went to see Chemmo. This was around 1957 when I came to India once. Before I left for India in 1956, Gombo Tashi said, "The situation is not good and so you should take the children and leave. As far as Kungö is concerned, do not worry at all. We will take care of him." So in 1957 I came [to India} and left the children at school and then returned again. After that, I went back once and at that time they all had left for Lhoka. You know Kungö has a daughter who is at this moment at the Tibet Children's Village. Her name is Södrönla [Tib. བསོད་སྒྲོན་ལགས]. Her husband is from Litang. He was, I think, a bodyguard left by Andru (Gombo Tashi). Where is he now? And does he have a lot to say? Yes. He is here and has a little bit to say. Probably, he might be better than me. Would you please introduce me to him. He stayed at Namseling since 1957, so he might have something to say about when Kungö and Samjola were sent to Lhoka. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>'s trouble started, a meeting was held to suppress the Khamba's disturbance and to mollify the anger of the China [Tib. ཁམབེ་སིངཇ་ཇཡ་དང, ཏྲུཡང་གོངབ་ཐང་ཡ]. I heard that many meetings were held. The Chinese were saying that we should send the soldiers to destroy the Khambas. Some might have the intention to pretend to go to destroy the Khambas and actually take arms and join the Chushigandru and fight the Chinese. Yes, it may be true that the intention was to send armed government troops to subdue the Khambas and then join them against the Chinese. It was said it was the Chinese's idea to send Kungö because many Khambas had connections with Kungö and he was sent along with Samjola and the abbots of the three great monasteries. He was told to tell the Khambas that there would be nothing other than losses [if they continued]. So don't do that. He went to Lhoka, but instead of telling them to stop fighting it is said that he made documents and prepared militia recruitment to fight the Chinese. Yes, he was supposed to tell the Khambas not to cause the disturbance, but actually he stayed and worked there. Did he ever tell you something about having had this idea from the early times? It seems that he had this idea from the early times. Maybe. When it was said that they have to leave, Trekhang Kungö Samjola and Kungö came home and they were not their usual selves. Usually they had a frown on their faces, but on that day, they were so happy. They were so happy and said that the government said that we have to go to India . I said if you are going to Lhoka I also want to go. Later he said this will not do. Think carefully. We are supposed to go and hold discussions and if a wife and children are taken then the Chinese will be suspicious. It's not a good idea. Later there was Dodrong Rabgyela [Tib. རྡོ་གྲོང་རབ་རྒྱས་ལགས] a lay official, the husband of Kungö's younger daughter. He went with Kungö and did a lot of letter writing. Just before the uprising, he came to Lhasa and said Kungö wants me to come to Lhoka. I could not go because it was the month in which my baby was due to be born. He was latter imprisoned for 20 years. Unfortunately he died after he was released. He would have known what happened at Lhoka. What did Kungö do in Lhoka? Did he recruit soldiers? Yes, he recruited soldiers and Dündüla [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་ལགས] knows what else he did. Before that, Andru Jinda used to come to your household, right? I heard from Draktenla [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན་ལགས] that you would stay outside the room? Yes. When Andru Jinda came to our house, Kungö used to tell me to guard the door and even tea does not have to be served. Was Andru alone? Yes, once in a while Kungö Chemmo came. Did they meet secretly with the pretext of playing mahjong? Playing mahjong was not a secret. I mean while playing mahjong, they might have had some secret talks. Chemmo would come once in a while, right? When Chemmo came, they didn't play mahjong. After I was put in prison the Chinese told me, "Andrutsang and you all went to Sangyib [Tib. གསང་ཡིབས] where there was a hot spring in the upper reaches of Lhasa on the pretext of a picnic when in reality the reason was to have meetings." It's true that they went. At first, they had a shooting contest on Saturday. The one who lost had to sponsor the picnic and they stayed there for a day or two. The Chinese gave me such a difficult time. Kungö went, but that's all I knew. There were some Khambas and Andru Jinda was there. Who else went with Kungö at that time? There was Andru and some Khambas. When he went to Lhoka, I heard that he had a little bit of trouble with the Chushigandru. I never heard anything until you just mentioned it. I did not hear about any problems Kungö had with the Khambas. Dündüla would know. If he worked on political matters, there could be trouble because there were many [Khamba] factions there. As far as work is concerned, he cherished others more than himself [Tib. རང་ལས་གཞན་གཅེས་པ] and he never cared about one's own private concerns, one's family's concerns. He did a lot of works secretly and openly, but now the younger generation do not know and many were saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> didn't do anything. So this is important for Tibetan history. At that time, I was young and inexperienced, so we needed a person to stay on the estate. So there was a person called Lhawang Tsering [Tib. ལྷ་དབང་ཚེ་རིང] who was the son of Kungö's younger sister and was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> [type of higher status monk exempt from the work required of young monks] in Drepung. He stayed on the estate and when the revolt took place and Kungö was in Lhoka and the Dalai Lama had left, he came [to India] with Kungö and is working as a teacher in a school in Darjeeling. How old is he? Probably, in his 50s. When he stayed on the estate, he was in his twenties. Might he have something to tell us about the history? I don't think so because before that he stayed in the monastery and then he stayed in Lhoka. In 1954, when the Dalai Lama was to go to China, were you in Lhasa at that time? Yes, and I don't have anything to tell you. Probably, they might have held some meetings saying the it would not be good for the Dalai Lama to go to China and some saying that it would be good. I think Kungö was one who did not wish him to go. The day the Dalai Lama left he stayed home and did not go in the "entourage" [Tib. ཆིབས་ཞབས]. He took leave saying that he will only end up crying. In 1951-52, the Chinese started the Youth and the Women's Federation. On this matter, were the people in society and in the monastery saying something about this? I don't think the Women's Federation started in 1952. It was in 1959. No, I mean the Chinese Women's Federation? Yes. It was said that it is not okay to start it. At that time, Taring Grandmother was also in there. The Chinese insisted a lot that I join the Women's Federation, but I was told not to go and I didn't go at all. Did they insist a lot? Yes. The Chinese used to send the kudraks they had connections with. I heard that mostly Ngabö Lhajam used to call people. I was asked a few times. Kungö did not allow me to go at all and I never went to any of the Chinese organizations. I never went anywhere. I just stayed at home. Some liked to go to he dances and those things. I was among the ones who didn't go. Did you go to India in 1957? Yes, I went in 1956 when the Dalai Lama came to India. I brought all the children and came to India. The children wanted to stay in school. Kungö stayed at Lhasa. Did he stay back because he had work? Yes, because he had work. He said he hoped to be in the entourage but was told to remain. At that time, Drönyerchemmo Phala went to India, right? Yes, Phala went to India. When did you go to India again? I went to India in 1956 for pilgrimage and then I returned and brought the children back and Kungö said, "You should have left the children in school." He did not tell me anything earlier and so once again in 1957 I took the children to school in India. Kungö said, "The situation is not at all good. So you stay there and only come if you are asked to come." So we were in India and it must be my karma. My 4 year old son, a lama, just would not stay and was crying day and night. I did a divination and so did my husband in Lhasa. It forecast that he should return to Lhasa and Kungö had sent people to receive him from Yadong. At that time, the Dalai Lama had returned to Tibet, right? Yes, if the Dalai Lama hadn't returned, I would have stayed in India. I was thinking of going wherever the Dalai Lama would go. In 1956, did you come for the pilgrimage or because of the situation was not good? I came only for pilgrimage purposes and not for political reasons. The Chinese even gave me a difficult time later. They asked for what reason did I go to India twice. The connection in India was Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ] Kungö Khenjung. He was one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>, right? Yes. At that time, Kungö told me the way that letters were sent. When I asked Kungö Khenjung if he had any letters to send, He said, "No, no. When we send letters we don't send through people like you. We put the letters in a bottle of Vaseline and send it." I heard that Phala was the one who had connections with Kalimpong and maybe your Kungö must also have had connections? Yes, he had a lot of connections with Kungö Khenjung. It is said that they knew each other since a long time ago. Did they make the connections through letters? Probably only through letters. Usually, I heard that they were close from the early times. he went in car or motorcycle to Kundeling while the others crossed the bridge and came where Kundeling is located. Kungö stayed for a night at Kundeling and on the next day, he went in a coracle to Lhoka. Did Samjola come to see your Kungö? No, he didn't come much. At that time, when they went to Lhoka, did they go together? They left on their own when they went to Kundeling. Samjola did not leave with Kungö.   

**A:**  At that time, everyone was holding their breadth in Lhasa and my late Kungö [Note: this a term of address and reference for aristocrats and here refers to her husband] went to the office daily. When things were not going well he used to come back with a long face and would ponder a lot. When I asked him what was the matter, he used to say, "You should not interfere; women should not interfere in government matters." At that time Chamdo was being lost and he just could not sleep. Previous to this he did not smoke opium. When Chamdo was lost he had sleeping problems for a very long time. Treatment at the Medical Astrological Institute [Tib. མེནཙིགང] was not helpful. In Lhasa there were a Guomindang Association or something in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] House. It was said that there were communists in there too and he worked on that and appointed two Wöbaling [Ch. he ba liang] [Muslim] people named Youyou and Jo Tsering as spies. It seemed that the two smoked [opium] and they told him that if he smoked a little bit, it would help him. So since that time he got hooked on it. At that time he was very worried.   

**Q:**  At that time, what work was he doing?   

**A:**  He was a tsipön and he also went to the Legjö (Reform) Office and others. He had to go to many offices. I don't remember.   

**Q:**  Generally, some of the households take a keen interest in politics. For example, my father was not interested. Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> take a keen interest in politics from early times?   

**A:** . Yes, he took a keen interest and there were others who also took an interest such as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Depön, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Depön [Trepala], and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Dzasa. The latter did not come often, but Kungö used to go and see him. Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] also used to come. So they discussed a lot. During those occasions we were not permitted to be in the room. Even tea need not be served. All he ever thought about was the government and never about family matters. I used to talk to him about certain difficulties regarding family expenses and he used to get very angry and say, "What are you talking about? The government is in a precarious situation like the proverb, "Goat's excrement pellets on a doorstep" [Tib. ཐེམ་པའི་སྒང་གི་རིལ་མ], so what are we compared to that. If the government survives then we do, if not, then we don't." So he never took any interest in private matters.   

**Q:**  In 1951, when the 17-Point Agreement was signed, what did he tell you about these matters?   

**A:**  I don't remember anything that he told me. He went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> in the entourage in 1950. When it was said that Chinese were coming, I was in the latter stages of pregnancy and fled to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, there was an argument about whether the Dalai Lama should return or not.   

**A:**  Yes, I heard there was a lot of arguing about this and Kungö seems to have been on the side that said the Dalai Lama must go to India.   

**Q:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> were the ones who said that he should go to India.   

**A:**  Later I heard that Lhautara was also there.   

**Q:**  [No] He had gone to sign the Agreement.   

**A:**  I heard that Lhautara wrote in his book that Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was the one who came forward saying that the Dalai Lama must leave though there were others behind him. [He wrote] That Namseling banged his fists and there was a big argument. I asked them if I can get the book, I didn't.   

**Q:**  This book is sold by Tenzin Gyentsenla [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས].   

**A:**  Not that one. I heard that there was one written in Tibet by himself.   

**Q:**  I don't think it was a real book that was in Tibetan. It was in a Chinese book called the [Tib. རྒྱུ་ཆ་འདེམས་སྒྲིག] which had a set of 11-12 volumes. You can get it from the library. Probably, he wrote an article in 1982-83.   

**A:**  When my late Kungö returned from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, he was on the verge of tears when I offered him a greeting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf.   

**Q:**  So at that time, Zhang Jingwu, etc., had come to Lhasa and the Dalai Lama had also returned and many Chinese soldiers arrived. Since the 17-Point Agreement was signed, the Kashag had to implement the points in the Agreement, but they didn't get along well with the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and there was the Water-Dragon Year People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ].   

**A:**  That was the one that Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག] was in, right?   

**Q:**  No, that was later on. It was the one with Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] and Tsha Trunyila [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལགས].   

**A:**  Yes, it seems that Kungö was also in that.   

**Q:**  At that time, did your Kungö have some work with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> in that [People's Association]?   

**A:**  Probably, he had. Chandzö Thamjö Sonamla used to come often to our house. Kungö often went to see the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, but he never told us what he did.   

**Q:**  Did he go with Thamjö Sonam to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>?   

**A:**  No, he wouldn't. Thamjö Sonam would come to our house and Kungö would go to the sitsab. He also went to see Chemmo [Drönyerchemmo] very often. But he never spoke about it. When officials came to our house for discussions, servants would not go in to serve tea. Andrutsang Gombo Tashi [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] used to come to our house.   

**Q:**  This was in 1957, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He used to come even before 1957. Even Alo Chöndze, Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར], and Lhabju used to come and see Kungö. He had a lot of connections with them and the Water-Dragon People's Association. Later Thamjö Sonamla's wife and daughter were sent to India At that time, Kungö got money from the government and gave it to them. They were sent to India.   

**Q:**  When was that? Was that after their association was banned?   

**A:**  It was after that. I think this took place after Thamjö Sonamla died. It was like the government sort of saw to their needs when his wife and daughter were living alone.   

**Q:**  I heard that there was a kind of group of Drönyerchemmo [Phala] that contained <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, Depön Tashi Perala [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ་ལགས], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsen la [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས] and Tema Jokala [Tib. bstan ma 'cog pa lags]. Who else was there?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this.   

**Q:**  Who came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> to see your Kungö? Did they have good relations before 1957?   

**A:**  Yes, they had. When it was said that the Chinese arrived in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, Andru Gombo Tashi would come to tell Kungö about what they were doing and what was their policy.   

**Q:**  Why did they come to tell your Kungö? Was he close to Drönyerchemmo? They had to do it secretly, right?   

**A:**  Probably, he couldn't go to see the Chemmo, so Kungö went to see Chemmo. This was around 1957 when I came to India once. Before I left for India in 1956, Gombo Tashi said, "The situation is not good and so you should take the children and leave. As far as Kungö is concerned, do not worry at all. We will take care of him." So in 1957 I came [to India} and left the children at school and then returned again. After that, I went back once and at that time they all had left for Lhoka. You know Kungö has a daughter who is at this moment at the Tibet Children's Village. Her name is Södrönla [Tib. བསོད་སྒྲོན་ལགས]. Her husband is from Litang. He was, I think, a bodyguard left by Andru (Gombo Tashi).   

**Q:**  Where is he now? And does he have a lot to say?   

**A:**  Yes. He is here and has a little bit to say. Probably, he might be better than me.   

**Q:**  Would you please introduce me to him.   

**A:**  He stayed at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> since 1957, so he might have something to say about when Kungö and Samjola were sent to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>'s trouble started, a meeting was held to suppress the Khamba's disturbance and to mollify the anger of the China [Tib. ཁམབེ་སིངཇ་ཇཡ་དང, ཏྲུཡང་གོངབ་ཐང་ཡ].   

**A:**  I heard that many meetings were held.   

**Q:**  The Chinese were saying that we should send the soldiers to destroy the Khambas. Some might have the intention to pretend to go to destroy the Khambas and actually take arms and join the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and fight the Chinese.   

**A:**  Yes, it may be true that the intention was to send armed government troops to subdue the Khambas and then join them against the Chinese. It was said it was the Chinese's idea to send Kungö because many Khambas had connections with Kungö and he was sent along with Samjola and the abbots of the three great monasteries. He was told to tell the Khambas that there would be nothing other than losses [if they continued]. So don't do that. He went to Lhoka, but instead of telling them to stop fighting it is said that he made documents and prepared militia recruitment to fight the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Yes, he was supposed to tell the Khambas not to cause the disturbance, but actually he stayed and worked there. Did he ever tell you something about having had this idea from the early times?   

**A:**  It seems that he had this idea from the early times. Maybe. When it was said that they have to leave, Trekhang Kungö Samjola and Kungö came home and they were not their usual selves. Usually they had a frown on their faces, but on that day, they were so happy. They were so happy and said that the government said that we have to go to India . I said if you are going to Lhoka I also want to go. Later he said this will not do. Think carefully. We are supposed to go and hold discussions and if a wife and children are taken then the Chinese will be suspicious. It's not a good idea. Later there was Dodrong Rabgyela [Tib. རྡོ་གྲོང་རབ་རྒྱས་ལགས] a lay official, the husband of Kungö's younger daughter. He went with Kungö and did a lot of letter writing. Just before the uprising, he came to Lhasa and said Kungö wants me to come to Lhoka. I could not go because it was the month in which my baby was due to be born. He was latter imprisoned for 20 years. Unfortunately he died after he was released. He would have known what happened at Lhoka.   

**Q:**  What did Kungö do in Lhoka? Did he recruit soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes, he recruited soldiers and Dündüla [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་ལགས] knows what else he did.   

**Q:**  Before that, Andru Jinda used to come to your household, right? I heard from Draktenla [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན་ལགས] that you would stay outside the room?   

**A:**  Yes. When Andru Jinda came to our house, Kungö used to tell me to guard the door and even tea does not have to be served.   

**Q:**  Was Andru alone?   

**A:**  Yes, once in a while Kungö Chemmo came.   

**Q:**  Did they meet secretly with the pretext of playing mahjong?   

**A:**  Playing mahjong was not a secret.   

**Q:**  I mean while playing mahjong, they might have had some secret talks. Chemmo would come once in a while, right?   

**A:**  When Chemmo came, they didn't play mahjong. After I was put in prison the Chinese told me, "Andrutsang and you all went to Sangyib [Tib. གསང་ཡིབས] where there was a hot spring in the upper reaches of Lhasa on the pretext of a picnic when in reality the reason was to have meetings." It's true that they went. At first, they had a shooting contest on Saturday. The one who lost had to sponsor the picnic and they stayed there for a day or two. The Chinese gave me such a difficult time. Kungö went, but that's all I knew. There were some Khambas and Andru Jinda was there.   

**Q:**  Who else went with Kungö at that time?   

**Q:**  There was Andru and some Khambas.   

**Q:**  When he went to Lhoka, I heard that he had a little bit of trouble with the Chushigandru.   

**A:**  I never heard anything until you just mentioned it. I did not hear about any problems Kungö had with the Khambas. Dündüla would know.   

**Q:**  If he worked on political matters, there could be trouble because there were many [Khamba] factions there.   

**A:**  As far as work is concerned, he cherished others more than himself [Tib. རང་ལས་གཞན་གཅེས་པ] and he never cared about one's own private concerns, one's family's concerns.   

**Q:**  He did a lot of works secretly and openly, but now the younger generation do not know and many were saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> didn't do anything. So this is important for Tibetan history.   

**A:**  At that time, I was young and inexperienced, so we needed a person to stay on the estate. So there was a person called Lhawang Tsering [Tib. ལྷ་དབང་ཚེ་རིང] who was the son of Kungö's younger sister and was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> [type of higher status monk exempt from the work required of young monks] in Drepung. He stayed on the estate and when the revolt took place and Kungö was in Lhoka and the Dalai Lama had left, he came [to India] with Kungö and is working as a teacher in a school in Darjeeling.   

**Q:**  How old is he?   

**A:**  Probably, in his 50s. When he stayed on the estate, he was in his twenties.   

**Q:**  Might he have something to tell us about the history?   

**A:**  I don't think so because before that he stayed in the monastery and then he stayed in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  In 1954, when the Dalai Lama was to go to China, were you in Lhasa at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, and I don't have anything to tell you.   

**Q:**  Probably, they might have held some meetings saying the it would not be good for the Dalai Lama to go to China and some saying that it would be good.   

**A:**  I think Kungö was one who did not wish him to go. The day the Dalai Lama left he stayed home and did not go in the "entourage" [Tib. ཆིབས་ཞབས]. He took leave saying that he will only end up crying.   

**Q:**  In 1951-52, the Chinese started the Youth and the Women's Federation. On this matter, were the people in society and in the monastery saying something about this?   

**A:**  I don't think the Women's Federation started in 1952. It was in 1959.   

**Q:**  No, I mean the Chinese Women's Federation?   

**A:**  Yes. It was said that it is not okay to start it. At that time, Taring Grandmother was also in there. The Chinese insisted a lot that I join the Women's Federation, but I was told not to go and I didn't go at all.   

**Q:**  Did they insist a lot?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese used to send the kudraks they had connections with. I heard that mostly Ngabö Lhajam used to call people. I was asked a few times. Kungö did not allow me to go at all and I never went to any of the Chinese organizations. I never went anywhere. I just stayed at home.   

**Q:**  Some liked to go to he dances and those things.   

**A:**  I was among the ones who didn't go.   

**Q:**  Did you go to India in 1957?   

**A:**  Yes, I went in 1956 when the Dalai Lama came to India. I brought all the children and came to India. The children wanted to stay in school. Kungö stayed at Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did he stay back because he had work?   

**A:**  Yes, because he had work. He said he hoped to be in the entourage but was told to remain.   

**Q:**  At that time, Drönyerchemmo Phala went to India, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Phala went to India.   

**Q:**  When did you go to India again?   

**A:**  I went to India in 1956 for pilgrimage and then I returned and brought the children back and Kungö said, "You should have left the children in school." He did not tell me anything earlier and so once again in 1957 I took the children to school in India. Kungö said, "The situation is not at all good. So you stay there and only come if you are asked to come." So we were in India and it must be my karma. My 4 year old son, a lama, just would not stay and was crying day and night. I did a divination and so did my husband in Lhasa. It forecast that he should return to Lhasa and Kungö had sent people to receive him from Yadong.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama had returned to Tibet, right?   

**A:**  Yes, if the Dalai Lama hadn't returned, I would have stayed in India. I was thinking of going wherever the Dalai Lama would go.   

**Q:**  In 1956, did you come for the pilgrimage or because of the situation was not good?   

**A:**  I came only for pilgrimage purposes and not for political reasons. The Chinese even gave me a difficult time later. They asked for what reason did I go to India twice. The connection in India was Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ] Kungö Khenjung.   

**Q:**  He was one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, Kungö told me the way that letters were sent. When I asked Kungö Khenjung if he had any letters to send, He said, "No, no. When we send letters we don't send through people like you. We put the letters in a bottle of Vaseline and send it."   

**Q:**  I heard that Phala was the one who had connections with Kalimpong and maybe your Kungö must also have had connections?   

**A:**  Yes, he had a lot of connections with Kungö Khenjung. It is said that they knew each other since a long time ago.   

**Q:**  Did they make the connections through letters?   

**A:**  Probably only through letters. Usually, I heard that they were close from the early times. he went in car or motorcycle to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> while the others crossed the bridge and came where Kundeling is located. Kungö stayed for a night at Kundeling and on the next day, he went in a coracle to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Did Samjola come to see your Kungö?   

**A:**  No, he didn't come much.   

**Q:**  At that time, when they went to Lhoka, did they go together?   

**A:**  They left on their own when they went to Kundeling. Samjola did not leave with Kungö.   

