# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, USA  
**Date of Interview:** September 1985  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English and Tibetan and translated completely into English .  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 46  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of the 10th Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview he disucsses the process of becoming an official in the monastery and how these position are asked for. Also within this interview are details about the two main monastery sub-units, the khamtsen (residence hall) and the tratshang (college), and about the office of the Jiso.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_03/M_0009_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  This is a continuation of the tape on Depung monastery by Gelek Rimpoche on Septermber 5th 1985. The question is (when getting alms at a prayer assembly session) who goes around and gets extra gye (alms)?   

**A:**  That mostly is the sheyngo and the gegö in the tratsang and the nangma [Tib. ནང་མ] chabril in the tratsang and the chagdampa [Tib. ཕྱག་དམ་པ] at the Mönlam. The chösungwa [Tib. ཆོས་སྲུང་བ] also goes. The shanggo shingnyer [Tib. ཞང་གོ་ཤིང་གཉེར] in the Mönlam Festival also goes in addition to that.   

**Q:**  Then in Mönlam, there were specials officials like the geyog and those stuffs. That kind of control all over Drepung or just Loseling and Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང]?   

**A:**  For Loseling, all of them would go and sometimes, Loseling and Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] would be the sheyngo. In the tratsang, lama shunglenpa [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ] doesn't really have much income except those officially in the tratsang, they get only 2 shares. So does the umdze. The gegö get a little more and they would say, "give me the reply" [Tib. ལན་ཁྱེར་ཤོག་ཨ].   

**Q:**  What does that mean?   

**A:**  That means if you are involved or make mistakes, you have to tell the gegö. The gegö get a lot of money out of that. Any case that comes according to the discipline in the tratsang, it goes to the gegö and in the tsogchen it goes to sheyngo. They get a lot of money out of them. They also get a lot of money from the khembo   

**Q:**  How do people become officials? What is the process?   

**A:**  The process is normally, the monks who have a certain degree on the religious they don't become officials. They were categorized to become geshe and abbot of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  The abbots always comes from the geshe?   

**A:**  Yes because the abbot is responsible for the monk's study also. The abbots don't become official at all.   

**Q:**  The abbots don't have involved?   

**A:**  The abbots don't get involved at all. Some of the monks were called dönsang [Tib. འདོན་བཟང] or kesang [Tib. སྐད་བཟང]. Those were the monks who have a good voice and they were socialized in chanting and they were performing the rituals and the pechawa memorize the scriptures. Now, another group of monks would neither do the pechawa nor do the dönsang and sometimes they would go little bit here and there and also they know how to read and write. They also knew how to deal with the officials in Lhasa some sort of connections here and there through blood relation or through friends or any thing. They were little bit good at calculation and they have a little bit good relations and little bit of political strategy and little bit business mind. There was a group of them and they become officials and depends on the individual. Some how they were involved in any of the tratsang's estate as a depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ] [shidü] and then they become little bigger, they sort of   

**Q:**  How do they have to ask for the position?   

**A:**  All of the chandzö would decide and some of them had the chabu or the chandzö who were their friends and they would decide. I don't believe that sort of they really applied for that. The chabu just asked them to do that. And sometimes, the abbot asked them to do that. The bungdzö [Tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] and the chabu also were led by the abbot and those people would make the decision. Then when they become little more permanent, then it is possible that they they may go into the chabu list and become chabu. The chabu's term is life time. The bungdzö are also done by turn. The bungdzö are also sometimes done by geshes. Some of the small khamtsen are short of people. So when they came to the turn of bungdzö, they ask the people in other khamtsen to be the bungdzö. Phara Khamtsen also had one bungdzö and one labrang chandzö [Tib. བླ་བྲང་ཕྱག་མཛོད] and they were belonged to Phara Khamtsen. There was one doing the Phara Nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང] pluss one Phara Bungdzö who was almost to become a geshe. that is more and less the line of Bungdzö. As for the chabu has to be permanent and well accepted and knows writing and reading which is more important, but their reading and writing is poor and especially their writing is very poor. Among the pechawa, they didn't have problem on reading, but they don't become chabu. Even during when they show how they look, mibab janshu [Tib. མི་བབ་སྤྱན་ཞུ], to test them properly, [in front] of the drunyichemmo they can't read properly and just say "la la la". When they could read and write a little bit, they could become the chabril and they had a lot of responsibility under the gegö and the gegö would get changed and the chabril remains there so they had a lot of experience. Loseling Tratsang chabril is responsible when there is the tonggo for thousands of monks. They have to cover everything like the distribution and everything and they are personally responsible. If they can't do it properly, the traja will be so long and it would become totally disorganized because there is the afternoon khamtsen tsomja and all of those things. In addition to that, the chabril also had the responsibility for coordinating the dignitaries like the tratsang uchö and the incarnated Lamas and they have to coordinate. The incarnated lamas don't come under the gegö. In addition to that, there are the Mönlam period, there are a lot of disciplines and additional disciplines. So the chabril had a lot of responsibility on the discipline. They are not necessary to become chabril, but there are chances .   

**Q:**  Did they become the chabril in the Mönlam?   

**A:**  They became the chabril in the tratsang. If you become the eligible, the sheyngo and gegö will , They calculate for 5-6 years from the year you became the gegö or the Shiwa Mitsen [Tib. ཞི་བ་མི་ཚན].   

**Q:**  So actually the lay people move more where they were going to get the bation? probably by generation. You know like they went to Lhündrub [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ] Dzong.   

**A:**  Yes, they were not depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ] they were depa [Tib. འདེད་པ] who go to collect and push them [to pay the loan]. Then they become the depa and then they become labrang and those things like that.   

**Q:**  Was the depa one year time ,?   

**A:**  No, they are once in a year.   

**Q:**  They were given a test, right?   

**A:**  No. They were given the document [written] at the time on how much they have distributed [the loan] and how they [should] do it according to the tradition or what so ever. .   

**Q:**  Is there any kind of people who are going to say that they are not going to give it to the new people? Or other people would get it?   

**A:**  No, another person would get it. They say that they are out of our khamtsen. If they don't have eligible people out of our khamtsen, they they would give it to the people out of the tratsang or any body.   

**Q:**  Is that any kind of your labrang or what?   

**A:**  It was any labrang.   

**Q:**  What kind of persons you were looking for?   

**A:**  The labrang also have a chandzö and nyerpa [Tib. གཉེར་པ]. The chandzö are . And sometimes, capable persons and there were also ex-officials and ex-government officials in the labrang. There was a lot benefits if a tsidrung become a labrang chandzö. He is responsible to the labrang and the lama and he is as well as the government official. There is another thing that for the Demo [Tib. དེ་མོ] Labrang, the dewashung appointed 2 government officers as the chandzö. There were two khenjung and these people do nothing.   

**Q:**  Did they have any power?   

**A:**  It depends on whether the labrang would consult them or not. They can intervene, but they do not do that. Unless they were consulted, they don't come. But, they have a lot of benefit like tsampa, flour and cooking oil. Those was appointed by the government. When you select a person as your manager, the labrang could do that. They didn't need those officials.   

**Q:**  What about the monastic officials within the monastery?   

**A:**  Gegö is only appointed by the abbot and whoever is capable of doing gegö is appointed and there is only one gegö. Each khempo will appoint his gegö.   

**Q:**  I am thinking more about the variety between the khamtsen.   

**A:**  Not much. They are not much inter-clashed? Sometimes they do on benefits like I belonged to there or here.   

**Q:**  Were there varieties like the khamtsen have more monks and have more lands and that khamtsen have less things?   

**A:**  You don't have to do anything. All of them were different and some of the khamtsen would serve tea and other things . They also keep the traditional relations with the rich and poor families and officials. And they also see to it that every monks in individuals also keep their relations and contact with their family members.   

**Q:**  What is the normal relation between the khamtsen and the tratsang?   

**A:**  The tratsang had the chabu and the bungdzö.   

**Q:**  So different people have different level of relations, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When somebody died who will they leave the money with? Was that mitsen or the khamtshen?   

**A:**  No, no, the tratsang and khamtsen doesn't get anything. It depends on their relation.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, in Ladhak, when somebody die, they leave a lot of things like property with the monastery. What did they do in Drepung?   

**A:**  If somebody die and if he didn't have a shagtsang and a heir, then they distribute all the things among them and the khamtsen would decide how much endowment they will give to the tratsang and how much endowment they give to the khamtsen and how much they will distribute to each monks. They also have relations with the rich and poor families and officials. The monks in individuals also keep their contact with their family members. There are a lot of relations with the kudrak also.   

**Q:**  What about the tratsang, laji and the rigji?   

**A:**  Rigji [Tib. རིགས་སྤྱི] had the rigtra [Tib. རིག་གྲྭ]. Jiso had no control over this.   

**Q:**  Jiso is what?   

**A:**  One jiso comes from Loseling and one comes from Gomang. They also have relations with the rich and poor families and officials. The monks in individuals also keep their contact with their family member. The first was the senior Phara Jiso and the second was the junior Phara Jiso   

**Q:**  They were in one shagtsang?   

**A:**  During my perios they stayed in two shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Who appoint the jiso?   

**A:**  I think the government appointed the jiso and laji was also appointed by the tratsang. All the incomes goes to the jiso and the jiso does the tonggo includes the everyday mangja. And they also have to supply for the Ganden Ngamjö and those festivals. And there was the delicious Ngamjö brown sugar of Drepung.   

**Q:**  So two people were in charge of the income, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They are the tsogchen level, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were the general level.   

**Q:**  That's call tsogchen or what?   

**A:**  No, that is called Drepung jiso. Jiso will be the acting officer. Under him, all the nangsen [Tib. ནང་ཟན] and those people were lay people.   

**Q:**  Why is that?   

**A:**  I don't know. They are all lay people. I will talk one more about the laji. There were two or three laji. I am not very sure. One was the secretary of the sheyngo called lhengye drungyi [Tib. ལྷན་རྒྱས་དྲུང་ཡིག] He was quite informatory for the sheyngo and he knows how to write and what to do. Any correspndent to be done was done by them.   

**Q:**  So the two jiso are very powerful, right?   

**A:**  They were very powerful economically.   

**Q:**  Was the jiso involved in the affairs in the monastery?   

**A:**  The laji was in charge of that. Sometimes, the big laji, laji chekhag [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག] would meet for example on the appointment of the sheyngo and all these things.   

**Q:**  Do the jiso come from any kind of khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes, any of the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  You mean the two tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes. For example, I do remember that there was a period where the jiso was the Phara Nyertshang [Tib. ཕ་ར་གཉེར་ཚང] and Loseling Nyertshang was also Phara Nyertshang. He was called Phara Jiso and also Phara Nyertshang. It was a rich shagtsang in the Phara Khamtsen They also receive the endowment of Drepung and but they have lot of expenses and like lot of mangja .   

**Q:**  What about the competition between the tratsang?   

**A:**  They do. What happened is that Loseling and Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] are close and they called nyelog [Tib. ཉེ་ལོག]. Gomang and Deyang [Tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] are nyelog.   

**Q:**  Dose these mean close relation?   

**A:**  Yes, Loseling and Gomang were the tsenyi tratsang and they don't have those rituals and those things and there were two gompo [Tib. མགོན་པོ] [the monks doing the prayers to propetiate the protective deities] Otherwise none. When some one asked to do the ritual, Loseling goes with Deyang and the Gomang goes with Ngagpa. During the Taglungdrag [Tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] what happened was that his nendrön was from Sera Ngagpa. So during Taktra period, nendrön was some kind of sick. When the Dalai Lama came to Drepung, Ngagpa started doing it from Gomang. Nendrön influenced Sera Ngagpa and Sera Ngagpa asked Gomang to do it. So Deyang came to Loseling and it became three [laughter] .   

**Q:**  Were there arguments in the monastery after hearing about this?   

**A:**  People talked about this a lot because Ngagpa went Loseling .   

**Q:**  Let's say that during the Taktra regency, did the people like you in Drepung feel loyalty to him?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**Q:**  What about the people in Gomang?   

**A:**  Very little. Because Taktra became the regent only through He didn't become a regent decently and the tratsang didn't support him and there was a big cheating on there like there was a big cheating by Loseling at the time of Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] [incident]. Loseling got the very expensive religious decoration, chödze [Tib. མཆོད་རྫས] from Tengyeling after Tengyeling had the misfortune.   

**Q:**  Taktra didn't do that, right?   

**A:**  Taktra didn't do much to the Gomang and the Gomang also didn't have much loyalty to Taktra. Or Sera laji or Detrug [Tib.སྡེ་དྲུག] Gomang had much more loyalty to Kündeling.   

**Q:**  Was Detrug from Loseling?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Most of your friends are in Loseling or Gomang?   

**A:**  Yeah, because most of them were in Loseling and the khamtsen and in Gomang . Very few people are except during the summer retreat, Yarchö Chemmo [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] and the winter rretreat, Günchö Chemmo [Tib. དགུན་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] the monks of the Loseling and Gomang were mixed up and they were patrioism and they keep their group. There was a debate called Kabshipai Tsoglang [Tib. སྐབས་བཞི་པའི་ཚོགས་ལངས] which means two Loseling monks sit for the debate, thamja [Tib. དམ་བཅའ] in Gomang where all the senior and the junior comes together   

**Q:**  What do you mean by that?   

**A:**  This was when the two of my Loseling monks would stand up and have a big debate on dialectics with the Gomang in the assembly. .   

**Q:**  Normally, there is no way that the Loseling and Gomang live in the same khamtsen?   

**A:**  Not much. Every body would live according to their own khamtsen unless they have their own labrang.   

**Q:**  How do you know the difference between the khamtsen in the Gomang or the Loseling?   

**A:**  Not much, but when they serve the tshomja [Tib. ཚོམས་ཇ] in the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Most people say that Drepung monks didn't get any phog was that right?   

**A:**  They had the alms, gye and phog.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between the gye and the phog?   

**A:**  The phog was paid from the endowments that the jiso and the laji is responsible for that and your shares is also left and the gye was given by the benfectors whenever they comes.   

**Q:**  Was the gye and phog enough for the monks ?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Then what happens?   

**A:**  Some monks were finding very difficult. Some of them were okay. It depends on what khamtsen they belonged to. Nyare [Tib. ཉག་རེ] Khamtsen   

**Q:**  When they have the mangja, did they give the tsampa to back home?   

**A:**  No, you have to carry your own tsampa. Sometimes, there was distribution of tsampa. Otherwise, you have to carry your own tsampa. On the mangja and tsomja there is only tea. Sometimes, in the tsomja, sometimes, they will serve thukpa. In Nyare, they serve meat broth, shathug [Tib. ཤ་ཐུག], but no tsampa.   

**Q:**  When they serve the mangja and the tsomja, why don't they serve tsampa?   

**A:**  The monks would take their tsampa with them.   

**Q:**  Where do they get the tsampa from?   

**A:**  Sometimes, there was grain salary, druphog [Tib. འབྲུ་ཕོགས] in the tratsang and the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  Tshomja is served everyday and you get butter on it, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was butter tea. If you want to go to the mangja, they will give you 4 teas and the traja will give you 3 teas and tshomja will give you 4 teas.   

**Q:**  No tsampa?   

**A:**  No tsampa. But, thukpa is given very often.   

**Q:**  Do the monks have a hard time making it?   

**A:**  Some poor khamtsen like Kongpo hardly have a tshomja.   

**Q:**  I heard that some khamtsen had tshomja and some not and they come for the New Year [Tib. ལོ་གསར] and then they go back.   

**A:**  Yes, they do and some continued to stay and didn't go back for 15-20 years   

**Q:**  So, a lot of monks in there are hungry, but they really didn't have a kind of rungkhang [Tib. རུང་ཁང].   

**A:**  These are the junior ones. If you go out of the khamtsen or the tratsang, then Duringthe shöndre period you have to remain there. I made one mistake about Nyare. I told you about the khamtsen gegen. The nyerpa is 4 and khamtsen gegan is 2.   

**Q:**  There were 2 nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes and they go out of 4.   

**Q:**  There were 2 khamtsen gegan, right?   

**A:**  Yes two.   

**Q:**  You told me that the government appoints the officials in the monastery and kept control over the monastery and when the Dalai Lama came. When did it start?   

**A:**  Loseling chabu and all these were started only by this Dala Lama. And the sheyngo and geshe started during the 13th Dalai Lama. Even giving the marks for the geshe exam on the Mönlam was started by the 13th Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Why did the monastery do that if there were contradictions ?   

**A:**  No, one side is the dewashung and on the other side is a but monastic seat [Tib. གྲྭ་ས] Sometimes, it became less. The monks are hired   

**Q:**  The monastery was hiring them?   

**A:**  No. They can't creat problems.   

