# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.10 : Tape 10  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English and Tibeten and completely translated into English. .  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ;ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 50  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview, he provides in-depth explanations of the education systems in the monastery, including curriculums, origins of particular teachings, and how education is performed. He discusses the vows that monks took upon entering the monastery and what was expected from them after taking them. He describes, in detail, parties (sütsig), including who would come, what would happen and how they were paid for. Additionally, he talks about the commitments monks would take and the chöra.   

---  
### Tape 10  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_10/M_0009_10.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  a lot of readings, readings would provide you for the doubts, you don't understand the meaning or you think its something wrong and the doubts are the basis for which you debate.   

**Q:**  You don't have to read things like Marpa's Biography [Tib. མར་པའི་རྣམ་ཐར], or something?   

**A:**  No, no, no. This is the history of we don't read, the subject or whatever you are   

**Q:**  Does anybody read those? In Tibet?   

**A:**  I'm sure there are people who read them, these are the subject when you read in your leisure.   

**Q:**  Leisure.   

**A:**  Leisure, not in a   

**Q:**  But like...did your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> have like a library?   

**A:**  Oh, yea, it do. Yeah. Because it was meant for us only, not for public library.   

**Q:**  But the monastery doesn't have a library?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  You have to get your own books somewhere.   

**A:**  Somewhere you get your own books, you get to read to borrow it around, books are borrowed a lot.   

**Q:**  Such an individual oriented system.   

**A:**  Yes, such an individual oriented.   

**Q:**  Everything's kind of individual, all of Buddhisms individual really.   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  And everything is like that, that's kind of, people do whatever they want, like, how deep they want to go or   

**A:**  It is individual, how deep they want to go, there is no such thing.   

**Q:**  It's like nobody, see, here, in Jesuit monasteries and that everything's structured, you have to do this and this and this and this...study this.   

**A:**  And if you don't study, nobody says anything and you will be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> and roam round.   

**Q:**  Even if your not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a>, there's no test or nothing.   

**A:**  Nothing.   

**Q:**  Now what about things like vows? Like, I'm still mixed up about what we're talking about that, let's go back to when monks first come in. You said, that they don't have to take any vows, they just get in the monastery and their name is written.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  Then what happens, I mean, then, you know, can you never take the vow? Or do you have to take   

**A:**  You will take a vow, you will take vow, then nobody will stay there without vow because it is misuse of the monks privelege and you get a lot of non-virtoues, that's why nobody wants to do that. As soon as possible you take a vow.   

**Q:**  What would determine whether a person is going to take a vow or not, I mean, a monk, I don't understand anything.   

**A:**  What?   

**Q:**  Like when would the teacher say, now you should take off the chuba?   

**A:**  Oh.   

**Q:**  I mean does he wait to see if the student is going to stay or?   

**A:**  No, no, no. The day when you shave your hair, wear your robe, you become parma rabchung [Tib. བར་མ་རབ་བྱུང], that is the first step.   

**Q:**  But "parma" means middle.   

**A:**  Middle. Not really rabchung yet, but you are not lay. And you are parma rabchung   

**Q:**  You're between then.   

**A:**  In between. From the parma rabchung you will join the getsül.   

**Q:**  Not genyen [Tib. དགེ་བསྙེན]?   

**A:**  Genyen is lay vow.   

**Q:**  Is lay vow, okay.   

**A:**  Getsül, and whether you fit to be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཚུལ] 1. The novice vows that Buddhist monks and nuns take. 2. A monk who has taken such vows.">getsül</a> or not, you have to be seven years, seven year old. And you be able to keep the crow out.   

**Q:**  What's that mean?   

**A:**  That means you can make enough noise to get crow scared.   

**Q:**  Really, I see, how do they say that in Tibetan?   

**A:**  Umm, [Tib. བྱ་རོག་དཀྲོག་ནུས་པ]. Seven years and you be able to keep the crows out. So then you are fit to be, age-wise, you're fit to be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཚུལ] 1. The novice vows that Buddhist monks and nuns take. 2. A monk who has taken such vows.">getsül</a> and then you go and ask whoever you want to get getsül, not necessarily from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a>, very few people get from khempo, the abbot, and some will know lamas here and there or whatever. And then, whoever giving getsül, the poor monks, they can't arrange individual function so whoever doing something, right, something and you go there and become part of it.   

**Q:**  I see, part of somebody else's.   

**A:**  Part of somebody else's. You know, you know what happened, is some sponsors comes, a big rich lama or something who wants to become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཚུལ] 1. The novice vows that Buddhist monks and nuns take. 2. A monk who has taken such vows.">getsül</a>, go and asked big lama, would you please make me getsül. He will say yes and then because major gift, he is going to do it, but at the same time, somebody is giving getsül vow and if everyone will say, can I take getsül, can I take getsül, you don't pay anything and maybe a hundred, maybe a thousand people taking getsül together. So that's how they act, you know.   

**Q:**  Isn't that interesting.   

**A:**  You become part of it and you become a getsül.   

**Q:**  And then what happens as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཚུལ] 1. The novice vows that Buddhist monks and nuns take. 2. A monk who has taken such vows.">getsül</a>?   

**A:**  Oh, they give you a name, each individually.   

**Q:**  Like what happens, you come up, the lama is sitting on a throne.   

**A:**  Well, there are three of them, there's a complete ritual, three, three, three you have to go.   

**Q:**  Three, three?   

**A:**  Three, three, three you have to go.   

**Q:**  Students?   

**A:**  Yes, three, three, three in you want to go three by three. You have to repeat certain things.   

**Q:**  There's just one lama.   

**A:**  One lama, there's a group of monks, all the vows of Soso Tharba [Tib. སོ་སོ་ཐར་པ] is given by group of monks, sitting there, somebody will ask you whether you are, somebody is called, okay, now, there an appointment [Tib. དུས་སྒོ] who gives you a time, there's a secret teacher who asks you secret questions. "Have you killed a man?" "Have you did something" "Have you did that." "Have you something," is always you say no.   

**Q:**  Like what?   

**A:**  Didn't you kill your father or mother? [Tib. ཕ་དང་མ་བསད་པ་མ་ཡིན་ནམ]? Whenever they say "didn't you" [Tib. མ་ཡིན་ནམ], you say "I didn't" [Tib. མ་ཡིན་ལགས]. And if they said, have you been offered permission "have you been", [Tib. ཡིན་ནམ", You say "I have been" [Tib. ཡིན་ལགས་ཡིན་ལགས"].   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  After that, the secret teacher will go, they will also ask three, three, three, group of three together they'll ask, and he'll go back and stand there and say "please listen and I am ask questions and they all seems to be fit [Tib. སྟོན་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་དགོངས་སུ་གསོལ]. Something sort of ritual, already set pattern, they will memorize, he repeat that. And then they set out and they say okay, [Tib. བབ་ལགས].   

**Q:**  How would they say in Tibetan?   

**A:**  [Tib. བབ་ལགས་ལེགས་སོ], that's the language, part of it.   

**Q:**  This is just for the three or for everybody, waits till everbody is done or just for everybody?   

**A:**  He will be asking, the secret people will be asking three, three, three again. And maybe the assistant two three more, you know going on everywhere, you know, sort of pass out, going that corner and that corner, like that they go. So then he comes back and one of them turn and say okay, so then they, all of them will go...in there.   

**Q:**  Into where?   

**A:**  In the hall, wherever the hall is, somebody will be on the throne and two or three people are sitting there and then you see two or three prostation here, three prostation there, ten prostation here, ten prostation there. They will keep on detecting and giving instructions.   

**Q:**  In the hall?   

**A:**  In the hall, by one the person who is sitting ion the throne. Three here and ther three there and say so and so "palapala palapala'. (mumble).   

**Q:**  So like vows and that?   

**A:**  No, you know monks individual who is sitting there. Lots of chanting like sounds three or four times. Like that they do. They say a lot of prayer chanting and then three prostration here they will say a few rituals. Lot of prostrations would come and they also memorize prayers.   

**Q:**  Here...it's memorizing?   

**A:**  Memorize and sitting on the throne, also memorize everything, saying "palapalapala", he will read through, say through, not read. And then ask "did you see the non-virtues as non-virtues? [Tib. ཉེས་པ་ལ་ཉེས་པ་མཐོང་ངམ] and you say "yes seen" [Tib. མཐོང་ལགས] and they say "will you obey in the future" [Tib. ཕྱིན་ཆད་ལེགས་པར་འདོམས་སམ] and you say "yes" [Tib. འདོམས་ལགས]! and then they say "okay" [Tib. bab lags legs so". That's it.   

**Q:**  That's it, I mean he doesn't tell you what the vows are?   

**A:**  He already said it when memorizing "palapalapala".   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, just so fast. So, that's just the three of them or is that everybody.   

**A:**  So after that, individually -- Yes, that's everybody - 500, everybody, then you go three by three, do that first, and you hold the (thing) together. They give you   

**Q:**  Hold the what?   

**A:**  Hold begging bowl together. And so and so from now on you should eat out of this and behave this "palapalapala" some kind of ritual there. You repeat that again after that.   

**Q:**  I see, you repeat it.   

**A:**  You repeat it, and now from now on you are so and so and another three will come.   

**Q:**  And when do they give you the name?   

**A:**  Uh, about that time, they will give you.   

**Q:**  I mean, does lama have to make up all the names?   

**A:**  Probably, he had already made up the names and you know, or maybe there's some...the big thing they maybe printed and name written or something. They give you piece of paper, you got even name. Write it on piece of paper, they give it to you...All these there and when you become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སློང] A monk who has taken the full set of vows.">gelong</a>, the lama will give you the image of Buddha too.   

**Q:**  So it's ususally done by a lama, not the khempo.   

**A:**  Oh, whoever...is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> of that.   

**Q:**  What do you mean?   

**A:**  Khempo is a technical name from Vinaya, whoever is heading that, that is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a>. I mean we are refering to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ས] A monastery that was considered a &quot;Monastic Seat.&quot; This usually referred to the three Gelugpa monastic seats in the Lhasa vicinity (Drepung, Sera and Ganden) and Tashilhunpo in Shigatse.">trasa</a> [Tib. གྲྭ་ས] [the three great monastic seats] khempo, that is the title khempo, that's two different things.   

**Q:**  Oh.   

**A:**  Khempo of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> is having the title of the Loseling Khempo might not necessarily be your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a>. Maybe khempo of Loseling, I mean may not necessarily be your real vow khempo.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, the one.   

**A:**  The one who giving you the vow.   

**Q:**  The one who give you the vow, you call him the khempo.   

**A:**  That's the real <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a>, the real khempo is one. It may be a lama, may be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, may be anybody, may be, yeah.   

**Q:**  So how do you know what the vows are, when does somebody tell you what?   

**A:**  Well, that's that. Then you study your own, and now on your own.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  That's how you go.   

**Q:**  So again, its on your own.   

**A:**  Everything's your own.   

**Q:**  Your teacher must tell you, no?   

**A:**  Not necessarily...it comes more detail when you study Vinaya rules.   

**Q:**  But that's late.   

**A:**  It probably comes like eight, nine years later.   

**Q:**  Yeah.   

**A:**  Yeah, that's okay.   

**Q:**  What about the monks who never go and study?   

**A:**  Well, who never go to study, they will know sometime what they're not supposed to do. Somehow this knowledge is flowing around.   

**Q:**  Now are there many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སློང] A monk who has taken the full set of vows.">gelong</a> who are not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a>?   

**A:**  Oh yes, a lot.   

**Q:**  So being a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a> and being a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སློང] A monk who has taken the full set of vows.">gelong</a> are like separate? I mean you may be a gelong and not know anything.   

**A:**  Yes, possible, definately possible. Not only possible, yes, there are a lot of them.   

**Q:**  So when a student first comes it, like how does he, if you're not going to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a>, then you'll never go into chöra. It doesn't even matter.   

**A:**  It doesn't even matter.   

**Q:**  But you have to learn something, don't you have to learn to memorize the text?   

**A:**  You memorize a few here and there, may be, may be not.   

**Q:**  I saw little kids   

**A:**  Kudrak monks who had become, I think, what will they be like.   

**Q:**  Oh no, I mean   

**A:**  There was a monk, there is very similar monk like that lot of them do.   

**Q:**  Yea?   

**A:**  Yes, a lot of them.   

**Q:**  So why would they be monks?   

**A:**  Because they like to be monks.   

**Q:**  I saw little kids now in Tibet.   

**A:**  Even in Tibet, they have   

**Q:**  In, outside they're always screaming rerererererere, memorizing.   

**A:**  Yes, they're memorizing.   

**Q:**  Is that the custom is the old days?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Yelling outside, outside the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, four or five of them.   

**A:**  They memorize the rituals, they say, the prayers they say, they memorize them... and they teach them, memorize, followed by meaning things like that.   

**Q:**  But, you could just, you mean to tell me, you could join the monastery and never learn to read that basically.   

**A:**  That's also there, that's also possible.   

**Q:**  But would most teachers, you know, try to insist that they read   

**A:**  Well, they will but some may not...or some teachers may insist, you may not listen to it, some teachers may beat you, some teachers may not.   

**Q:**  But is there any...but there isn't any feeling that being a monk is good in itself, right? That's the object...being a monk versus not being a monk.   

**A:**  That's right.   

**Q:**  Learning how to read and studying is not considered as important as being a monk?   

**A:**  I think so.   

**Q:**  You think so?   

**A:**  I think so.   

**Q:**  That's certainly what it seems like.   

**A:**  I'm talking about general public view, yea, may be not.   

**Q:**  And the monk's view?   

**A:**  Monastery who cares, monastery really doesn't, I mean its supposed to be the duty of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> is supposed to make sure everybody study, now, but totally different in India now, totally different, khempo really chase them around and a lot. But it Tibet, not. No. Total different in India now. Total different.   

**Q:**  People never talked about things like that, that, you know, there are a lot of monks who don't know anything...we should throw them out or something like that.   

**A:**  No, no, no. As long as you don't fuck any woman or stealing somebody and kill nobody...what right do anybody have to talk about throwing out a monk?. Nothing.   

**Q:**  That's very interesting. So then, some monks will start off as little boys, seven or eight, and maybe learn how to read and memorize a few prayers?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But they have to do something at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a>, what do they do when they go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they have to go there and say.   

**Q:**  They have to say something.   

**A:**  Yes, something, and some will have nothing to say, they sit there and   

**Q:**  Oh, really.   

**A:**  There are a lot of them too.   

**Q:**  No kidding?   

**A:**  I'm not kidding.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Many of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, very well-known geshe also might not have anything memorized either.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes, and many of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> who will not even can't to write their name, too.   

**Q:**  But you can't take your book into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> or something like that?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  You can't sit and read.   

**A:**  No. You can take your books only when you are learning from your teacher to the individual house.   

**Q:**  So then you go into this and so you are seven, eight, nine, then what happens to you? Then you have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a>?   

**A:**  Then you begin to .... <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> is another point, now the educational point is, you begin to memorize things and then you begin, first they teach the reading, how to read, and then be able to read faster, read good and read properly. That means, you know, this is called [Tib. ཡིག་རྩ་ཚུགས་པ], they'll make sure that you really can grab on the reading, they really emphasize that so much and they will give you good training of how to read, how to read faster yet with picking at all the meanings and that they will give you very good.... After that, you are almost on your own. Whatever you want to study, whatever you want to do, just memorize, and don't do much study, and join in the dönsang kesang [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་སྐད་བཟང] [the group of having good voice and chanting] And study learning the tunes, you can do that and you can study, memorizing and then go, study, looking into the real text books and being of interested on the debate, yes, you can do that.   

**Q:**  Well, what about the, you know, the things like playing instruments. Is that your choice or does somebody just say that   

**A:**  Playing instruments in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, we don't have.   

**Q:**  Oh, that's right...   

**A:**  Yea, but those who have, yes, they can do it too. Your choice...you say, I like to do that, it is okay. And you have to go to the right person who can give you, you have to, whatever you want to do, you have to make sure that you go to the right person. If you don't know the right person, you ask your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a>. I'd like to enter into that and who is the right person to report? Normally, so and so is the right person to report and you go and report that gegen. Then that become your gegen again, real true, there are so many gegen too. If you want to study properly and you choose own gegen then you follow that. If you two or three or ten gegen. There is no organized manner to make you do this or make you do that. There is none.   

**Q:**  And when you take teachings from somebody then you're supposed to have special respect for them 'cause he's your teacher?   

**A:**  Yes, of course you gain respect automatically, you gain respect, but you don't, not necessary to pay. I mean its nothing.   

**Q:**  I mean show respect for him?   

**A:**  You show respect.   

**Q:**  You were saying how somebody would that Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] was trying to convince somebody to do something and they all said "We're your disciple, we jump in the river if you say, but we won't do   

**A:**  But that is different, that is different. That is a dharma teaching, kachö [Tib. བཀའ་ཆོས] are totally different category again. Lama who give the kachö are different category again. The teachers who teach you all the meaings and things like that, they are not people who give you the kachö.   

**Q:**  Kachö is the?   

**A:**  Kachö is like you know, big teachings like the "Stage of Paths" Lamrim [Tib. ལམ་རིམ] on this initiation, that initiation and all this and that, that is the biggest skill, the highest skill. And umm, that is non-monk, lays are also included in it, not necessarily observed for the monks. And there is lay people and everything together, that's another total system, separately in conjunction with the monastery.   

**Q:**  Those are not in the monastery itself?   

**A:**  It can be.   

**Q:**  But not necessarily?   

**A:**  Not necessarily.   

**Q:**  I see, so that's another thing, and those are usually done by lamas?   

**A:**  Usually done by well known lamas. Lamas of that type, good ones, it also not started by big way, it started by 10-20-30-40-100-200 something, thousand something like that it go.   

**Q:**  That's good.   

**A:**  ...house, right, water is free, no electricity charge, nothing and they except that you buy cow dung and some vegetable and some meat here and there and that you can go every morning in the stone floor, dobjel [Tib. རྡོ་གཅལ].   

**Q:**  The dobjel is what?   

**A:**  The dobjel is outside the Drepung where they come every morning things to sell.   

**Q:**  Oh, yea, there's still people, outside restaurant, people selling stuff.   

**A:**  Now they have restaurants because at that time there are no restaurants.   

**Q:**  Its cause all the people are coming for the pilgrimage.   

**A:**  Oh, now you have that there.   

**Q:**  Yeah, little guys, you know with, they have like little carts, little boxes and they sell <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> and   

**A:**  They sell sausages and the dry meat.   

**Q:**  Not so much that, but   

**A:**  Earlier they used to be the spicy dish made from stomach [Tib. གྲོད་པ་ཁ་ཚ] too.   

**Q:**  Dopjel is what they call it.   

**A:**  Dopjel, there's a cow dung, meat, vegetables, and maybe few little necessary items, they may have it. Thats a Dopjel. They comes every morning. Every morning there's Dopjel session. I think up to about 10:30, 11:00, noon, up to noon, there. By noon the shops will be closed.   

**Q:**  So some monks just sit around and do that?   

**A:**  There are a lot of them. Lot of them...they sit around do nothing.   

**Q:**  They must go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> and some stuff like that.   

**A:**  Some go, some don't...but, then if you don't go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> you can go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a>. If you don't want so early tea you go to traja and maybe you don't want to go to traja, you wait till <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོམ་ཇ] The name of the khamtsen&#x27;s prayer assembly meetings at which tea was served.">tsomja</a> comes in. It's very relaxed like, you, I seen very often this sort of monk, they come out in the sun and sit there and whole day put a little shawl on top and they sit there and then they, in late afternoon they get together and yea, yea yea for a little or long time and then go back and then have some snuff.   

**Q:**  Is there any custom in Drepung or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> where monks eat together and that...when I was in Ladakh, I'd noticed that some monks thought it was bad, they considered it bad to you know eat dinner with friends. Other monks would rotate, they with three or four friends and they would one night the three would eat in one house, and the next night they'd eat at the next one's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> and there was like a script between those who were more social, who'd always eating at you know, talking, spending the night and those who considered that bad, they'd just say, you're supposed to be by yourself, you're not supposed to be fooling around. None of 'em do much, I mean, nobody did anything there in that monastery, but they have different thoughts.   

**A:**  Yea, that's true, that's true, I don't know of a really they doing this socialize manner and organize manner that way, I don't know about Drepung, maybe there is, I don't know. There are parties too. Oh, yeah, there are a lot of parties too.   

**Q:**  What's a party called?   

**A:**  sütsig [Tib. གསོལ་ཚིགས].   

**Q:**  sütsig. I see.   

**A:**  A lot of sütsig.   

**Q:**  Meaning that somebody says, Come, let's eat.   

**A:**  Yes, they say "please come to the sütsig" [Tib. གསོལ་ཚིགས་ལ་ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་གནང་རོགས་གནང]. There's official sütsig and unofficial sütsig.   

**Q:**  Oh, that may be more what that was like.   

**A:**  Yeah, there's a lot of sütsig. A lot of sütsig. And every   

**Q:**  Where you make a little <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མོག་མོག] Stuffed dumplings.">momo</a> and that   

**A:**  Not only momo. Official sütsig are from the morning til evening, yeah, there will serve you, they give you some one after another to eat, a tremendous amount.   

**Q:**  Like official means whose official?   

**A:**  Like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, one geshe, this here geshe is geshe tonggo's day, you invite all your friends, all your class fellows, all the geshe of that year, plus the monastery's official and its abbots and all incarnated lamas, whoever you want to, they sellect it. Ordinary monks, poor monks may not have that much. And your friends and that's a whole day thing. When I did geshe, I think, before I did geshe tonggo, I think, probably about two thousand of sütsig of the different people you inviting there and making preparation and planning meeting.   

**Q:**  Two thousand?   

**A:**  Two dozen.   

**Q:**  Two dozen?   

**A:**  Two dozen times.   

**Q:**  Times.   

**A:**  Yeah, two dozen times and even before, to sort of, you know, who you going to involved, how you going to plan it, and talk all about sort of sütsig. And sütsig means, when you invited, in old system, when you invited sütsig you come for whole day.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  You serve early <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤགས] A staple Tibetan dish of tsampa mixed with tea and kneaded into balls of dough-like consistency.">pag</a> and the dinner. So the whole day, sitting there.   

**Q:**  Whole day, from what time? Ten o'clock?   

**A:**  Oh something like, 8:30 - 9:00 to 4:30 - 5:00, that type of thing. And that whole day there and there's planning and talking all this sort of thing, half dozen times. No two dozen times, they did.   

**Q:**  With the same people or different?   

**A:**  Same people, some times there may be different people from time, eating it up, sort of core person who are planning and then addition these, maybe these one, maybe that one, maybe that one, this one. Then when the actual <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> comes in, I think it is like a fifteen days constant sütsig running every day. And then on the really day of tonggo, I am not kidding, maybe about three thousand guests.   

**Q:**  Oh, my goodness.   

**A:**  All the different relations and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and even Ngabö and everybody there. All the Ngabö families are there. And Surkhangs [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང] are there and Shesurs [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] are there, all of them, with their wives. That's why, how the numbers builds up, in addition to the   

**Q:**  What do you do, where can you put those kinds of people?   

**A:**  Oh, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> will make the arrangement. Everything will be emptied, they get all the rooms in khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes! Yes!   

**Q:**  All the monks   

**A:**  All the monks will be busy working. They become a volunteer to service. Oh, they will transform everything. And the whole tshom will be transformed for the sütsig.   

**Q:**  Tshom is what?   

**A:**  That big tsomchen [Tib. ཚོམས་ཆེན] [hall]. The tshom, where the monks normally gather. That will become a sütsig area.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  And all the courtyards in the suns they'll be the sütsig area.. And all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> and the people, some living here and some living there, sütsig are going up and down like that, oh, it is not a   

**Q:**  That's why it needs a lot of planning.   

**A:**  There's a lot of planning, that would run like ten-fifteen days. Sometimes even   

**Q:**  That must cost a fortune?   

**A:**  Oh, yes. It is so expensive to get like 10 or one dozen well known cooks, you hire them.   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  From the monastery or from?   

**A:**  From Lhasa, from Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག], from the monastery, from everywhere and each individual will take different responsibilites and whole courtyard of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> where I told you they sell the clothes will become kitchen, totally transformed into kitchen, its a totally different scene, there then.   

**Q:**  What kind of food do you serve?   

**A:**  Whistles. I've been a number of those places, so I really know. A category, B category, C category.   

**Q:**  Tell me, tell me.   

**A:**  Let's A category, somebody will come, in my case, somebody will come, we know because so and so's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> is such and such a day. So I, I say I don't have a very close personal relation with that guy. Sort of, but we know they're going to invite all the incarnate lamas, particularly the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trülku</a> will be definitely invited. So, not a poor monk's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, ok, but somehow <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> and trülku or somebody, or somebody who wanted to show their names and get invited. Then three days before, somebody will come with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> in hand, they will not put the khata down, khata is rolled in piece of paper, hold it together in hand, but they're not going to give you. But they show you the khata and say "please come for the sütsig". Sometimes when they're busy or some other certain categories, the servants will not allow that man in, so what will happen, the servant will pick up that khata, walk inside the room, so and somebody had come or maybe by name or something like that and say so and so's geshe tonggo is day after tomorrow, please come to the sütsig and then they give it out like that. And they say, Yes, yes or no, or whatever it is. And then the next day, they come back again, and say tomorrow and then tomorrow you definately give an answer. Whether you coming or not coming. And then if you are wanted, you are not coming, actually then they will insist that you have to come. Then four people will come and insist. All these. But on the day, the early morning, somebody will come there again to take your cup [Tib. བཞེས་ཆས་གདན་འདྲེན་ཞུ] .   

**Q:**  What is [Tib. བཞེས་ཆས] ?   

**A:**  It means the cup. So they will have a little, we have a little red or orange colored silk cloth, put it on top of the cup and this fellow will hold it like this and go before you. So you supposed to follow your bowl.   

**Q:**  Follow your bowl.   

**A:**  Bowl.   

**Q:**  What kind of bowl did you have?   

**A:**  The tea bowl...normal where you drink the tea.   

**Q:**  The wood cup, phorpa [Tib. ཕོར་པ] ?   

**A:**  Wood bowl, they, he will carry like this. Sometimes, you roll it and nicely and then he will carry that. Even then he carry like that. You give it this way and he will carry this way or roll it and he will carry that way.   

**Q:**  He goes and then you go.   

**A:**  He goes before and you go afterward. And which of your servant also go with you.   

**Q:**  Your servant which will be who, your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] A lama or abbot&#x27;s servant.">söpön</a> [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན]?   

**A:**  Söpön, definately, maybe one or two. So then you, the moment you get in there, it will be decided almost coming or others are not but whoever comes, in case like us, we have a little throne build up there for every body, each individual sit on top of that.   

**Q:**  For each individual, you know that so and so should be there and so and so should be there?   

**A:**  Yes, they have normal rules that they, you know who takes what and who is above you, who is below you. You have, so you sit, you really know where you are sitting. And they will make you sit there too, they know also. When you sit down they give you tea and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> bowl to eat <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> and a little <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུད] A Tibetan food made from a mixture of butter and cheese. Often sugar or congealed molasses sugar [tib. བུ་རམ] was added.">thü</a> [Tib. ཐུད], a kind of cake made from butter, dry cheese. Nobody takes that. Nobody will eat tsampa there. Nobody will do that.   

**Q:**  Nobody would eat the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a>?   

**A:**  Its already sort of ..... , maybe you take a cup of tea, and then some another tea. Then you move the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> out and they immediately they will give you sweet potatoes with melted butter, droma markhu [Tib. གྲོ་མ་མར་ཁུ] and then they will give rice with melted butter, dresi [Tib. འབྲས་སིལ], like that you know.   

**Q:**  And all this time you are talking to people?   

**A:**  Oh, yeah, people of your normal group are there, so you'll be chitting chatting and there'll be nobody. Nobody from the whole staff. Or your guest and no host. Every one are all busy sometime, the real host, you don't even see it.   

**Q:**  Oh, really.   

**A:**  I mean you don't see, normally you really don't see them. So...there are people serving and going up and down and all this and one of those important repre<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟན] The upper part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">sen</a>tative host will come everytime and decide they take their shawl, sen [Tib. གཟན] off and say, "please help yourself nicely" [Tib. གསོལ་ཚིགས་མཉེས་པོ་གནང་དགོས].   

**Q:**  Now who would that be like?   

**A:**  One of those monastery officials. Like a one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a>, ex-gegö, or ex-chagdampa, or ex-shengo, or ex-chabu.   

**Q:**  Would he being doing it because he's a friend of this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> or what?   

**A:**  Oh, he'll be doing it because he has been asked to help.   

**Q:**  Oh, he's been asked to help.   

**A:**  There's a big organization, there are two general managers, jigyab [Tib. [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ], below that four different jigyab below that four different .... all this, this is total organization..   

**Q:**  Just for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> ?   

**A:**  Just for the sütsig alone. Not for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> there, for the sütsig.   

**Q:**  So then you have to go ask people, I mean, you don't pay them?   

**A:**  Oh, you give a lot of gifts to them, yes and in our cases, I think the two general managers, we get two tsidrung. .   

**Q:**  You say <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> to get more in charge, of that tsidrung has to be from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> tsidrung, has to be there. And then below that, will probably have two chabu.   

**Q:**  Oh wow.   

**A:**  Below that we have two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> and then two or three ex-shengo and ex-gegö and that type of thing. Each one of them has a name and then they are, then you find after that there really be person who is running up and down all the time, their job is to see the guests come, to see the guests is properly settled, to see the foods are going, nobody is left out without eating food, and the foods are clean, all carried properly and that's their job and they will succomb faster right here and right there and one of them, the two big managers will not really move much, they're sitting there enjoying themselves. But they will come up from time to time and they take off their shawl and say "please help yourself nicely". They are the kudrak.   

**Q:**  They're like the hosts.   

**A:**  But they are representing the hosts, they representing and then they, below that ones will go more and more, more and more. And this, junior ones goes everywhere but the senior ones will go to the high places while we are sitting they may come but they don't go much down about. And then there's a real one who were like Ugyen la [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས] type of people who'll be sitting some kind of corner of the house, where they see every where down there, where they see everywhere and see the houses, they say "And so and so over there, that monk move faster, you move there faster, you move this up there and what is that man doing down there with the tray? Move faster." They do that all, sort of, they probably the whole day and their shawls are tied up and actually sort of standing there and shouting all the day during this period of serving. So the serving comes one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤགས] A staple Tibetan dish of tsampa mixed with tea and kneaded into balls of dough-like consistency.">pag</a>, one droma markhu and dresi. Then the noodle soups [Tib. རྒྱ་ཐུག] comes. And then, the leftover comes sweet tea and snacks and all this and then dinner. So that's seven times of different food will serve. And then they would really get there because they relax a little bit but then you know, during the thing, it will be like this.   

**Q:**  With three thousand people, that's a very big party.   

**A:**  But then you know they have to see the particular <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> are now sitting in these different areas, they will make sure they get it.   

**Q:**  Like all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> are in one place and all the others are in one place?   

**A:**  Not necessarily, no, no, no..the senior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, the cabinet people are in another house and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེ་ཇི] A third rank position in the Tibetan government.">theiji</a> will be in another house, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ] A title (and term of address) for wives of high aristocratic officials.">lhajam</a> [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ], [the wives of the kalön and the dzasa and theiji], will be in another, oh, yea.   

**Q:**  What do you have to sit on?   

**A:**  Oh, they have put cushions.   

**Q:**  Yea, but you can't have enough rugs and stuff for everybody.   

**A:**  Oh, yes.   

**Q:**  You borrow?   

**A:**  You borrow, you have, you borrow, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> will have, I mean, in our case we don't even have to borrow, Demo Labrang probably have a couple of thousand rugs spread out.   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  Yes, I mean, really - Nyare Khamtsen equally has that much rugs and there is no shortage of that, no. And uh, then there's maybe a shortage of a few stuffed cushions, böden [Tib. འབོལ་གདན] here and there.   

**Q:**  But you borrow like tables and things like that?   

**A:**  Otherwise, there is no shortage. Even all these courtyards you have all the rugs laid out, and even the untouchable caste of people of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</a> who take the corpses of the beggars, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རགས་རྒྱབ་པ] An untouchable social stratum (caste) in Lhasa that took corpses to the sky burial site.">ragyaba</a> [Tib. རགས་རྒྱབ་པ] would also come. In our cases, the ragyaba will even shout make the noice like "galongalongalong." they shout and all this. and you have to give them a gift. They call it share [Tib. སྐུ་སྐལ], sort of whatever you are giving to the monks you are giving equal.If they are not happy they shout again. And that day was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>, you are going to give the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> too. You know, donggo distribution of money and distribution of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and all this. And thukpa will come here too, all the guests. And the important guests will go with you to sit on the siyang [Tib. བསིལ་གཡང] of the tratsang. The tratsang will give you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and early morning nobody come, only few people come and they also sit on the siyang of the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  You also sit where?   

**A:**  Siyang, siyang is the place on the roof from where you can see the monks gathered there [through the long windows].   

**Q:**  Into the tsogchen.   

**A:**  Into the hall, you are overlooking. The guests will come and join you there. The seating arrangement will be done by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> and tratsang. Oh, yes, there are a lot of things, that was a big thing.   

**Q:**  What did you do, you're just wearing like robes?   

**A:**  We have to wear special robes and go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> , go to tsogchen and then go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> , (phone rings)...and then after the tratsang 's over you have your own function. You will go down and in the middle of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, tshom in there, there's a big throne built for you and all your relations and you sit on top, everybody will come and give you scarf. All the guests who are enjoying sütsig give you gifts and scarfs, we've got a lot of them, a lot.   

**Q:**  What kinds of gifts do people give?   

**A:**  Oh, anything, from the rolls of brocade to the carpets, yea, and money.   

**Q:**  With people's name in it saying   

**A:**  Oh, yes, yes, yes and then somebody will have a hundred of these and a hundred of that, a thousand of these and a thousand of that [Tib. བརྒྱ་འབུལ་སྟོང་འབུལ].   

**Q:**  Of what?   

**A:**  Anything, there's a hundred of this and thousands of that.   

**Q:**  Of what?   

**A:**  Anything like people give a hundred roles of brocade.   

**Q:**  Do they give hundred roles of brocade?   

**A:**  Yea, yea, yea...it depends what relation you have with that other fellows.   

**Q:**  But other monks won't give..?   

**A:**  Of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>...the labrang will have its own relation then that will be noted in your thing and next time that labrang   

**Q:**  Will be noted where?   

**A:**  In your sort of registration book and then in the next time, some lamas become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, then they will, you look in your list and what you received and you do according to back, and they note it and they do it next time. That's how they build up these, gifts exchange during that period. It is not that simple.   

**Q:**  No, it not.   

**A:**  Not that, that's why you have a hundreds of these and a hundreds of that.   

**Q:**  So that's a pretty, very expensive.   

**A:**  There pretty expensive affairs, both ways, in both ways.   

**Q:**  So what would you have to give the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> to come an do this, I mean, what kind of gifts?   

**A:**  Nothing, what <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> have to give?   

**Q:**  No, no, no, but if you have to give to the general manager <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  Oh, that's their job to see.   

**Q:**  What would you have to, like give them, what kind of gifts, on what level?   

**A:**  They are demanding, they probably will give, what, maybe you give them one roll of brocade or whatever, something. A few scarfs and thank you, maybe you give one thousand dayang. And um, something like that, (low mumbling).   

**Q:**  And then you have also, see, you have all these people and then you have the cooks.   

**A:**  And then the big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> will give you, the big families will give you gift, and you note that, and then they have functions of promotion and you try and return it. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> will return it to them.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  That's the way you build. This is a...probably you know what you're getting. You can almost plan it, because you know, what you have given it, according to the, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> have to maintain their lot of register for that, sort of you know, according to that, you get, if not more, you won't get less.   

**Q:**  So that would be mostly for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> but a regular monk, a regular <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, wouldn't have?   

**A:**  Regular <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> would not have, we normally do like, you know, we give them one or two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> in the envelopes and some few <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a>, we won't go, our managers will go, servants will go on our behalf.   

**Q:**  But they won't write it down in a book, they, for a regular <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, would they?   

**A:**  I don't think so.   

**Q:**  So, like and then all the other people serving   

**A:**  Unless, unless the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> is close to you and you know quite well, then you may give like, you know, 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> or 20-25 dotse or whatever they needed. Maybe 100 skin/bag loads of rice, dretang [Tib. 'bras ltang.   

**Q:**  Dretang is what?   

**A:**  Skin/bag loads of rice to be used for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> donggo. So in that case you give the rice in advance, already giving. So they doesn't have to buy. Or you give two or three skin/bag loads of butter already given before. But then during that day, ther will be the scarf and some few money, that's all.   

**Q:**  And all the other people who were carrying food and that   

**A:**  Labrang, when they have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a>, the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> will not give you rice in advance or the butter in advance, you get that day.   

**Q:**  Why is that?   

**A:**  Because they don't expect you to need it in advance.   

**Q:**  But then all the other servants and stuff carrying food, those are volunteers or?   

**A:**  Everything, from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, they will have, all the monks will have the, except the very senior ones.   

**Q:**  Will be working?   

**A:**  Automatically will be volunteer work around.   

**Q:**  Then you don't pay them anything special?   

**A:**  Nothing.   

**Q:**  They just get food?   

**A:**  They just get food, but then they get their turn too, afterwards, see like,   

**Q:**  Yes, but the common monks will never be   

**A:**  Common monks will also get, oh yes, also get their own turn of your food and all this.   

**Q:**  Oh, yeah, right.   

**A:**  No, but they own their turn of gift.   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  Then you have to do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo. And that is the day you have to rent everything.   

**Q:**  Even if you're a common monk? Even if you're a poor monk you have to do <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo ?   

**A:**  Oh, yes, everybody does <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo .   

**Q:**  Once or twice or what?   

**A:**  Once, once, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo you do, khamtsen tonggo, we do khamtsen tonggo twice, in that day, all the monks who are helping, you know, and sort of, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a>, so when we, I gave one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> or what, I did it one time in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> too and in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and probably 25 daynag in the khamtsen or something and each monk get 25 dayang.   

**Q:**  That's the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo .   

**A:**  Yeah, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo. So, I mean, that's khamtsen is a like a three times more income than the tratsang. Individually income, we see to it and get it. And maybe two days, maybe three days khamtsen tonggo.   

**Q:**  When do you have to do <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo ?   

**A:**  When everything outside is over. Everything's over, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> tonggo, sütsig, every function is completely over, then you do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo.   

**Q:**  What other functions are there, I mean, say, I didn't know about these so there's, you're a monk now, say you have to do a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> tonggo, you say?   

**A:**  This is what I'm talking about when you do the geshe.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see when you do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, oh first you do   

**A:**  Even you...even when you enter the monastery, chöshug [Tib. ཆོས་ཞུགས], you do not do that, you do something very similar to it but miniature level.   

**Q:**  Chöshug is?   

**A:**  Entering in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  And then you, in the middle of that, I told you that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ལང] The name for two monks debating in the midst of a large gathering of monks.">tsoglang</a> [Tib. ཚོགས་ལངས] where two monks debating in the mids of large gathering of monks on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མ] The Madhyamaka text (&quot;the Middle Way&quot;).">Uma</a> [Tib. དབུ་མ] or something, you will also have functions, same things, miniature little more than chöshug, similar. Except we don't have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>. But otherwise you have the same function, give sütsig and all this. Khamtsen also get, tratsang may not get anything.   

**Q:**  So when you do <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, you have to do <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> at all three?   

**A:**  Tonggo all the three and the plus that sütsig, plus that eliminating planning business and after that thank you sütsig again.   

**Q:**  Thank you?   

**A:**  Thanking sütsig, all these volunteers who are helping them, you know these managers and planning, host actors, they all be invited for thank you. For couple of times, again. And then when all of them over, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> will start.   

**Q:**  When all of that's over, then khantsen   

**A:**  When that is over, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo will begin to start.   

**Q:**  Oh, my god.   

**A:**  Then they internal arrangement, then is, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tonggo , I mean...   

**Q:**  So how much did that cost you, a thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>, ten thousand dotse?   

**A:**  Got to be joking.   

**Q:**  Millions, I don't know.   

**A:**  Might be like a couple of hundred thousand dotse.   

**Q:**  Oh, yea?   

**A:**  Yes, I mean its not simple job, this is a lot.   

**Q:**  So you have to save up, I mean all these years, you've been thinking.   

**A:**  Yes, all these years you save up and all them are finished, lots of you borrow and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trülku means a lot of expenses. A lot of expenses.   

**Q:**  A couple hundred thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>, like how much, did you have this one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>, how much did that give every year, roughly?   

**A:**  I have no idea, I really don't know.   

**Q:**  It couldn't be anything like that, could it?   

**A:**  Oh, no, in addition to that if you don't do business, there's no way. No way...and in addition to that you borrow money too. Borrow a lot.   

**Q:**  So who would you borrow it from then?   

**A:**  Oh, from some wealthy families.   

**Q:**  Oh, yes?   

**A:**  Yes, or mostly from the business people and then some wealthy relations a little bit. So then emergency loans or some like that and all these are there.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were giving <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> not Tibetan money or?   

**A:**  Well, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> was functioning, Tibetan money too like the ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> coin, jugor [Tib. བཅུ་སྒོར] and dayang. Dayang was the pure silver and the jugor was not pure silver, that's why we choose pure silver.   

**Q:**  That's a lot. I mean, one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> buys how much grain, at that time?   

**A:**  I don't know, it was 15 sang.   

**Q:**  One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> is 15 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>?   

**A:**  Probably, one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain must be 50 sang.   

**Q:**  One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> would be one bo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  One bo would be how much?   

**A:**  Probably, one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> [ 50 sang].   

**Q:**  How much is one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>?   

**A:**  Probably almost a little less than 5 dayang.   

**Q:**  So twenty-five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> is like 6 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>, that's almost one year's food in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, the grain?   

**A:**  Isn't it?   

**Q:**  Yes, if you gave out, you said 25 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> gets 25 dayang.   

**Q:**  That's almost like one year? Oh, it is one year because that's over 300 sang. What would just a regular <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> have to spend? It's going to vary, if it's somebody who's like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] Title of monk officials from aristocratic families.">jedrung</a> [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] he's going to have a big one too.   

**A:**  But you don't always expect as much big.   

**Q:**  Bigger than this.   

**A:**  Not maybe bigger than this but about almost the same size. Almost. So, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] Title of monk officials from aristocratic families.">jedrung</a> doesn't do <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, right?   

**Q:**  Oh, no?   

**A:**  Some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] Title of monk officials from aristocratic families.">jedrung</a> do but then you know, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> will almost be sad, almost be sad, there's no reason why they have to enjoy priveleges, they can't do that.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  I mean, if they expect <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> more, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trülku</a>, some trülku may not be able to do it because of the poor condition, not being able to do it, but chöndze, they do expect because they, sort of, they volunteered to be in that position.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  So, they expect...that they   

**Q:**  Regular <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, what would they do?   

**A:**  Regular <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, however nothing in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a>, very poor, medium... one   

**Q:**  Wait, wait, wait, what would, like a medium thing be in the (section/session?), what would that mean?   

**A:**  The medium <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, geshe of not so wealthy, but sort of you know medium level, doesn't, no distribution or anything.   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  Nothing. So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>, have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>, of course, thukpa has to be good or bad, they may not be so great thukpa, which means some days which we can eat, you not be that much great, in the sense that middle quality thukpa, not much meat, and there may not be that much fruit, and then butter may not be that good quality. And the rice may not be that good quality and may not be so much thukpa being thrown out and giving it out.   

**Q:**  The rice is where, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>? Or separately?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> is rice thukpa.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  And it is that big rice <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and not a liquid thukpa, you know, that's a huge big rice thukpa.   

**Q:**  I don't follow you.   

**A:**  That <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> is rice thukpa, it is not liquid.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  It is thick rice <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> which you can pour it on the top, on top of the bowl this much high up.   

**Q:**  Oh, so its almost like rice, like sticky rice.   

**A:**  It is sticky rice...it is sticky rice and you put a lot of meat in it, a lot of fruit in it and even the monks, when they collect, they won't collect in cup like this, [the bowl is kept] in the middle sort of cloth and they pore the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> with the sound "phaw phaw" like that. They don't eat, they take it home, they take it home and eat for a week. A lot of butter because its almost rice boiled in butter.   

**Q:**  But normally at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> when they say <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>, that's not this?   

**A:**  That's not this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>, no, no, no, no.   

**Q:**  This is special.   

**A:**  This is special.   

**Q:**  Is there a special name for this?   

**A:**  Yeah, mingtag [Tib. མིང་བཏགས] thukpa.   

**Q:**  Mingtag?   

**A:**  Mingtag thukpa.   

**Q:**  Mingtag means?   

**A:**  Means the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> for giving name to the geshe. Some people call it thukpa thamja [Tib. དམ་བཅའ], but it is Mingtag thukpa.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  That's a different thukpa.   

**Q:**  So they have to give that at least.   

**A:**  And common meaning for this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> is called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤགས] A staple Tibetan dish of tsampa mixed with tea and kneaded into balls of dough-like consistency.">pag</a>tsöma [Tib. སྤགས་ཚོས་མ], it looks like boiled pag, it is thick rice, it is rice, what do you call that? Sticky rice cooked.   

**Q:**  Yeah, like Japanese style rice.   

**A:**  Yeah, and especially they give it at least two cups each, some get three, four...that's why it doesn't fit in their cup, you know, no matter how big bowl it is, they have some little piece of cloth goes with it. Some take double, during my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, I saw somebody taking double, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a> noticed immediately and got a hold of him. And after somebody got a hold of and standing up there and get a handful of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and put it on his head. They did that to punish him, for taking double.   

**Q:**  He's gonna eat for two weeks.   

**A:**  Oh, yeah, probably, yea, really that's a lot.   

**Q:**  And so then, after, then after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> , then they have to do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, the same. So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> may not be that quality, it may or may not be the same money, may be there's a five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a>, maybe a one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>, or maybe that much and then the khamtsen always have a little better quality of thukpa and maybe two or three sang or something like that, yes.   

**Q:**  And that would be meeting, what would that cost, like about?   

**A:**  Oooh, ah, probably about 50-60 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>, no way, much more than that, probably about 100-200 dotse.   

**Q:**  And they could afford it, how would people save up that kind of money?   

**A:**  Ah, they go and beg around.   

**Q:**  Oh, do they?   

**A:**  They call it, "begging" longmo [Tib. སློང་མོ] for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> tonggo"   

**Q:**  Ah, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> tonggo longmo ?   

**A:**  That is normal.   

**Q:**  They would just go what, in Lhasa with friends?   

**A:**  Friends and relations, and also for your, for persons who are business, who have connections with your khamtsen...and things like that, they go and they collect. And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཕྲུག] 1. Student. 2. Disciple. 3. Commonly the name for monks living with a gegen or teacher. These are more like wards than real disciples.">gidru</a>, they give something like that and that's what they do. That was not easy.   

**Q:**  I see, that's very interesting. So that's the biggest thing a monk has to do?   

**A:**  Usually biggest expenditure for examination, yes.   

**Q:**  But that's the only <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> is just when you're geshe.   

**A:**  That's only when geshe.   

**Q:**  But there's a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> when you enter the monastery? There's a small one?   

**A:**  There...I think poor monk don't have to do it, if at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> level they may have something, but not at that, they don't have committments. No, what do you call that - committment or what?   

**Q:**  Obligations.   

**A:**  Obligations, that's right!   

**Q:**  What does <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> have to do?   

**A:**  Chöndze are volunteered obligated, volunteer obligated, they really do. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trülku</a> have to do that, is obligated. Chöndze are volunteered, not really obligated but they volunteer.   

**Q:**  Now, whats the idea of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>, I mean   

**A:**  You get exemption!   

**Q:**  From what?   

**A:**  From the any junior taxes, or you get almost to that equal to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trülku</a>, yes almost equal to the trülku, almost.   

**Q:**  Will you sit also?   

**A:**  Yes, sit with them too. And in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, in the particular bad case in Loseling, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> give lot of money, they sit above trülku. It is economic policy.   

**Q:**  Oh really, yeah. Means, that if you have a lot of money, it means that they do a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a>, a big tonggo ?   

**A:**  A big big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> ... yeah at the beginning, enter the monastery and all the distribution of the money and if you are distributing, like, you know the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> probably distributing when they enter, they probably distributing 10 or 15 or 20, 25 maybe.   

**Q:**  Dayang?   

**A:**  Oh, no. sang.   

**Q:**  In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a>?   

**A:**  In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a>, they don't have.   

**Q:**  They don't have that.   

**A:**  Tratsang only.   

**Q:**  And then, they have to do something the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> too?   

**A:**  Oh, yeah, naturally. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> also gives them extra rooms and extra privileges and all this, so they have to do it.   

**Q:**  Do a lot of these <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>, like then, find their own servants?   

**A:**  Oh, yes. They'll find their own servants and then they be already   

**Q:**  But they have to be monks, they can't be like lay people, can they?   

**A:**  Can there be lay servants? Yes.   

**Q:**  They can be?   

**A:**  They can be, yes.   

**Q:**  So like Surkhang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> jedrung, they can send some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>?   

**A:**  They can send some...well, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> will not be good for, you can't keep so many in the monastery, you get very limited servant, you don't want a big set up there.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Normal rule, somehow, there's no room, there's no place, there is shortage of everything, so you don't want to set up [something] big there, so you want somebody who is efficient enough to do something, rather than having too many un-efficient people.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  So, I don't think you'd pick an ordinary <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> there. Maybe you have miser come from time to time bringing cow dungs and fire wood and things like that, needed, that everybody have anyway.   

**Q:**  What was that thing you were talking about in the history, about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] case, where the, when these <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> kids become monks, they have some shares, kela [Tib. སྐལ་བ] what, what?   

**A:**  I forgot the name of that, I forgot the name, I don't know what the name they really don't call it kela or... maybe called it share of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a>, shakel [Tib. ཤག་སྐལ] or monk's share, trakel [Tib. གྲྭ་སྐལ]. I totally forget, anyway there's a name for that, for the monks who get in. It's not really a kela.   

**Q:**  Well, anyway that's something, that's, you know, that's one of the kind of things that we have to ask a specific person, like some kudrak. Its not true villagers, I don't think, I 'm pretty sure that villagers don't get anything, they have no rights.   

**A:**  No, no. Maybe the family gives.   

**Q:**  The family may volunteer to give but I don't think they can say, you know, I want my kela, I don't think so.   

**A:**  I don't think the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> do like that.   

**Q:**  No?   

**A:**  No, but it become an incident of Phünkhang [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང] Geshe la.   

**Q:**  Yeah, right, right.   

**A:**  Was it called additional share, pharkel [Tib. འཕར་སྐལ]. no?   

**Q:**  Something like that.   

**A:**  Phünkhang Geshe la challenged because Phünkhang was not giving him.   

**Q:**  It was Phünkhang, wasn't it, yeah.   

**A:**  That's why, Phünkhang shape lost his rank and office, so that was that.   

**Q:**  Okay, well, I mean that's no hurry, that's easy to find out, that's easy... .   

**Q:**  Now, can you explain, like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> business?   

**A:**  chöra.   

**Q:**  chöra.   

**A:**  Okay. chöra.   

**Q:**  Like there's four chöra.   

**A:**  Yeah, I think they divided into chötheng [Tib. ཆོས་ཐེངས] which is like a semester type.   

**Q:**  Spelling of theng is [Tib. ཐེངས]?   

**A:**  Yes. And first there is one chötheng between Mönlam and Tsongjö. I think its called the first spring <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, jichö dangpo [Tib. སྤྱིད་ཆོས་དང་པོ].   

**Q:**  Spelling is?   

**A:**  [Tib. སྤྱིད་ཆོས་དང་པོ].   

**Q:**  Yes, yes.   

**A:**  And then they break and go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨོན་ལམ་ཚོགས་མཆོད] Abbr.: The Mönlam and Tsongjö Prayer Festivals in Lhasa.">Mönlam Tsongjö</a>, and it becomes the big spring <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, jichö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chenmo</a> [Tib. དཔྱིད་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] which is month long chötheng, I think. And then it comes summer and the fourth lunar month and there is a break and, ahh...then there is about 15 day break or something - and then becomes the big summer chöra, yarchö chenmo [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས]. And then there's a big break, chöntsam [Tib. ཆོས་མཚམས], I think month and half or something you get, the monks heading the summer retreat, few people will observe.   

**Q:**  Will observe what?   

**A:**  The summer retreat.   

**Q:**  Yarney [Tib. དབྱར་གནས]?   

**A:**  Yarney.   

**Q:**  If they observe it where will they go?   

**A:**  They will remain in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, they remain.   

**A:**  Or every seven days have you get back or something like that.   

**Q:**  I thought they go up in the mountains somewhere, no?   

**A:**  They can go but most of the monks are will not observe Yarney and they go into the mountains, caves and bridges ? and memorize things like that. You call it pentsam [Tib. དཔེ་མཚམས].   

**Q:**  Pentsam?   

**A:**  The retreat of pecha.   

**Q:**  Most monks will do that, you say?   

**A:**  Most <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a> will do that.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  It's called the pentsam.   

**Q:**  But that's not yarney?   

**A:**  No, yarney is going on in that period.   

**Q:**  What's the yarney then? I thought that's what yarney was.   

**A:**  No, that's not yarney, yarney is in the monastery, people who are staying, they have everyday meeting there and the rigtra [Tib. རིགས་གྲྭ] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> will give the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and all this during this period. There's some, some three or four meeting in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a>, twice, at least twice there.   

**Q:**  I see. Because the word is retreat, you'd think they're going somewhere, that's, not.   

**A:**  Yarney is you are taking the summer promise, [Tib. དབྱར་ཁས་ལེན་པ] which means not going to break and smashed out the fresh greens, green grass and green leaves here and that is what the main thing is.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, so it is not the   

**A:**  In the western translating, they call that summer retreat, I don't know why but I think its something to do with the influence from Thailand...some where a translator   

**Q:**  So it's not a retreat, its really   

**A:**  It's a commitment to   

**Q:**  Commitment not to kill anything?   

**A:**  Commitment not to kill the living trees. Yarney, it's a promise not to damage the green growing.   

**Q:**  Not to damage the grain   

**A:**  Not the grain, the green.   

**Q:**  The green, I see, and you do that by not leaving the monastery?   

**A:**  Then there are some functions there, and I forget, what is it, now, I totally forgot, you have to get back within 24 hours in the monastery or something you have to do. Something...or they, you get blessed summer commitment and you can go away but you have to get back within the seven days. Almost like a retreat, they have some kind of boundary, you don't go out of the boundary, if you want to go out of the boundary you have to be blessed to go. Some small rituals you have to do and then you go out of boundary and you have to get back within certain period, I forgot, period, whether it is seven days or 24 hours, I forgot.   

**Q:**  And you are blessed by who, by the abbot?   

**A:**  Oh, by anybody.   

**Q:**  And then after the yarney?   

**A:**  Yarney is not part of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, it comes between the break, chöntsam [Tib. ཆོས་ཚམས], that's why there's a big long chöntsam, so then, you have the great autumn chöra, tönchö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chenmo</a> [Tib. སྟོན་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] after that you have a tönchö chenmo.   

**Q:**  That, all these   

**A:**  All four seasons will have four major <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, with a month long each and then between that, like the first spring chöra, [Tib. དཔྱིད་ཆོས་དང་པོ] and then there's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྔ་མཆོད] The Ganden Ngamjö holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ngamjö</a> chöra, there is something, pre great winter chöra, günchö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chenmo</a> [Tib. དགུན་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ] there is Ngamjö chöra, there's something, I don't remember any tönchö chenmo has something there or not, anyway there are small chöra like 15 days or something like that, or 10 days chöra or something and then, there's a chöntsam.   

**Q:**  Or break?   

**A:**  Break and then the the great <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, chöra chenmo [Tib. ཆེན་མོ] will come. Only during the chöra period, you have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> 's traja, in chöra.   

**Q:**  Oh, really.   

**A:**  During the chöntsam you don't have traja.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see. Oh, so its hard for monks then.   

**A:**  Yes, its harder, but there be lesser monk in the monastery also during the chöntsam.   

**Q:**  Yeah, but those who stay   

**A:**  There's no traja.   

**Q:**  So, if they're in a poorer <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and there's no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོམ་ཇ] The name of the khamtsen&#x27;s prayer assembly meetings at which tea was served.">tsomja</a>?   

**A:**  No, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོམ་ཇ] The name of the khamtsen&#x27;s prayer assembly meetings at which tea was served.">tsomja</a> also.   

**Q:**  There's just mangja.   

**A:**  There's just mangja.   

**Q:**  So it's hard when they've got to have more income.   

**A:**  During the chöntsam its much more difficult for those poor monks for living.   

**Q:**  But that's like seven months of the year, almost because its only four months of chöra. Maybe one more month of small one, that's five.   

**A:**  No, chöntsam is much less, I'm missing some few <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> here. I'm missing some chöra. Maybe, jichö, there is a pre and after, maybe and maybe yarchö, there's a pre and after, then there's a Sagadawa [Tib. sa ga lza ba], [the 4th lunar month commemorating the birth, death and the Paranirvana of the Buddha]. chöra, there's something there and there's a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྔ་མཆོད] The Ganden Ngamjö holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ngamjö</a> chöra, there's something like that, so, I mean chöntsam is much less.   

**Q:**  Somebody who knows that, what we need is, a real list.   

**A:**  Yeah, we have to have that list.   

**Q:**  You know, these kind of things, I think we can get little by little, a list of all the chöra.   

**A:**  Oh, yeah, little chart.   

**Q:**  A little chart and how long they are, but you think, how many months of chöntsam? Out of the year?   

**A:**  The longest is one and half month during the summer, the chöntsam <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chenmo</a> then likely, you know, 10 days here, 15 days here, like that. Ummm, altogether maybe 3-4 months, maybe three months, that much. More <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> than chöntsam.   

**Q:**  So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, then what about the one, that you said about, that debate, what was it called? Where monks go to debate? When is that?   

**A:**  During the chöra.   

**Q:**  Oh, that's during the chöra.   

**A:**  When chöntsam there's nothing.   

**Q:**  No, no, but there was some place where they leave and go somewhere else and then they come back.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇང་དགུན་ཆོས] The special winter debating session for monks that was held annually in the area called Jang.">Jang günchö</a> will fall during the günchö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chenmo</a> period. A lot of monks go there and the Sangphu Yarchö [Tib. གསང་ཕུ་དབྱར་ཆོས] will probably fall in summer chöntsam somewhere that period, but not so many people go to Sangphu Yarchö.   

**Q:**  Sangphu Yarchö is?   

**A:**  Sangphu Yarchö, all the monks call it Sangphu, in that village and there's Yarchö, the summer <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> and in Drepung it is the chöntsam period, but even then, not so many people go for Sangphu Yarchö, however there is monks from Ganden comes a lot because Ganden Shartse is one of the ten ling [Tib. གླིང] of Sangphu called Sangphu Lingkhagju, [Tib. གསང་ཕུ་གླིང་ཁག་བཅུ]. Sera Drepung doesn't go much. Nyare Khamgpa has to go a little bit more because of Nyare connection with Ratö Nyare. That's why they call it a [unclear sentence]. Originally they supposed to go there, every Drepung monk supposed to go and I don't when it was dropped but [unfinished]   

**Q:**  Who teaches there? There are separate teachers there?   

**A:**  All of the monastery teachers will go.   

**Q:**  So just the monks, the teachers   

**A:**  The monks, the teachers, everybody will go.   

**Q:**  What's the sense of going there?   

**A:**  Oh, but then other monks will come to debate together.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  Together and but, administration will be totally controlled by Ratö.   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  Both Sangphu Yarchö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇང] 1. The area called Jang. 2. The special winter debating session for monks that was held annually in Jang.">Jang</a> günchö. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, Ganden, Drepung, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨད] The Mey College of Sera Monastery.">Mey</a> have nothing to say, even they abbot will be there teaching but they're not abbot there anymore.   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  They be just spectators?.   

**Q:**  So Ratö is like a separate monastery, its not like part of?   

**A:**  Yeah, Ratö is a separate monastery, it's owned and Ratö Nyare is part of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, Drepung Nyare two, yes and no. Both is there.   

**Q:**  And they have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> at the same time and stuff, too?   

**A:**  Who?   

**Q:**  At these   

**A:**  Oh, yes, they are the same things, same thing, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a>, everything. So they don't call it the mangja, traja..they call it morning <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a>, ngatsog [Tib. སྔ་ཚོགས], noon tsog, nyintsog [Tib. ཉིན་ཚོགས] and evening tsog [Tib. དགོང་ཚོགས].   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  Because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> period is an earlier for the ngatsog or shogtsog and then nyintsog, because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> things they call nyintsog so they have that. Tsomja in the evening and all these.   

**Q:**  So now, during, okay, let's take each of these <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> which is like a semester, let's say.   

**A:**  Semester, yes.   

**Q:**  Whatever it is...uhh...that means that during that time there's teaching?   

**A:**  Teachings is individual arrangement with individual students and the teacher. So it can be during the chöntsam, it can be during the chöra. Teaching is...can be, that is individual arrangement. The official arrangement is the, only debate and meeting and saying prayers.   

**Q:**  So, during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, then what happens?   

**A:**  During the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>   

**Q:**  Do you go there in the morning?   

**A:**  You go   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> is still or you just   

**A:**  Mangja is everyday, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> or no chöra. It is everyday, 364 days or more, except for few days, I don't know, Mönlam period. But then always there's a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a>. And after mangja, comes the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས] The morning chöra (debating) session.">shogchö</a>, the first chöra called shogchö.   

**Q:**  Shogchö mean morning <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>?   

**A:**  Shogchö is not very popular. Quite a lot of junior people will come, not so many senior monks come, they have little debate, few prayers to say, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས] The morning chöra (debating) session.">shogchö</a> will be over.   

**Q:**  Now, who's in charge of that, now, someone has to be.   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> is in charge of whole disciplinary action and umdze is responsible for saying the prayers and umm   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> and the umdze have to come?   

**A:**  They're there but then they also know other monks will come, they have to come, they come.   

**Q:**  Those two?   

**A:**  They two plus chösungnga [Tib. ཆོས་སྲུང་བ] .   

**Q:**  What's that?   

**A:**  Somebody whose like a caretaker, kyönyer type, he's responsible for the chöra. So he's there too.   

**Q:**  He's responsible in what sense?   

**A:**  Disciplinary and everything, below <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> and he also watch.   

**Q:**  Chösungnga?   

**A:**  Chösungnga. The monks, some come, some don't come, its a say, just like one of the meetings, annual meetings somebody announce it, its there every day, you go, you don't go, that type of thing.   

**Q:**  But like at the meetings, there's somebody in charge of what prayers gonna be said or what debate's gonna be or...one person in charge?   

**A:**  Its not...its not debate...or group debate, it's individual debate so wherever you study, you debate with your individual partners, you debate with them. You debate with individual debate.   

**Q:**  So what's the difference if you debate in your room or if you go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>?   

**A:**  You can't debate in your room, you're not allowed to make noise in your room.   

**Q:**  Oh, really.   

**A:**  No, you can't.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  You have to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> to debate. So you can't make big noise there. (Disturb) other people.   

**Q:**  But can you debate in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> when there's no chöra?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Only during those times?   

**A:**  Only during those times.   

**Q:**  I see, so if you have your own private teacher then what do you do?   

**A:**  You go there and teach in his house, there, you don't debate, you debate, like this type of thing, little bit of debate, but you don't even shout and there's a whole different tuned down business. And then whatever you learn from there, you come back big debate down there in chöra.   

**Q:**  Well, how do know if you've done well or not well? I mean, is there somebody that stands and says   

**A:**  No, no...I mean this is individual, totally, there's nobody standing, individual totally and then you come back, read more in your house and go back to the teacher and then see what he says and you ask questions and gradually you pick up. Nobody is going to be right from the beginning.   

**Q:**  But, like, I mean, when you go into the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, I mean, do you say, would you like to debate with me?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  Just ask anybody?   

**A:**  Anybody...anybody of your grade, dzintra [Tib. འཛིན་གྲྭ], greads are categorized already. Every year, whoever study, there is a group together called same grade, so with in your dzintra, you keep on debating.   

**Q:**  How many people are in a dzintra?   

**A:**  Oh, there variety. Some dzintra will have 20-30, some dzintra will have 10-15, some dzintra will have 30-40, it depends.   

**Q:**  So it's not that many.   

**A:**  Not that many, small group.   

**Q:**  So how many do you think are in dzintra all total?   

**A:**  Huh?   

**Q:**  All total, in any given year? Say, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, how many people are in the dzintra? If you added up all of the dzintra?   

**A:**  All the people who are still <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a>, they will be in dzintra.   

**Q:**  But that doesn't sound like too much.   

**A:**  That's a lot.   

**Q:**  Oh, yeah.   

**A:**  In the first dzintra, There's a lot of them. And then are the second and the third dzintra, yeah, there are a lot, really a lot...there are a like, what 14 dzintra there and 14 dzintra, each would probably have like a 10 roughly 20, multiplied by what?   

**A:**  300, 400?   

**A:**  300, 400 and first dzintra may have that much, 4-5-6-700...people there.   

**Q:**  What percent?   

**A:**  10%, yeah.   

**Q:**  So you know who's in your dzintra and you know who you   

**A:**  And you know what you'll be going, even you have some debate left last night, you continue tomorrow and, or you do something else. You have doubt something like that, that's what is ...., but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས] The morning chöra (debating) session.">shogchö</a> debate is very short, very short, and then after some time, umdze will be - <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> will be (hinting?) and chösung nga will be singing something and you'll meet together and say little prayers...say little prayers, that is the umdze leads the prayers and monks with good voice, dönsang kesang [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་སྐད་བཟང] will be responsible.   

**Q:**  The dönsang kesang aren't debating, they come from somewhere?   

**A:**  No, they're be there by that time. They know when they have to get there.   

**Q:**  When they show up.   

**A:**  And everybody knows when you have to show up. And about that time, the gong will be also on top of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and the gong will be beaten with the sound "bong!   

**Q:**  What will the gong do?   

**A:**  I don't know who's responsible to beat it, might be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་མ] The monk(s) in charge of a monastery&#x27;s kitchen.">jama</a>, somebody, probably jama, something, and they'll beat the gong and then the monks started coming to traja.   

**Q:**  Oh, that's the sign that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> is starting.   

**A:**  Traja is starting and then they move over there for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a>. Some people will leave from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས] The morning chöra (debating) session.">shogchö</a> and don't go to traja and come back to get the alms share, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐལ་ལེན] A special right allowing certain monks to take their share of alms outside of the prayer assembly hall. This privilege meant they did not have to attend the prayer session to get their alms.">kelen</a> [Tib. སྐལ་ལེན] too. That's possible too.   

**Q:**  Come back for what?   

**A:**  To collect money. Kelen will be done in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, yes.   

**Q:**  So everybody has a choice whether to do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐལ་ལེན] A special right allowing certain monks to take their share of alms outside of the prayer assembly hall. This privilege meant they did not have to attend the prayer session to get their alms.">kelen</a> or go into the traja.   

**A:**  Most the people have choice, but junior ones most will go there and senior ones have choice.   

**Q:**  Junior ones will be more <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a>?   

**A:**  The junior and the new ones they have to go in, because you know, no new ones will go in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐལ་ལེན] A special right allowing certain monks to take their share of alms outside of the prayer assembly hall. This privilege meant they did not have to attend the prayer session to get their alms.">kelen</a>, you know, that is rather   

**Q:**  Nervier?   

**A:**  Rather nervy, yeah. Or even <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> will scold you. That's possible.   

**Q:**  But the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> is in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>?   

**A:**  There is only one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a>. Gegö will be oberving in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས] The morning chöra (debating) session.">shogchö</a> and then going to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> and when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐལ་ལེན] A special right allowing certain monks to take their share of alms outside of the prayer assembly hall. This privilege meant they did not have to attend the prayer session to get their alms.">kelen</a> is starting, the gegö will be there again. When the kelen is over the gegö will go to the other side too. He goes around.   

**Q:**  The shengo only shows up at the   

**A:**  Only shows up at the manja business. He has nothing to do after mangja.   

**Q:**  And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</a>, what would they do?   

**A:**  Geyog are not funtioning in the monastery.   

**Q:**  They don't function in the monastery?   

**A:**  They don't.   

**Q:**  So under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> is who?   

**A:**  Under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> is chabril.   

**Q:**  They are actually like disciplinarian?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They can catch monks?   

**A:**  Yes, they can catch monks? The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a> will be in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> only when there is saying prayers in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> and not in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>. In the chöra, chabril won't come. In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐལ་ལེན] A special right allowing certain monks to take their share of alms outside of the prayer assembly hall. This privilege meant they did not have to attend the prayer session to get their alms.">kelen</a>, maybe chabril maybe coming for awhile. Chabril is more responsible for serving tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and things like that.   

**Q:**  What is chab?   

**A:**  Chab is water and he carrys a water jar up and down.   

**Q:**  What is that reason?   

**A:**  The water jar is called repa jilug [Tib. རས་པ྄་སྤྱི་བླུགས]. This is supposed to be after food, washing your mouth. Nobody gives water or anything, that's for show going up and down little bit. That is his main purpose job, but he is responsible for serving tea and thukpa. So he has a little stick and he comes in between and telling these people move down this side and the that side. He has to plan it how fast the tea is served and how far it covred it. And from this and to that or from the central to the directions or that is entirely up to him.   

**Q:**  Yes, I have seen when I was in Lhasa in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>. Now I think when I was there, Loseling assembly hall, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདུ་ཁང] An assembly hall in a monastery.">dukhang</a> [Tib. འདུ་ཁང] was used by everybody. There were little kids like 10-13 running around with tea pots and they used to run in out. The monks were doing the tsog.   

**Q:**  That's what there used to be, but not the kids. There will be grown people who in order to serve them faster and go and up down. And there was also a big show off too when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> was serving. All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> would dressed up and stand there and come with whole falls with the sound "bao" and if you are not good one, you will fall.   

**Q:**  I don't understand this. What do they do?   

**A:**  Oh yea, you know how long the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདུ་ཁང] An assembly hall in a monastery.">dukhang</a> area, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  From that door,the number one you can will be standing there with all his physical force and the number two will come and run faster and bound his body against them.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  That's their ... they like it.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Ther will be big bound and he will be standing there and there is always force joining.   

**Q:**  Do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> says stop or not?   

**A:**  No, no that is part of their allowed and they dressed up so differently.   

**Q:**  They can' t wear there in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a>, no?   

**A:**  Oh, they do during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> when there is the mingtag thukpa going on.   

**Q:**  When there is the mingtag <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Only then?   

**A:**  Yes. In that period they do that. That's why these people saved their hair and all these, otherwise the normally they don't come out. Even they put on their shawl, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟན] The upper part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">sen</a> [Tib. གཟན] on top of their hair. They were afraid that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> and somebody would cut them off. So during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> period they will show off everything. They will bound to him and he will stand there. If he is a weak person we will fall. So you can't fall it.   

**Q:**  What do you mean they can fall it?   

**A:**  If you fall, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> will fall on you and then   

**A:**  You are carrying <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> in hand   

**Q:**  And people run into you?   

**A:**  Yes, people run into you with the ladle. And you are standing there and the number two will come and bound on you.   

**Q:**  He is empty or he got <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>?   

**A:**  He got <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> too. Everybody have thukpa and thing.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  And then two of them stand and the third will bound and three of them stand and the fourth will bound and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a>   

**Q:**  Would they stand side by side or?   

**A:**  Yes, side by side.   

**Q:**  They actually runs fast?   

**A:**  Yes, full speed and they bound there.   

**Q:**  Dressed like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> container sola [Tib. ཟོ་ལག] bangs with the sound "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤགས] A staple Tibetan dish of tsampa mixed with tea and kneaded into balls of dough-like consistency.">pag</a>". And the weak sola crashes.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> mess on the floor?   

**A:**  And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a> will come and beat you. The chabril is standing there and try to put it off.   

**Q:**  Chabril is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a>, no ?   

**A:**  Chabril could be dobdo. And he says "run faster, run faster" He will see the number of people will filled up in one row, trel [Tib. གྲལ] and till then he will keep up counting and they come after another with the sound "beng beng". Where you stand, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a> will say "hey! stay there" [Tib. ཀས་འདིར་སྡོད]. And all the others will bound on him. After that, chabril will come in the middle and say "hey! you come in" [Tib. ཀས་ཡར་ཤོག] and they run through the rows one by one.   

**Q:**  Where would they run?   

**A:**  From the end of the row to the beginning of the row. First, you are running east to the west and then you are running south to the north. First you are running from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུང་ཁང] A monastic kitchen.">rungkhang</a> to here.   

**Q:**  When they were banging, they are all standing here?   

**A:**  Yes, and then bang, bang, bang till you have enough here. And they say "run up" and the first, second, third will run and fill up this. And they say, "hey! get ready to serve the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>" [Tib. ཀས་བཞེས་ཐུག་ཞུས་ཆོག་བྱེད] and the monks will be holding and then he says "face the east" [Tib. ཁ་ལ་ཤར་ལ་སློག] and they look east side. And he say say, hey! serve the thukpa" [Tib. ཀས་བཞེས་ཐུག་ཞུས] and they serve with the sound "cha cha cha" and he says "face the west" [Tib. ཁ་ནུབ་ལ་སློག] and they face the west and then serve "cha cha cha" and he says "hey! get out" [Tib. ཀས་མར་རྒྱུགས] and they have to run immediately. Thats what they do, otherwise, how you expect 7,000 monks could be to covered in a short period. That's the whole <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a>'s job. It's like big movie.   

**Q:**  So we were saying about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> and   

**A:**  And then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> comes. After traja   

**Q:**  Somebody says I want to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> and I want to stay in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, he can?   

**A:**  He can't.   

**Q:**  He have to go in your room or some where?   

**A:**  You have to go to some where else. And then you go wherever you go. And after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཉིན་ཆོས] A mid-day study session in monasteries.">nyinchö</a> will start with debate, again there are lot of different rules in the chöra. Some nyinchö have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱོར་དཔོན] The monastic official who functions as the main teacher in the Dharma Grove (chöra) where monks go to study debating and logic.">gyorpön</a> and some memmorizing and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> will say few words and the gyorpön have to repeat. Dzintra by dzintra you have go to the khempo and there are lot of different rules in the chöra.   

**Q:**  All the dzintra are all in one place?   

**A:**  They are all in one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a>, dzintra by dzintra, they have go to the khempo.   

**Q:**  Who would appoint the teachers for the each dzintra?   

**A:**  There are no teacher for each dzintra. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱོར་དཔོན] The monastic official who functions as the main teacher in the Dharma Grove (chöra) where monks go to study debating and logic.">gyorpön</a> is there and he is not a teacher. He is the sort of leader of the dzintra.   

**Q:**  What are they doing there?   

**A:**  They debate. Dzintra is always for debating purpose.   

**Q:**  What does the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱོར་དཔོན] The monastic official who functions as the main teacher in the Dharma Grove (chöra) where monks go to study debating and logic.">gyorpön</a> do?   

**Q:**  Gyorpön has to memmorize more because he have to make sure when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> says certain portion out of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཆ] The tsenyi teaching materials used by a monastic college.">yigcha</a> once or twice out of yigcha you have to repeat the whole thing immediaitly after that. They call it tsishag [Tib. རྩིས་བཞག]. Originally, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] Abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khembo</a> supposed to have taught and you have to learn. Khempo will memmorize some and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱོར་དཔོན] The monastic official who functions as the main teacher in the Dharma Grove (chöra) where monks go to study debating and logic.">gyorpön</a> memmorize some and the khempo will say "pa la pa la" and the gyorpön will say it back.   

**Q:**  Say it back to who?   

**A:**  To the khempo. Everybody is sitting like this and you have go dzintra by dzintra and bow down.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> is on the throne?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> is on the throne and he will say" pa la pa la" and after that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱོར་དཔོན] The monastic official who functions as the main teacher in the Dharma Grove (chöra) where monks go to study debating and logic.">gyorpön</a> will say,"papapa" and the next dzintra will come.   

**Q:**  You people can understand or not?   

**A:**  Yes, you can understand because when he memmorize something, he will come out of memmory. And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱོར་དཔོན] The monastic official who functions as the main teacher in the Dharma Grove (chöra) where monks go to study debating and logic.">gyorpön</a> has already memmorized that.   

**Q:**  You already know that too?   

**A:**  Yes, the whole dzintra will go. You don't have to memmorize that.   

**Q:**  That was just some kind of ritual?   

**A:**  That was just some kind of not ritual, Buddhist type of ritual is sometimes different from the normal rituals. It was kind of sustom activity.   

**A:**  So basically, you were reading all these complicated texts, who is tell me what they mean?   

**A:**  Your teachers, you individual teachers.   

**Q:**  But they don't go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> to see how you are doing anything?   

**A:**  No way.   

**Q:**  So how do they know   

**A:**  Everything is your personal and not very much supervized like professors here always giving tests. No way.   

**Q:**  How does he know you understand what   

**A:**  No, you go and teaching sort of day after day.   

**Q:**  You go everyday to teach?   

**A:**  Not necessarily everyday, they come day after tommorow and three days laters or whatever. This is all private arrangements.   

**Q:**  You go by yourself or?   

**A:**  Some of your class fellows may come with you and some classes will go to other teachers. And all of them may come to one teacher. It all depends on the relation of individualized relation.   

**Q:**  What does the teacher do when you come there, he says this is the   

**A:**  You will read certain portion and he will ask you questions and the method of the teaching is like a greek philosover by questioning and make you understand better.   

**Q:**  He doesn't say that this is the Pharchin, it was written in   

**A:**  No, no. This portion is supposed to learn by reading or knowledge whatever it is. He will read the text wherever it is covering your... and he will say "well this book says this. What do you think it means and then you will say something and he will argue with you, debate with you and say I have read in such and the such book and it say something else and say would you like to look at it. And tommorow, they ask, "did you read it? What do you think about it? That's how they teach.   

**Q:**  That's pretty loose.   

**A:**  This is very loose, I mean if you have 20 students together one teacher, maybe ask you, maybe call on you, maybe says not now. Today's thing is ... and say this is in the book in line so and so. What do you think? Don't you think this is will contradict with such and such thing. And if not, what is the reason about it. In that manner that goes.   

**Q:**  Oh wow! Where do you get the books from?   

**A:**  Well, somehow you have them around.   

**Q:**  Do you buy them or?   

**A:**  Well, the printers are there and you can buy from them. Printed books are sold everywhere and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> also print from time to time and made it available. I don't know how it made available, but that is there around. You borrow it, you have it and big borrow stake is there. Everybody, at least each have a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཆ] The tsenyi teaching materials used by a monastic college.">yigcha</a> copy.   

**Q:**  Yigcha copy means the copy of all the books in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཆ] The tsenyi teaching materials used by a monastic college.">yigcha</a>?   

**A:**  No, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཆ] The tsenyi teaching materials used by a monastic college.">yigcha</a>, the root [text] and the comentary of the yigcha both. The yigcha are available with you. You may not have the whole book, you may have the books dealing with that portion that somebody did 2-3 years before and not needed and you borrow from it. Anyway, everybody have a copy.   

**Q:**  You have to memmorize the books also?   

**A:**  Certain thing people do and certain don't. Some people memmorize and ome people don't memmorize. You can memmorize, it will be helpful to you and if you don't memmorize, they may not be that helpful. You read it and you understand it.   

**Q:**  But, basically, unless you read so much, you don't get much guidence like directions? I mean nobody says there are four schools and Buddhism and we stress the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མ] The Madhyamaka text (&quot;the Middle Way&quot;).">Uma</a> school and the main principel schools like that?   

**A:**  No way. But if you are study <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མ] The Madhyamaka text (&quot;the Middle Way&quot;).">Uma</a>, then that time they probably come and they say sort of Ngar Juna, the Buddha Palina is there and this and that. And it is more or less you have to do lot of your own study.   

