# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.11 : Tape 11  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khendrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་དབྲེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ])  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, U.S.A.  
**Date of Interview:** April 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English.  
**Interview by:** Dr. Goldstein  
**Name:** Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khendrü [Tib. dge legs rin po che; nyag dbre mkhan sprul  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 50  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview he continues discussions on a broad range of topics of monastic life, including details of how the Tratsang (college) “semesters” are done and on issues surrounding the Mönlam Prayer Festival. This interview includes very specific details about particular positions of authority and responsibility in the monastery and how responsibilities are carried out for particular occasions.   

---  
### Tape 11  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_11/M_0009_11.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  We were talking about how some of these monasteries, the Tratsang [Tib. གྲྭ་ཚང ] move [for semesters] ...   

**A:**  The Tratsang moved, ha ha, there are, what I think is that there are two kind of movements, one is like, the tantric colleges such as Gyütö [Tib. རྒྱུད་སྟོད] and Gyümey [Tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད]. They (move) from estate to estate of their own; the estates are also linked up and linked up with a special areas, like Chumiglung [Tib.ཆུ་མིག་ལུང] or Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང ] where there were some kind of historical evidence, like Tsongkhpa put something there, you know, something there and here, something that was connected them with this, and then economically it made it easy because there was some kind of estate that belonging to each Tratsang. So they moved there. These were called chöthog [Tib. ཆོས་ཐོག] or semesters. But actually they called it chumiglung chöthog (the Chumiglung semester). These chöthog semesters generally didn't mean moving; for every sort of semester they refered to it as a chöthog. However, this “moving chöthog” (semesters where the monks moved) were also called Chumiglung chöthog and the chöthog was named in accordance with the area where they are moving to, e.g., like Chumiglung or the Tölung chöthog or like that. That's what the tantric colleges did in (Central Tibet) Lhasa, as far as I know. There must be other monasteries who did this too, but I have no idea about those. But there are also other moving chöthog which had no estates connected at all, no estates at all. These are the Sangpu Yarchö [Tib. གསང་ཕུ་དབྱར་ཆོས] and the Jang Günchö [Tib. འཇང་དགུན་ཆོས] (the Jang winter semester). For the latter, which takes place in the winter, they all moved, not the total monastery, but a lot of the monks would go for one and a half months, maybe two and a half months in winter. Also, they went to the place called Jang [Tib. འཇང] where there is a monastery. And behind that, is the place called Jang Günchö. Then in the summer, they went to Sangpu and it was called the Sangpu Yarchö (the Sangpu Summer semester). These two are the monasteries to which the monks moved, so there was no estate therfe. So the whole monastery will move to Ratö [Tib. ར་སྟོད] and the whole monastery will move to Sangpu and also to Ratö. So there were Ratö and Ramey [Tib. ར་སྨད]. And all this, I don't think Ganden...   

**Q:**  Ratö is the one (monastery) near Lhasa?   

**A:**  Near Nyethang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང].   

**Q:**  Nyethang, is like Nyaral [Tib. མྱ་རལ] [unclear] ?   

**A:**  Yeah, that's right, that is Ratö. And they moved; the whole monastery moved.   

**Q:**  But did they have an estate there or not?   

**A:**  They didn't. They didn't have any estate in Jang. I do not know if they have any estate in Sangpu or not. I don't know, but I presume they didn't. Because Ratö normally complained that they had no estates whatsoever. So, as far as Drepung, Sera, and Ganden are concerned, a lot of monks went there, but not the whole monastery. However, they move for Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ ] and of course for Tshonjö [Tib. ཚོངས་མཆོད] and umm...So these are the two types of semester move in the monastery.   

**Q:**  If they move where there is no estate, then where do they get the money from, where do they get the food from?   

**A:**  They look after this individually, totally themselves.   

**Q:**  So, they must have sponsors or jinda [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག]?   

**A:**  No, not a lot of Jinda will come, but the funny system is……   

**Q:**  If 500 monks show up at one place, that's a lot of people to feed every day.   

**A:**  The funny system is, is, uhh, okay, you can't think of feeding that way, no. Each one individually cooked. The individual cooked. Nobody will feed you in general, so every individual has to make their own arrangement. But, for Ratö, the prayer assembly tea, that is the mangja [Tib. མང་ཇ] and tratsang’s tea, that is the traja, [Tib. གྲྭ་ཇ ] like the early morning and mid- sort of late morning and early morning, or they, mangja and traja are totally provided by Ratö RPC, or Ratö Tratsang because everybody can go there, because Ratö is in charge and Rato’s hall is for everyone’s use, so Ratö, sort of, you know, automatically fix them up, and all this...   

**Q:**  But this is when they go to Ratö?   

**A:**  They go to Jang.   

**Q:**  Jang?   

**A:**  Ratö is also moved from Ratö to Jang.  

**Q:**  And Ratö has a hall?   

**A:**  Yes, they had a hall and abbot is Ratö’s abbot, nobody else, and the Gegö [Tib. དགེ་བསྐོས] are also from Ratö and all the officials will be from Ratö Tratsang.  

**Q:**  And this place, was it called Jang?   

**A:**  Yes, Jang.   

**Q:**  Jang is a monastery?   

**A:**  It’s a village, and at the back of the village, there are two villages, and I think that this is in Jangtö (Upper Jang) and before there were Jangtö and Jangmey or Lower Jang [Tib. འཇང་སྟོད་ཇང་སྨད], in between these there is a little valley and at the end, at foot hill of the hill over there, the mountain over there, they build a monastery called Jang Gunchö, I mean it is like the winter semester, whatever it is. And like the monastery named after that, so they called it Jang Gunchö. So for the rest of the year, (the monastery) is totally empty, there's nobody living there. It’s totally empty.   

**Q:**  And does it have an assembly hall (tshogang [Tib. ཚོགས་ཁང]) and shag (rooms/apartments) and everything?   

**A:**  It’s got everything. And later on each Tratsang (college) in Sera, Drepung and Ganden monasteries started building their own buildings. Loseling [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] built its own building, Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང ] built its own building, Serache [Tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས ] built its own, as did Serame [Tib. སེ་ར་སྨད ]. I do not know whether khamtsen (residence halls) then build up their own. I don't think they did. So except for Nyare Khamtsen, oh yes, and Gowo [Tib. གོ་བོ], and Loseling’s Tsangba Khamtsen [Tib. གཙང་པ་ཁང་ཙན ] also start building up as did Minyag [Tib. མི་ཉག] (residence hall). All of them started building up there, so it became quite big later, but except for two or two and half months, and that also goes down, sort of, you know really solidly like for a month and a half, or about 45 days or something like that there are big activities. Otherwise, for the rest of the year it is totally empty. I'm not sure whether Ratö Tratsang leaves one monk there or not; I'm not sure. Maybe they have one or two gönnyer (monastery caretakers).   

**Q:**  So if monks don't have sponsors (for the semester period there), then they just make their own food; they just bring some of their own food, or whatever, right?   

**A:**  That's right. They have to make some arrangement. They're on their own so they do that and somehow everybody has somehow something worked out and there is no problem. The jindag (patrons) are there, quite a number of them and the system is so funny over there. Normally, in Drepung, Sera, and Ganden, all the Jindag will give you this tea and then thukpa. If they give you thukpa, it always something to do with rice, e.g., thukpa mingta [Tib. ཐུག་པ་མིང་བཏགས] which is made from rice, butter and dry fruit, etc., but in the Jang Günchö semester, (the patrons) give you bagthug [Tib. བག་ཐུག] which is made from flour dough, radishes, dry cheese, and meat, etc. It is totally different. It is like nothing else.   

**Q:**  Bagthug is the one that looks like little round dough balls, right?   

**A:**  It is the big bagthug, that is huge, like a fist. It is big bagthug. So, that is different.   

**Q:**  Did you ever go there?   

**A:**  Oh, yeah. I've been there...   

**Q:**  What happens after you get there? And when is that?   

**A:**  That was after the Death Anniversary of Tsongkhapa, the Ngamchö [Tib. ལྔ་མཆོད]. It is at the beginning of the eleventh month...   

**Q:**  Was it cold then?   

**A:**  It was very cold, so it was during the cold season ...   

**Q:**  And did all the monks go there on foot?   

**A:**  Some went by horse, I've gone there by horse. And once I went by car too.   

**Q:**  If you take a horse, then who looks after the horse?   

**A:**  No. The horse goes back. Goes back. I mean in our case, we have a bunch of people who go together with horses and food. The (my) labrang [Tib. བླ་བྲང] carried everything down there and after you reached there, the horse went back and they won't come back till you are ready to go.   

**Q:**  Do they do the mangja payer assembly like they do in a regular monastery, when you come and sit down...   

**A:**  Just like that. Everything is just like that.  

**Q:**  In the book by Ratö Kyongla [Tib. ར་སྟོད་སྐྱོང་ལྷ] Rinpoche.   

**A:**  Kyongla.   

**Q:**  The book said Chongla.   

**A:**  The spelling is Kyongla, but in the (Khampa) pronunciation, it becomes Chongla rather than Kyongla.   

**Q:**  I see, he's from Ratö. He said that incarnations get served tea in a nicer porcelain pot rather than this kind of brass one. Is that true in Loseling too?   

**A:**  No, I think it only refers to the khamtsen (residence hall). I don't think Ratö Tratsang does that.   

**Q:**  Oh, this was in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes, in the khamtsen you have that.   

**Q:**  Did you have that too?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. In the khamtsen they did that. I don’t think they did that Ratö Tratsang.  

**Q:**  You had that too?   

**A:**  Yes. But in Ratö Tratsang, I don’t think they did that.  

**Q:**  Is he (Kyongla) a Tshogchen Truku [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] [a Truku of the higher rank]  

**A:**  Yes.  

**Q:**  Is he still alive?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where is he?   

**A:**  In New York.   

**Q:**  It is kind of an interesting book.   

**A:**  He wrote a very interesting book...   

**Q:**  It’s quite good, you know. It’s kind of interesting, very interesting, I mean that's all you can say. It’s got a lot of information. But not as much (as I would like). I mean there would be a million things one would want to ask but...   

**A:**  I do not know whether he gives interview or not. These days he sort of (has become a) quite an interesting character, but...   

**Q:**  What's he do for a living? Does he have a center?   

**A:**  He has a center, but he inherited very wealthy artist, so she gives everything to him. So he has a tiny little room in New York which is under rent control. When you go there it has huge (images and thankas) and you can't even move round.   

**Q:**  Is he a very learned person?   

**A:**  Yes, he was good. He was considered very good. But he doesn't talk. He has a very funny character. He said that he has a kind of depression [Tib. སྲོག་རླུང] or something, so...   

**Q:**  He had what?   

**A:**  [Tib. སྲོག་རླུང ], an emotional type of thing (psychological illness).   

**Q:**  Oh, yea?   

**A:**  Umm-hmmm...   

**Q:**  His book is very evocative of feelings. Normally people don't talk that way about "How I felt" and say "I felt this." I mean, it’s quite like an American book in terms of that, so I thought he must be a very open person, who is talkative.   

**A:**  I doubt it.  

**Q:**  I had one quick question about the shingnyer [Tib. ཤིང་གཉེར] monastic official.   

**A:**  The shingnyer.   

**Q:**  Yes, the shingnyer. Are there are two of them or one of them?   

**A:**  One. You are talking about Mönlam Shingnyer. They were called the shanggo [Tib. ཞང་འགོ ] shingnyer, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  The shango shingnyer.   

**Q:**  They only exist at that time?   

**A:**  They only exist during the Mönlam and Tshongjö.  

**Q:**  At the Tsonchö, does each shengo [Tib. ཞལ་ངོ] have one?   

**A:**  No. If each shengo had one, that is the Chagdamba [Tib. ཕྱག་དམ་པ ].   

**Q:**  And then there was one jama and one nangma or what?   

**A:**  Yes, one jama and one nangma.   

**Q:**  But there's only one...   

**A:**  Only one shingnyer.   

**Q:**  The shango shingnyer? And then he's got nineteen...   

**A:**  Those were the geyog [Tib. དགེ་གཡོག] under him (under the shengo), yes.   

**Q:**  That's what I wanted to know.   

**A:**  And, um, there are incidents saying that the shango shingnyer controls the Lower Court of Law [Tib. ཁྲིམས་ར་འོག་མ] and the tsogchen shengo [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན་ཞལ་ངོ ] controls the Upper Court of Law [Tib. ཁྲིམས་ར་གོང་མ ].  

**Q:**  What does that mean?   

**A:**  It means that there were two Courts of Laws who make decisions about whether something was right or wrong...   

**Q:**  Cases?   

**A:**  Cases. They sent them out. The shango shingnyer and the people liked to say that there are two Courts of Law and the shango shingnyer would make a lot of decisions down there, though the shengo would like to denounce that and say there's only one Court of Law. I'm quoting this from ügyen la [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས] who had sereved in both positions.   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  Yeah. I mean they are linked So ügyen la said this. I remember this very clearly. I asked him was that really true? He said, it is really true. If the shango shingnyer is strong, like in case of shingnyer Chöndzin [Tib. ཆོས་འཛིན], who wa the shingnyer for a long long time, I think that for all the 1930s and 40s he had been shingnyer. For twenty years. So during his period, he will not (obey) anything that the shengo says. He will make his decision down there, straightaway.   

**Q:**  Now, he's making a decision over what kind of things?   

**A:**  Cases that come to him, and he even sometimes goes beyond his jurisdiction and pick up outside cases and things like that, but it is mostly cases relating to the kitchen. Things concerning the butter that has to be brought and the tea. That type of a thing and whatever is the incident that is taking place in both places. The shingnyer makes the decision and then Chönzin had even expanded this and some families were responsible for bringing the fire wood.   

**Q:**  During the Mönlam and Tshongjö?   

**A:**  Yes, during the Mönlam and Tshongjö, so he (heard) any cases related to that house that was also under his control. He extended his jurisdiction in that way, but the truth is that anything that mattered dealing with the stove and the storeroom in the kitchen is decided by him. And anything that has to do with anything that comes to the geyog [Tib. དགེ་གཡོག] and the kitchen helper Thabyog [Tib. ཐབ་གཡོག] were decided by the shingnyer.  

**Q:**  The thabyog, too?   

**A:**  Yes, the thabyog too.   

**Q:**  The thabyog was under the geyog?   

**A:**  The thabyog was under the shingnyer, not really directly under the geyog.   

**Q:**  I see, how many were there? There must be lots.   

**A:**  I think there were lots there. I don't know the number. I think in Drepung there were about 23 or 24 thabyog, something like that. I just vaguely remember. But I think in the mönlam, they...   

**Q:**  Who picks the shengo? And the shango shingnyer?   

**A:**  I think the shengo is appointed by the government. I think so. The chagdampa are not appointed by the government. I'm not very sure whether that shengo is appointed by the Laji [Tib. བླ་སྤྱི] or the government, that's a question that you could ask...   

**Q:**  And chagdamba, is that what Ügyan la was?   

**A:**  Ügyan la was the chagdamba for a very very long time.   

**Q:**  And what is the chagdamba’s job?   

**A:**  The chagdamba 's job is to be the deputy shengo. It's like the deputy shengo. They act just like the shengo, and they dress just like a shengo. The shengo will occupy the two middle lines. They will lead the tea [being served] in the two middle lines...   

**Q:**  Lead the what?   

**A:**  Tea. You know the tea servers called Olo will bring the tea at the Mönlam. You know what Olo is? Okay, those people who serve the tea in Mönlam. I think the name comes from Tsang [dialect] [Tib. གཙང ] area, somewhere...   

**Q:**  Oh really?   

**A:**  Yeah, and they are have to lead (the tea servers) inside and that is shengo and chagdampa, so the senior shengo will go the middle line and Junior shengo will go the right line and senior chagdampa will go the left line and the junior chagdampa will go to the other line. So the four lines in the center will be led by the shengo and chagdampa and then the shengo shingnyer comes in the middle of the Olo, at the center of the Olo, and then he will come to the other side of the line, but there's still one more line left, empty, and he will come and stand there with a long stick -- a huge long stick about two storeys high, a big thick one.   

**Q:**  He carries that in?   

**A:**  He has tea. He can't carry it, so he has to sort of pull it. And then there's the center of that. When he reach the center of the line, he has to put that up. It almost touches to the courtyard up there and he holds that and stands there. And he has to carry that wherever he goes, whatever he does... he has to pull that everywhere.   

**Q:**  And the rest of the, what is it the shengo shingnyer does?   

**A:**  The shengo shingnyer is in charge of all Olos too. There are a lot of Olos , a lot of them. I don't know how many. Maybe 500.   

**Q:**  But then, when it is not Mönlam and Tshongjö…..   

**A:**  Nothing, nothing. People may call them shengo and people may sort of you know give them respect, but officially its nothing, nobody, but...   

**Q:**  Usually Geshelaa ( ) on? (unclear)  

**A:**  Yes, at very big shatsang, not many of the shengos will become Shengo later. Some people will remain a shengo all their life. Ügyenla remained a chagdampa for 20 years and shengo Chözin remained as shengo for 20 years.   

**Q:**  Now, when you say an assistant shengo, like what would he do? I mean, like what would that mean?   

**A:**  Well, actually it means something in Mönlam, nothing else.   

**Q:**  Only in Mönlam?   

**A:**  Only in Mönlam, and Tshongjö. During the [other time] day to day he has nothing. He will be working for Loseling [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] or for the Drepung Laji [Tib. ‘bras spungs bl spyi] or Riji [Tib. རི་སྤྱི]) or going up and down chasing cases round and showing the monasteries (a way) to some people and do this sort of thing, this type of thing.   

**Q:**  Does he do these things on Mönlam?  

**A:**  Yeah. He does this sort of thing. And even people like Drönyerchenmo [Tib. Mgron gnyer chen mo] pay a lot of attention to him and especially when he appears on certain cases, and then they will ask three kind questions like are you all by yourself or what are you?   

**Q:**  Meaning?   

**A:**  Meaning are you carrying the weight of the monastery behind you or are you showing the monastery’s weight without much showing openly or, you know, sort of, you know...   

**Q:**  You mean, like civil cases?   

**A:**  Civil cases in Lhasa during... the, not during the Mönlam but...   

**Q:**  During the regular time?   

**A:**  During the regular time.   

**Q:**  Like he'll go to one of the (judges and say)...   

**A:**  He won't go to judges, he'll go to the Kashag [Tib. བཀའ་ཤག]... yeah... Drönyerchenmo [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] and those and sometimes he will appear officially rather than... some family or Labrang or something, and then they will ask three times questions. Are you there by yourself? Or what are you?   

**Q:**  But that's a... a monastery as a whole (role) chagdamba, that's not Tratsang , so... that's...   

**A:**  Tratsang has nothing to do with chagdamba. chagdamba was totally for the Mönlam. The Mönlam activities will begin to pick up in the monastery by about wintertime. Until wintertime, there's nothing. But by about wintertime, the shengo have to make a Tonggo ceremony [Tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] in each Tratsang wherever they belong. It is just like geshe’s Tonggo [Tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] just like the geshes, the shengo have to do that every year, wherever the shengo is, they have to do that...   

**Q:**  The Tonggo, but not the parties?   

**A:**  Yeah, everything, including the parties.   

**Q:**  How can they afford toc since it's so expensive.   

**A:**  Well, they do it, but the parties are not that big, you know, not like labrang's do. They have some small party. Then the geyog, chagdamba and the chagdamba’s nangmas and Chagdamba’s chabril all will become active shingnyer and geyog and all will begin to become active. People sort of started calling them and people started taking notice of them and they also started dressing up in different way, so they were almost indicating they're getting ready for the Mönlam. And then, of course, then officially they will go for the lhatse [Tib. ལྷ་ཚེ] to help those (oracles) in Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང], so they go one day to Tenma [Tib. བསྟན་མ ], and one day to Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང].   

**Q:**  It is called Latse?   

**A:**  Latse, like days... the day of the deities, so they go and ask those deities to help them and this and that and this and that, and that was the day, the first day they will definitely be completely like shengo or chagdampa or whatever that is, not shengo but chagdampa, shingnyer. The geyog according to that and their discipline, will also start on that day.   

**Q:**  What day is that, do you know?   

**A:**  It has to be choosen by the shengo every year. Some are in the late tenth month or early eleventh month. Some were around there. Sometime it was even the middle of tenth month or even earlier, the end of the ninth month. That is very early. Every Tratsang has a day of winter offerings called Günsö [Tib. དགུན་གསོལ ] that is a winter Lhatse. Every Tratsang will have it round about that period. That day becomes the Shengo Lhatse, and that day will be the beginning of the thabyog and chagdamba and everybody following the discipline.   

**Q:**  What is the...   

**A:**  The discipline (rules) is in the (sense) here that if they fall from their horse or if their hat falloff their head or something like that, they have to pay.  

**Q:**  Who has to?   

**A:**  To the Geyog.  

**Q:**  If they fall their hat means?   

**A:**  That have to wear their hat when riding a horse, and if someone’s hat falls or if they fall off the horse, they have to pay (a fine) to the shengo shingnyer who will be watching. And the discipline is started.   

**Q:**  But this Günsö is usually what?   

**A:**  Actually, they have monthly offerings in the monastery all the time and then they have a seasonal offering called söka [Tib. གསོལ་ཁ]. The most important were the two, the summer offering called yarsö [Tib. དབྱར་གསོལ] and the günsö for the winter. The spring offering, jisö [Tib. དཔྱིད་གསོལ] and the autumn offering, the Tönsö [Tib. སྟོན་གསོལ ] they were not very important. The yarsö and günsö were the more popular (time for) everybody. Yes, it was something very special.   

**Q:**  And these are taught in the ( ) or just taught everywhere?   

**A:**  Oh, no, no in particular ones like Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང ], Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང], Tenma [Tib. བསྟན་མ ]and a Thambag Shengo [Tib. དན་འབག་ཞང་འགོ]. Also, maybe sometimes the Phushar [Tib. ཕུ་ཤར] does a little bit.   

**Q:**  And then all the monks go or just some representatives?   

**A:**  In the case of the Loseling Yarsö, all the people who enjoy any status in Loseling, that includes all the abbot, ex-abbots, the abbots of other monasteries that belong to Loseling such as the Gyeba Khampo [Tib. རྒྱས་པ་མཁན་པོ], the Shagor Khempo [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར་མཁན་པོ] and that type, and the ex- and current abbot of Loseling. And all the incarnate lama that belong to Loseling, and all the monastery officials like the chandzö [Tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད], the bungdzö [Tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] all like this have to go. I mean you may not come but, you'll be invited and you expect to go and you go mostly except...   

**Q:**  But then other Tratsang like Gomang and...   

**A:**  They have that too.   

**Q:**  But on different dates?   

**A:**  Different dates, yes.   

**Q:**  Otherwise it'd be all...   

**A:**  Yes, that's right different dates. And even the Khamtsen have their own (house) and even Labrangs have their own (houses).   

**Q:**  And what do they ask when they ask. I mean, what do you go and ask? Do you ask questions, say...   

**A:**  You ask questions and you say this is here...   

**Q:**  Like what, for example?   

**A:**  Well, anything you want, I mean this is here, we like to hear, thank you, you had help us during the past and this is also to request you to help us during the future and presently we having this present issue to think what we should do and then they tell us the physical, mental, (financial) state or even if you want to become a geshe and it’s about time you think to go ahead so things like which year should you go or should you hold up.   

**Q:**  Are individuals there?   

**A:**  Yes, there are individuals.   

**Q:**  Are there may be a hundred people there?   

**A:**  There are Labrang people, lamas, ordinary monks, I mean there may.   

**Q:**  Some don't ask?   

**A:**  Maybe not because they go by turns and the lamas have the chance to pick up here and there, so...   

**Q:**  I see, so he goes into trance and then everybody walks up to him like...   

**A:**  Yes, yes, yes. I mean haven’t you not seen one of these? If not, I’ll show you, okay?   

**Q:**  Oh yeah?   

**A:**  Yes, so you get idea.   

**Q:**  And individuals go up to him and ask them their questions.   

**A:**  Yes, their questions.   

**Q:**  And then he answers right away?   

**A:**  Right away, and also there ask general questions and you can write them down. Somebody will read the answer. He will give the answer that way.  

**Q:**  And he gives an answer you can understand or do you have to ask his...   

**A:**  Oh, you can understand whether it is right or wrong (yes or no), who knows? But, you get an answer for sure.   

**Q:**  I see. So that's yarsö and the günsö.  

**A:**  There was an incident with one man. I remember that a very funny thing happened. One of our friends who was also a Nyare (Khamtsen) monk wanted to become the Lama Könyer [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་གཉེར] of Loseling. The Lama Könyer position is the caretaker of the Loseling Tratsang (College), so it has a lot of money (potential earnings). There is a lot of income for that job.   

**Q:**  Because he runs the Labrang...   

**A:**  He runs the Labrang and then a lot of things. He sits above the kitchen of Loseling. He gets a room there and all sorts of things. And so he wanted to be that (unclear ). At that time, the abbot (of Loseling) happened to be my teacher and we had to go to him to make this request to him and then (unclear ) he told me "Hey, look, every Rinpoche around here are my students now and everybody wants somebody to be Lama Könyer and there's only one post. I can't... so I'm not going to show any favoritism to anybody, so I'm going to ask the Gadong (oracle) [Tib.དགའ་གདོང]. So that nobody will feel bad about the decision as I didn't do make the choice. So I'm going to ask Gadong. So... that's what he said, he said he was going to ask Gadong. Generally, he said, he had asked Gadong even about his bungdzö position, and Gadong did it and he will ask the same thing to Gadong for the Lama Könyer. So after this... I went back and told his mother... you know, she then said so now please go to Gadong and ask him. However, there was no time for me to go to Gadong, so I went to Phushar, [Tib. ཕུ་ཤར] another oracle who goes into trance. You you can walk up there to him so the next day we went to Phushar and asked Phushar if he could ask Gadong to help him. I was a kid so I didn't know that human beings can ask a favor to the other, and the other, they can do the same thing, that sort of thing. The Phushar oracle said yes, I will definitely ask since you asked me. I will. I cannot make the decision. I cannot say what is going to happen, but I will definitely ask Gadong in God’s realm (lhayü [Tib. ལྷ་ཡུལ]) and then I’ll let you know what he says. You come back the next day. Gadong is going to be there. I think, the day after that or something, so the next day, we went to the Phushar and he said yes. I asked Gadong in Lhayü and he agreed. And the next day, Gadong really said he should get the position. So they did get something.   

**Q:**  How did Gadong give it to him? Did people read a bunch of names to Gadong?   

**A:**  No. Loseling wrote a bunch of names, maybe 15-20 names, whatever names they had and he picked up his seal and put it on somebody's name.   

**Q:**  Oh really?   

**A:**  That's that.   

**Q:**  Oh, he put the seal on?   

**A:**  He put the seal on somebody's name, and that was it.   

**Q:**  So he doesn't really read it?   

**A:**  He read it, but he may... They don't really read it in front of their eyes. They read it above their head, like this. We understand that they read it by their third eye or something. They throw the paper on their head and they pick up one seal and put it on, and then they throw it away with some sort of rice.   

**Q:**  So he couldn't know. I mean, normally he couldn't look at it and say, oh, there's Pema Dorje?  

**A:**  Yea. I mean, sort of. I think he knew it, but he didn't read it like normal people read it. It sort of goes like this. He puts the seal on the right name. Yes. Really. After that, we went and said thank you to Gadong and everybody and Gadong told me, "Well, you know we have had a very special relationship between you, your father, and myself, and you could easily come and stay with us. Yes. They do that, they do that, I mean that's not my own...   

**Q:**  But that's not in trance, that's when he's...   

**A:**  That's in trance...   

**Q:**  In trance...   

**A:**  They do that, I think the medium has no idea what's going on, I think they really don't know.   

**Q:**  I see. That's pretty interesting. And then what do you have to do? Do you give them gifts or something?   

**A:**  No, but we made Tshog [Tib.ཚོགས ] offerings on Lhatshe [Tib. ལྷ་ཚེས ]   

**Q:**  What's a Lhatshe?   

**A:**  On Lhatshe, they invite him to go into trance, so then maybe they give a Tshog offering or sometimes...   

**Q:**  A Tshog offering means what?   

**A:**  It means offering some Tshog (which is made from Tsampa, dry cheese and butter) and things like that.   

**Q:**  But that means giving some butter to make the tshog?   

**A:**  There is only Tshog. That's all. They enjoy that. And that happened.  

**Q:**  The, what other parts of the monastery do you think we should know about and talk about now, that we haven't already?   

**A:**  Why don't we talk about, we talk about... I don't know very much about the estate business... tape interruption... during the Mönlam and Tshongjö (Prayer Festivals), especially during the Tshongjö, the shengo and chagdamba will always ask them (the oracles) to go into trance to settle big cases...   

**Q:**  Oh really?   

**A:**  They do.   

**Q:**  I still don't understand this. I mean, let's say that if a person doesn't like the settlement, then what stops them from after Mönlam, going back to the government and saying, we don't like the settlement?   

**A:**  Sighs. Next year, the shengo comes back. It might not necessarily be the same shengo, but they try to defend the earlier shengo's decision. It’s sort of holding one's kind of loyalty (lagya [Tib. ལ་རྒྱ ] to the monastery, and if government revises it, then the Shengo will revise it back the next year.   

**Q:**  Lagya is spelled how?   

**A:**  [Tib. ལ་རྒྱ ] its like some kind of protection (of) your own authority, though it’s not as an individual. And they can revise back and go back and then if government tries to do it again, then the monastery can come and ask, "What are you doing?" So it can lead to trouble. The government tried to encourage the shengo later. Later, it became much more sophisticated, By the mid (19)40s, 50s, I think, especially in the 50s, when they came under Phala Drönyerchemmo, it become very, very popular. Drönyerchemmo was powerful by then. He tried to manipulate the Shengo not to make decisions much. Where there are small things where they can make some money and make decisions, make decisions, he let them do that, but when big cases started coming up, I think he intervened immediately with the Shengo who. The Yigsang and the Kashag would tell the Drönyerchemmo and the Drönyerchemmo will tell the shengo not to make these decisions. They were (afraid) of the Drönyerchemmo somehow, as he represented the Dalai Lama, so...   

**Q:**  The...   

**A:**  They're not afraid of (unclear ).   

**Q:**  Did people come to the shengo and say, it's Mönlam soon can you take a case, can you settle it, that kind of stuff. Was that kind of stuff done?   

**A:**  I think they did it. In the case of the Shatra [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] fight, remember, in our history interview Shatra was saying that his son was hoping to get the shengo and ask him if they can whip Gyala [Tib. རྒྱལ་ལགས]. They were going to give him what, 100 dotse [Tib. རྒྱལ་ལགས] or something [as a gift]...   

**Q:**  I don't remember that...   

**A:**  Gyala...   

**Q:**  Gyala is who?   

**A:**  Shatra's manager. He was very well known: Chandzö Gyala.   

**Q:**  When was this? I don't remember this? Like which story was this?   

**A:**  I remember Shatra telling me, so what else is in the tape or...   

**Q:**  It may not be in the tape.   

**A:**  Or maybe it was just gossip talk... Whatever. So Gyala said, what is Shatra's (mother) name, that woman's name, I forget, anyway, she had asked the shengo to lash Gyala. If you can lash Gyala, just lie him down on the floor. The shengo was going to make 100 dotse. So the shengo was getting ready and by that time Taglungdra Chandzö [Tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག་ཕྱག་མཛོད] had just become chandzö and it was his first year and that's the way you know Shatra is close to Taglungdra. Shatra Kungö went to Taglungdra and said that after becoming gegö (unclear) he was bit different, I think it was some around there he mentioned. So he went there to stop Gyala getting whipped. And, umm, the chandzö didn't act very fast and then one of Shatra's servents came on, and sort of burst into the room where Taglungdra chandzö and Shatra were talking and he started prostrating, saying, "Please do something otherwise now they are already starting, and they will start lashing." Call somebody. Then somebody went immediately to the shengo, so when they went there, at that time, he was about to start and didn't really get started. They got there just on time. So they could manipulate thing from on top.   

**Q:**  Yeah, interesting. Hmmmm... There must be some incentive to do, it because you'll be able to settle a case quickly.   

**A:**  Yes. I mean you get to settle quickly and the monks don't take so much (gift) anyway. And you give 100 dotse, it is a huge amount, right. I mean it's really like a million dollars or something... So, they don't need that much money. They don't it for that much money and there's no complications; they will just say, “Yes” or “No,” or something... The government, however, will do another way which will take a long time and you know all this sort of thing, so... there was a great incentive for (unclear ). It’s almost like here, you know, in the American people's court. On T.V. you see, I think something like that.   

**Q:**  A small claims court.   

**A:**  A small claims court or something like that.   

**Q:**  Ok, that's that, now. What else should we talk about?   

**A:**  We didn't talk about much about the debate sessions, chöra [Tib. ཆོས་ར], did we?   

**Q:**  We didn't talk much about mitsen [Tib. མི་ཚན]?   

**A:**  I don't have much knowledge about mitsen. Its on a smaller scale than a Khamtsen.  

**Q:**  It’s within the Khamtsen.   

**A:**  Within the Khamtsen, but some mitsen have a different person belonging to different Khamtsen become a mitsen , they would talk like Böpashung [Tib. བོད་པ་གཞུང]. I think. Didn't we talk about Böpashung? Böpashung is a mitsen, but its members come from a lot of different Khamtsen. Böpazhung will stand by itself.   

**Q:**  Yeah, they invite people, that's the one that invites people in? To be members?   

**A:**  Yeah, yes. Getting in [is valuable) because that’s one way to become a Shengo, one door, one way to get to the Shengo position. Some people go in that. A lot of shagtsang [Tib. ཤག་ཚང ] (monk households) will become a member of Böpashung. Böpashung is a wealthy mitsen because there are wealthy shagtsang who are members and they put money in or whatever it is. This Böpazhung is a very wealthy mitsen. Okay, did we talk about the Riji council [Tib. རི་སྤྱི]?   

**Q:**  Yeah.   

**A:**  And we talked about Laji council [Tib. བླ་སྤྱི] a little bit. We didn't talk much about the Tratsang. We didn't talk much about the Phodrang Deba [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ] and the Chökhang.  

**Q:**  Yeah, why don't we talk about some of them or why don't we talk about what kind of work people did and what you did and what your chandzö did? Whether the chandzö came and asked you everything or how much you knew about what was happening, all that kind of stuff...   

**A:**  Oh, practically I know nothing about it... and umm, I was young, of course, and I do know, I do know things that I need to know, so I really don't know much about anything...   

**Q:**  Like when you say, things you need to know, what's that mean?...   

**A:**  Where I'm going, what book I'm reading, who's going to be the teacher, who's going to be, things like that. And uh, very limited...   

**Q:**  This Kyongla Rinpoche's book, (he said) his chandzö and those kind of people were always saying, were always trying to encourage him saying that you need people to think well of you, so you have to study hard because people will think you're a bad lama or that kind of stuff. Were people always telling you that?   

**A:**  All the time.   

**Q:**  Always trying to motivate you...make you feel guilty for not studying.   

**A:**  They make you to do both ways... they try to encourage you and also they try to say all the people are saying bad things about you... this and that and this and that and all funny things, you know, all funny things... they'll threaten you and do all sorts of things, you know. I used to be threatened that if I did something disgraceful, they're were going to put an empty skin container for putting butter [Tib. མར་སྐོགས] on my head and take it out monthly. Nobody does that, but I used to be afraid of that all the time. They take the butter out and put it on the head and take it off. That was the biggest threat I ever got... And they encouraged you all the time, and said, oh, that's very good and you're wonderful and at the same time, they would frighten you and in my case, in total, I think I have more of the threats than encouragement... (They would be) threatening me all the time... And the more I become older, the more threats. The threats they said were mostly saying things like that you have built such a great name and people will respect you, but if you will (blow it) you will never know it and this and that and this was one way.   

**Q:**  What kind of things were you doing that annoyed them? Like not studying, or what?   

**A:**  Not studying or playing or not reading properly or not teaching properly... in other words I have a large number of people coming to learn from me and I understand a little, I mean, people around me even sort of build that up and for...it helps me to learn better by teaching others. And, ummm... its funny, it helps me to build myself better by teaching others. So I do it and when I don't teach very well or something, then I get it.   

**Q:**  Like teach them what, I don't understand.   

**A:**  The subject, whatever...   

**Q:**  You teach other monks or lay people?   

**A:**  Yes, other monks. Monks who are studying and in the debate system; all sorts of things, there are a lot of things. One after another. You know, sometimes it is quite busy. Early morning, you have things to memorize for your teacher, then sometimes you go to Traja (College Prayer session). Sometimes you don't go to the College’s Tea, (traja [Tib. གྲྭ་ཇ]. During the Traja period, I usually went to Lochö [Tib. བློ་ཆོས] Rinpoche's room to learn things from Lochö Rinpoche and um, also to repeat what he taught me, next day – previous day...   

**Q:**  Are you Lopön [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན] ?   

**A:**  No, I'm not. Lochö Rinpoche is my personal teacher. And there's another Rinpoche from Dema [Tib.ལྡན་མ]. The two of us are alone during the Traja period. Then in the evening, Lochö Rinpoche will take a group, whatever he taught in group, whether you understand it or not, you will know tomorrow and what debate we did and repeat the debate. And what we learned and things like that.   

**Q:**  I don't understand, he'll give it in the group and he'll give you the same thing during the day.   

**A:**  And he will ask questions about what he taught during the group session to see whether we understand and then if you can you debate on that in the Chöra (debating grove) to show what was our understanding, what more did I gain, what more information did I collect from what books. Things like that. He will go through things in more detail, the next, when we are having the tsampa dough, Pag [Tib. སྤགས] for breakfast and during the traja period. If you don't go to traja, then you have to go during the day time to the Chöra session that is called nyinchö [Tib. ཉིན་ཆོས] for debating. After the Nyinchö, there'll be a little bit of time to rest and then you have a group of people coming to learn from you.   

**Q:**  And why would they be coming to learn from you? You are only 15,16, right?   

**A:**  Yeah, but they come.   

**Q:**  Because you're a Rinpoche?   

**A:**  No. I'm not bad in subjects, so... I believe, that's why they come.   

**Q:**  So how would you teach them? I mean, is it...   

**A:**  Ah, (I would) read the root text and then give explanations and give different opinions of the different persons.   

**Q:**  Give opinions of...   

**A:**  Opinions of the different authors and...   

**Q:**  And then they have to see...   

**A:**  Then, you also debate with them and of their understanding of the debating system and umm, and try to say read this and read that and this and that and then some sentence of the book said, this, this, this, But somehow contradict this and this and that and that and all of this and that.   

**Q:**  So if you weren't doing it seriously, how would you be doing it? What would be the difference?   

**A:**  I don't think people who are telling me, "You're not doing this well" know what they're talking about. To tell you the truth, they, I think, keep on guessing and try to tell me good or bad and also their opinions. I think to tell the truth, 90% of the time they don't even know what they're talking about. So they have to say something when they tell it. Maybe they're looking at people smiling or grumbling or whatever when they leave, maybe that's what they're doing, who knows?   

**Q:**  But like, did the chandzö comes and asks you stuff, like "Should we do this or do that?"   

**A:**  Nnn...about big, big decisions, sometime they do... they don't say "Should we?" They say, "We think we are doing this good and we're thinking of doing that."   

**Q:**  Like what would an example be?   

**A:**  Like, if we are going to buy estate, yeah, take that estate here. Or remove this person from that...   

**Q:**  Buying an estate? Who's he buying an estate from?   

**A:**  Oh, yes, sometimes you can get it, on loan, on lease, [Tib. བོགས་མ]. About things like that, you know, sometimes from government asking all sorts of things... And then also maybe it’s better to do geshes (unclear) now. Things like that. That type of big things... And then, of course, the Chinese had been asking me to visit China. I would have liked to go, but they wouldn't allow me. They kept on asking me, saying, have you heard, have they decided to ask you, but you have to tell them no. And this and that.   

**Q:**  I mean, like... if you want to buy something like a dog, I mean, its, you could just go buy the dog?   

**A:**  No, no, you have to ask.   

**Q:**  You have to ask who?   

**A:**  The chandzö or somebody there; somebody who is senior.   

**Q:**  So, so how would you call in the chandzö?   

**A:**  Yes, who's there and say, to them can I buy that? And they say we have to ask chandzö; we have to ask somebody else where the money comes from... you know, so, that's it. In my case I was completely limited. I don't have anything so I can't do anything. Even if you are hiding something, somewhere, they will find it and take it away... yeah, I mean they will take it away.   

**Q:**  Now, when did that change? At what age, like?   

**A:**  I don't remember it was changing while I'm still in Tibet... a little bit of change, yes... probably beginning to see things and I say, well, I’d like to buy that and they used to collect money from the chandzö, and they pay of course. They may not like it, but they pay and then as I became older, right, I became like 17, 18, and then I'm (doing) much more and they don't tell me much. First don't do that and that, and then I keep on repeating so they don't tell me anything and sometimes they say, "There's no money." If you buy another one, there's no money, they said that for ( ) month, I kept on buying things and they keep on ...   

**Q:**  What kind of things...   

**A:**  Oh, like the monk’s lower garment, the shamthab [Tib.ཤམ་ཐབས] or the monk’s shawl or zan [Tib. གཟན] or some different clothes. It was not buying things for a few cents here and there, is was becoming like for a couple of dotse.   

**Q:**  And in Tibet of course, you never have to pay, you just have to say I'll buy it and...   

**A:**  Yes, and they will send it to you and somehow they [his labrang] give the money, right? So that's what I do and uh... I go to the Barkor Street [Tib. བར་སྐོར] and see certain different things and I say, okay, that's...   

**Q:**  But if you want to go to the Barkor, did you have to ask anybody?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Even when you were seventeen?   

**A:**  Umm, then I could say, I'm going to Barkor and somebody will follow you...in disguise as a servant. They actually spy on you, on what you're doing and where you go and what...   

**Q:**  You don't have to ask anybody in the monastery when you go, do you?   

**A:**  No, none whatsoever. You may go. It was only in the house you controlled, but not by the monks. Regarding the monastery we are totally relaxed, totally relaxed, yes.   

**Q:**  So, when you go out...   

**A:**  I do remember when I was young, they even used to (come to tell me) what clothes I can wear for what day, totally. And then later I think I began to change that as I became older. I do remember about 12,13 (years old), there've been changed. I can select a few, but not all of my clothes, but they sort of put it out, divided clothes into like the best dress up (sabtrö chenmo [Tib. གཟབ་སྤྲོས་ཆེན་མོ] and just dressed up (sabtrö [Tib.གཟབ་སྤྲོས ]), and the mediocre dress up (barsab [Tib. བར་གཟབ ]) . They sort of divided it like that, you know, and so I can wear it, anything I want out of that (category)  

**Q:**  Barsab is what?...  

**A:**  Sort of mediocre, better dressed, that type of thing, and among them I can choose any thing. So I started choosing sabtrö, and they showed a lot of displeasure as that's not the right thing to do and they give you a long lecture but...   

**Q:**  They give you a long lecture, why didn't they...   

**A:**  Saying it was not right, because you have another occasion so what you are going to wear there better than this if you wear it all the time. That sort of thing and that's what they lecture me about. And ummm... I began to select what (saddles) I like and when I like it and what decorations that I wanted to put on, this and that, by about 14, 15, 16... and by seventeen I started buying things at the dotse level, but by 11, 12, I have to beg every bit of money from everywhere and I even tell the shopkeepers to give money, but they won't give you...   

**Q:**  They won't give you, eh?   

**A:**  They say yes, yes, but they do not deliver it. (they think he’s a) kid, right? Unless I have a little money to pay with … By about by 15, 16, 17, that all changed.   

**Q:**  Did you ever ask, say, the chandzö, like to let me see the accounts?   

**A:**  No., I never asked that. I never asked that. I don't think they have accounts... I don't believe they have accounts.   

**Q:**  How do they know how much money they have? They must have books that say so-and-so is due, and...   

**A:**  Oh, what is due, yes! But how much money they have, I don't think there's a book. I don't think that they write it in a book. But when money is loaned to somebody then they ( unclear) document it and then they document it when it comes back, but whatever is there is there, I don't think, I don't think they have any... book. I don't think they maintain the account of expenditures... small expenditures... so, so, even they sold like a hundred khel [Tib. ཁལ ] of barley, and they get the money, I think they just pool the money. I don't think they write it down... In my case, I really think so... I don't think they maintained an account. So what is there is there. And when they invest in some business, to some business people, then there is some document maintained. So and so has been given such and such dotse.  

**Q:**  Would they ask you when they invested something?   

**A:**  Never. Never. But later I knew, they, sort of, you know, when I become like 18, 19 and that period they begin to telling me, so and so has labrang (unclear ), so and so has labrang (unclear ), so and so has labrang ( unclear), they don't tell me exact amount, but they say like we have a big amount or and have a small amount, or not much, etc. Something like that, they didn't give me exact numbers. I think they do when you are done with your geshe exam [Tib. དམ་བཅའ ]. After you went for one year in the Tantric College, Lama Gyüpa [Tib. བླ་མ་རྒྱུད་པ], at about that time, I think then they had a normal system. The chandzö began to put you in the know about economics. Not in control but...   

**Q:**  Yeah, but if you wanted control, you could just take...   

**A:**  You can, then, (get) the chandzö off. I could even do that by age 17, 18, but I never did, but at 17, 18 if you don't like the chandzö, you can say Go, yeah.   

**Q:**  So when you were, say 17 or 18, how many people were working in your Labrang?   

**A:**  In Drepung there were three or four. In the south (Lhoka) there were quite a number. I don't know how many, but quite a lot. And I'm in a small, very small Labrang and we don't have any basic monastery Shigön [Tib. གཞིས་དགོན], we don't have that at all. Then we had people working in the business field... like three or four, so I don't know how many we had, maybe 15. Maybe... not counting the corvee laborers (ula [Tib. འུལ་ལག]) and that type of thing. So maybe about that much... not monks... mostly my people are mostly my chandzö’s relations. All the business people and everybody they were relations of my chandzö and a few other persons.   

**Q:**  But, in the monastery, there are those four...   

**A:**  Four or five, maybe sometimes six...   

**Q:**  And they would be what kind of people?   

**A:**  They'll pick up people from the khamtsen. Somebody from here, there.   

**Q:**  They wouldn't ask you what do you think of so and so?   

**A:**  No. I don't really remember. I do remember it changing, but though all the changes that were then taking place when I was young, I don't remember of any changes taking place after I was 15. In the four years before that, quite a number of changes took place. And they simply were telling me so and so has left. Or so and so has (joined). So and so is here, but so and so was not good. So and so is maybe good. But watch out.   

**Q:**  And joined (the Labrang), how did they say joined?..   

**A:**  [Tib. བླ་བྲང་ལ་ཡོང་པ་རེད]. They came to the Labrang.   

**Q:**  What did those people do in the Labrang?   

**A:**  Can't think of many things. I don't think they did anything. They cleaned up, they gave me food to eat...   

**Q:**  One of them had to cook also...   

**A:**  Yeah, some cooked, some... we didn't have somebody named cook... [Ours] was a small set up. But later we did. Yes, yes we did have one later. We did have a cook when I moved from the small house to the bigger house in (Kharika). Then we had a cook and somebody who looked after the horses and all that in the monastery itself. But I knew mostly the persons who were dealing with me. Someone always was there to wake you up or take you out or put you back or put your clothes on or put your shoes on, or clean the room or tell you to now you have to go here, or there and do this and do that. That I had all the time. When they changed, then they will tell you...   

**Q:**  That's called a söpön [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] isn’t it?  

**A:**  Yes, a söpön. (I remember) one söpön. The rest of them were called “pupil of the shag” or shagigitru [Tib. ཤག་གི་དགེ་ཕྲུག]   

**Q:**  Shagigitru   

**A:**  Shagigitru   

**Q:**  Well, that's like a part of the shag (apartment), no?   

**A:**  It’s a part of the shag, but they are not like a (part of the) shagtsang [Tib. ཤག་ཚང ].   

**Q:**  But they're not really...   

**A:**  They are not like a shagtsang type of thing. It is different. Shatsang are shared [by its members] but it was not like that here. It was not like that here. They didn't have any share at all [in the wealth of the shagtsang].   

**Q:**  Alright. Could you sometimes say when they are making Tsampa dough or bag [Tib. སྤགས ] for dinner, that I want momo?  

**A:**  Yeah, I can. I can, but I can't do it at the last minute. They will grumble and fight and do like they would fight.   

**Q:**  And can you invite over friends or other monks [yourself] or do you have to...   

**A:**  Until I was 15, I could not. It was not allowed. And even I invited somebody, they wouldn't even come, as they knew that very well. I was very well disciplined, so they won't come. They won't come until after I was 15. I could invite Urgyen la [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས]. If I wanted, he would come and he would talk and that is very, very, I don't know, some, that was my relaxation when he comes. He sits there and talks and he has a way of talking, he acts, it’s like a movie to me. When he talks about people and all these things that I've been talking [to you about], I've heared from him... All different things. (Now) I mostly forgot. I should really, if I try to remember, I can really remember a lot. Or cases that he dealt with and things where he went and fought cases and when we went to the monastery representing Loseling about what had happened and his arguments with abbot and chandzö and bungdzö and all this. You know, I mean, he used to come, I, sort of, all the time, asked him to come, come, come, come... and then, he sort of comes maybe once or twice a month. Not that much, but when he comes, I let somebody know and they don't like it because he's a big disturbance on me, but they, he comes anyway, so they grump a lot, but they say he's coming tomorrow and that sort of thing, and then when he comes, he comes something like about 10:15... in the morning... and then he sits the whole day until like 5 or 6, talking there and all the food served and things like that and then... by evening he leaves. So, it is big holiday for me.   

**Q:**  You didn't have to go to the debate grove (chöra) or...   

**A:**  I didn't have to do anything then, just sit there and listen. And I think he also came when there was no chöra. He came during that period and talks. He sat there and talked. He also used to go to the north, to chang [Tib. བྱང ], and he use to tell me all the stories before he left and after he came back. He would tells me all the stories...   

**Q:**  What was he doing in chang?   

**A:**  Oh, I think he went on business. Collecting [loans] for some manager. All sorts of things. I remember there was one called Rebe gyau [Tib. དབྲེ་པའི་རྒྱ་འུ ] of Sera Che. He was the leader of Chang Drachen [Tib. སྦྲ་ཆེན]. And there was the one called Drigung [Tib. འབྲི་གུང ] chandzö. He was made in charge of all this in Drachen and Urgyen la told me that he saw all of them in Drachen. He was around there too, you know? All these sorts of things, I have heard. So that's part of my life, really and umm... I began to get controlled, I don't...   

**Q:**  So most of your life was spent like what? You got up in the morning...   

**A:**  Got up in the morning, said my prayers and then began to memorize (texts)...   

**Q:**  Did you sleep in your own room or did other people sleep in the room?   

**A:**  I had my own room. Sometime one teacher slept there but most of the time, I'm alone, I'm supposed to get up inearly morning. Sometimes, a lot of times when I don't get up early, they used to bring a little stick and used to hit me. I used to sleep like this. As I remember, that was so painful...   

**Q:**  Oh, was it?   

**A:**  Oh, yeah. The moment you wake, it was painful... Yeah...   

**Q:**  What did you do after you did your prayers?   

**A:**  I went to say my prayers...   

**Q:**  That took how long?   

**A:**  Umm... an hour at most, 45 minutes, an hour, and then you begin to memorize, memorize… I used to...   

**Q:**  Do you get tea right away in the morning?   

**A:**  Well, tea started coming by itself. It was part of it. There were no breaks for tea. Tea came, tsamba came, everything cames. I just did nothing and just kept memorizing there. I kept on memorizing. I used to memorize a lot of pages, a lot of pages, a lot of pages, sometimes 12, 13, 14, 15.  

**Q:**  For the day?   

**A:**  Long before the Traja prayer assembly was over. And later on, like I think I remember about when I was 14 or 15, they used to just prick some needle through and give me like that. To memorize. Because I did memorize that much. And I don't know how many pages came up. Maybe somewhere between 12 and 15, so by the Traja, when the Traja was almost over, I had memorized them all.   

**Q:**  Did you forget these the next day?   

**A:**  No, you didn't. Because what happens, the rule is that you have to repeat it again in the evening. And then next morning, and the next day. And after three or four times, you don't forget it immediately. However, now I've forgotten all of it. Yes, really. Yeah, one doesn't forget it immediately, no. And then I used to cheat them, too. They used to come to see what I memorized, so they start to reading through it while I will say it myself. But sometimes I'll put it across the table since I knew how to read upside down....They didn't know that...   

**Q:**  No kidding?   

**A:**  I did that a lot.   

**Q:**  How could you read upside down?   

**A:**  I don't know, when you're used to it, you can read it. In the years, especially when I was in the Uma [Tib. དབུ་མ ] class, the first year in Uma, I cheated a lot. Somehow they begin to come to know and the second year, they started picking it up like this, so could not cheat anymore. I think it took them one year to...   

**Q:**  ...To figure out.   

**A:**  To figure out, that's why I think they don't know what they're talking about. They didn't have anybody very well educated sitting with you, so, they were doing some kind of activities, just by making sure Rinpoche is memorizing that and that.   

**Q:**  And so then you go to the chöra in the morning or what?   

**A:**  No, then you begin the nyinchö, the daytime debate session...that I have to go to. And, there's more debate. And after nyinchö, people convene for learning, the junior ones, the beginning ones, and then I think got about 2, 3 groups, not every day but alternatively or every third or fourth day, I don't know how it works. But they usually come in and you have to teach them. I have to prepare myself to teach them properly. I used to do that, I was very careful. And the normal system of the teachers teaching you is the only, they will teach you the basis of the root text and then whatever the Panchen Sonam Dragpa [Tib. pan chen bsod dams grags pa ] indicates Loseling has special views.   

**Q:**  So all this time, did you have playmates or people or that kind of stuff?   

**A:**  Not very much. Ummm, when I was very young, I do remember, one of my teachers used to have a lot of students, young ones put outside my door. They had those, and that Shovala that was hanging down; it was sort of a little folding desk type of thing. They hung it down from the wall, and the teacher would read, memorize, and do things like that on that (desk).   

**Q:**  Was that inside the class?   

**A:**  Yeah. Sort of you know, you get to (meet to those) kids, a little bit. Not very much.   

**Q:**  I don't understand... Shovala means what?   

**A:**  Shovala is some bamboo... sort of cardboard decorated with a (unclear ) and a bamboo stick, so it just sort of becomes a folder for books to keep them inside. It has a thread so it can go up to the ceiling again. Roll it up when you are not using it, then you can pull it down. And when you are reading it you can let it down and within it this and they adjust level to the students height ...   

**Q:**  So what has this got to do with other kids, though?   

**A:**  They're also being taught how to read by the same teacher. At the beginning level, reading was taught to us for a very, very long time, a very, very long time. It makes you know things very well. And then, they sort of made you spell (words) all the time. I mean you spent years together just to make you read it, and keep on spelling...   

**Q:**  Like how?   

**A:**  Like the spellings like garatatra dra shabjudru [Tib. ག་ར་བཏགས་གྲ་གྲ་ཞབས་ཀྱུ་གྲུ] etc. That’s the way you have to go, then they make you do that for years...   

**Q:**  What's the book?   

**A:**  Any book, any text book.   

**Q:**  Oh, any book.   

**A:**  And the more and more they give you, the more and more difficult are the texts and the manuscripts they let you read. And then afterwards, the manuscripts have this sign of hiding, so they make you read that.   

**Q:**  What's that mean?   

**A:**  It mean a lot of them are crossed there, that means you have to keep on guessing what the word is...   

**Q:**  Oh really.   

**A:**  Yes, and that is where you get the most beatings and there is where you learn the most.   

**Q:**  I see, you've got to figure out the missing word.   

**A:**  You have to figure out the missing words. And I think you can get along well and figure out quite a lot after a while.   

**Q:**  Who is in charge of this?   

**A:**  Oh, there's some specialized teacher, they'll come.   

**Q:**  Oh, yeah?   

**A:**  Yeah, they do that.   

**Q:**  What are they called?   

**A:**  Just, gen [Tib. རྒན], no nothing special, just gen.   

**Q:**  But, this was for you privately or for a bunch of students?   

**A:**  Private. A bunch of students don't go through that. There's one private. And when you are not guessing right, they beat you like anything. With anything they have in hand. And, you have to keep on guessing it. And, that was tough, that was really tough. After some time, they, like 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 across will come together [be missing] and then you have to guess the whole thing.   

**Q:**  He's got a text book really.   

**A:**  He has some kind of, yeah, it's a text book, like Pema Kathang [Tib. པད་མ་བཀའ་ཐང ] or...   

**Q:**  But it's handwritten or what is it?   

**A:**  Handwritten, total handwriting, maybe there will be crosses or something and mostly wherever there’s a cross and then you keep on guessing it everyday. And you don't know how to write it but you have to say the right thing. And when its not the right thing you get hit on the back. Like that I think I spent a year.   

**Q:**  Wow, when you were how old like?   

**A:**  Seven or eight.   

**Q:**  I see, that's before you start like Chöra and...   

**A:**  Well, Chöra was also going side by side at that time, I don't have anybody teaching, I mean to get lesson from, that was picked up in between. They never taught me grammar like that but they say it is a disturbance for me and that’s why you have a lot of it...   

**Q:**  It’s the what kind of form?   

**A:**  It is disturbing for your study.   

**Q:**  So how did you learn it then, I mean you obviously learned it...   

**A:**  I learned by myself.   

**Q:**  Oh really.   

**A:**  You have to hide all this. Not officially to learn it. So by hiding...   

**Q:**  So how would you even get the book?   

**A:**  Oh, I did get books, books are there. You can pick up anything...   

**Q:**  They're where?   

**A:**  They are in my room, there're a number books, in any of them and umm, the persons who are watching me, the later one, doesn't know what I'm reading, has no idea. As long as you are looking at some paper that's okay. So that's why. So I can sort of learn all this by myself...   

**Q:**  And did you have people come to you for blessings and that kind of stuff?   

**A:**  Oh, yes.   

**Q:**  From what age, from small on?   

**A:**  I don't remember much when I was small. When small only your friends and anyones with relations with the previous incarnation or with the peasant villagers and families who have some business deals, things like that may be coming occasionally, otherwise not. I remember Kabshöpa [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] [came one day... They were very busy saying Kabshöpa is coming and they put up a little seat for him in front of me with a higher seat, and they told me, get up, don't come out of your seat, just get up and touch your forehead and then you say “Kungö, Please have a seat”. [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་བཞུགས་གདན་འཇགས] and then don't talk too much.   

**Q:**  Get up meaning? Sit up?   

**A:**  I stand up, yeah, But don't come out of your seat, standing up.   

**Q:**  Oh, on your throne, on the throne.   

**A:**  I mean it’s not really a throne but you know...   

**Q:**  On the cushion.   

**A:**  Your regular cushion and then ask him, after that, you remember you give the scarf and all this and if he is prostrating, say, “Please don’t prostrate.” [Tib. སྐུ་ཕྱག་མ་གནང] If he doesn't prostrate, don't say anything. The teacher, I mean, like, you know, they duplicated everything before, with prostrating, without prostrating, making sure that I did the right thing, you know? They did that, and then they taught me to say, “How are you? How many children do you have? [Tib. སྐུ་གཟུགས་བདེ་པོ་ཡིན་པས།ཨ་ཝ་ག་ཤོད་ཡོད་དམ ]”Arent you tired from coming to the monastery? [Tib. དེ་རིང་དགོན་པར་ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་ནང་བར་སྐུ་མཉེལ་མ་སོང་ནམ ] ” All these sort of standard things you say and if he asks you questions then you answer...   

**Q:**  What did Kabshöpa come for?  

**A:**  Huh?, some blessings. He did that type of thing. I mean, he knew I'm sort of an incarnate lama who can have better chances, he believed that way, that fellow was so, so tricky, you don't know it. He was really that way, he was. He planned that way, this can be useful. So for me, going to Drepung, and give him a couple of dotse is nothing, but you know, I know him and he know me and I think he built up like that a lot [of connections/relations]. Even to Trijang Rinpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ ] well, then he kind of even did it in the monastery and built financial ties, he knew whose...   

**Q:**  And then what kind of stuff did he ask you, anything?   

**A:**  Well, he asked me, what are you reading, and where are you and then how do you... oh he asked a lot of funny questions. I remember all his questions, even now.   

**Q:**  Like what?   

**A:**  He asks why you are doing … I heard you are doing very, very well in your studies and everybody respects you and you did a very wonderful thing in the Jang Günchö last year. And I heard some outstanding thing last year, and the year before that. A lot of people talked about it.   

**Q:**  In the debate?   

**A:**  In the debate in Jang Günchö. And the name came up and then coming back in the Loseling I also had a big strong debate then, even when I went to the Mönlam, both Trijang Rinpoche and, they have heard already. All this Kabshöpa had heard and came running. And he came and said I was so wonderful and can be very useful, and he is very grateful, Buddhism in general, Tsongkhapa's teachings and this and that but are you also (simultaneously) paying attention to the Lamrim, I say oh, yes, and then he asked me several questions that he knows (and which I know) and he was very impressed and he once asked me one question, he said "What do you think, why are a lot of monks are going to Jang Günchö these days?" A lot of people go to Jang Günchö in that year and earlier they don't have much, a lot of people goes, he says, "Jang is a such a remote area and we have difficulty, why did so many people go there?" So I remember my answer, I said, "Number one, the tsema [Tib. ཚད་མ] the logic teaching debate are not usually done in the case of Loseling here, and it’s only done in Jang, so that is the major reason. Out of five subjects. And then the second reason I said was that there are a lot of people coming from all the three great monasteries and others and lot of more ideas come pouring in... so that is a great help. It is very impressive, literally and physically and he immediately commented, he said he immediately, “Even though you are a small child, your thought is very large. [Tib. ཨ་ཝ་ཆུང་ཆུང་ཡིན་ན་ཡང་དགོངས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ཞེ་དྲག་རེད]” These were questions that was not prepared and he kept on asking me questions which were not prepared, but he knew very well and was very impressed.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see. But don't people study that in Loseling?   

**A:**  You don't.   

**Q:**  You don't?   

**A:**  You don't.   

**Q:**  I thought that was the main (thing).   

**A:**  Yes, but this is something which you do it on your own, not...   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  The Lamrim is a shorter version of a thing that should be studied. It is a shorter, abbreviated version for, according to the typical monastery geshe’s language, it is for the mediocre educated peoples ( ). It is a shorter, abbreviated form of... what you study, the pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན ] for eight years. But a lot of people don't know that and also when they reach Lamrim they know nothing about it and then they have to go and ask somebody else. Which is very stupid because they don't, they're unable to put two and two together and that is normally in the teachings, Kachö [Tib. བཀའ་ཆོས] by the Kyabje [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྗེ ] (Trijang) Rinpoche who used to say all the time that's why Kabshöpa was repeating that. That's what, you know and also he knew the subject and so he had asked questions on that subject, I didn't know the subject he was going to ask, so I didn't know the lay out of some things, but in the subject that he asked I did know, I did have an answer for it. I suppose, when I remember Kabshöpa, I think he was the first one.   

**Q:**  And then he gets served tea and that...   

**A:**  He gets served tea and he sat there for a while, and started talking with the chandzö and he start talking to other people...   

**Q:**  He was already a shape [Tib. ཞབས་པད ] then?   

**A:**  He was not a shape, he's whatever it is.   

**Q:**  He was Tsipön [Tib. རྩིས་དཔོན].   

**A:**  I don' t think he was Tsipön he, I don't think he was wearing some kind of yellow thing, I remember, so maybe Rinpoche or whatever, he's wearing yellow. After that, then a few kudrag (government officials) started coming. Following Kabshöpa, Trunyichenmo Angula [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ་ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] started coming... I think they're building it, the foundation ….  

**Q:**  Your Labrang people? Oh, I see, those people...   

**A:**  Thinking that in the future, this will be somebody... and so, can be very influential or powerful or whatever they thinking, who knows? So they pick up this young, bright incarnate lama, a few of them, they build a relationship since, you know, so, I mean, think of it, you know, they're ... politicians, right?   

