# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Cleveland, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted, recorded in English and Tibetan translated completely into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་དབྲེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 50  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of the 10th Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this long and detailed interview, the interviewee provides a discussion on the steps involved in entering the monastery from an early age, providing examples from his own life to illustrate certain details of this process. Included in this interview are discussions of the relationship between the sheyngo and geyog during Mönlam and Tsongjö and issues surrounding the geyog's position and money-making activities, and the sheyngo's powers to confiscate property.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_07/M_0009_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  So you were saying, then, that that's the style of how the sheyngo make a lot of money.   

**A:**  Yes, sheyngo make a lot of money, sheyngo in addition to that, you know, during the Mönlam, sheyngo's best income is in the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  From Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes and a lot of cases that have been pending in Lhasa for years, sometimes sheyngo will decide that within two weeks.   

**Q:**  They can do that?   

**A:**  Oh, yes, they have twenty-one days they have all the right to do.   

**Q:**  I see, I see, you mean even like over shiga and phashi and that.   

**A:**  Oh yes they can do any sort of thing but the sheyngo's decision may be overturned but, but they can.   

**Q:**  I see, so that is a lot of power.   

**A:**  Oh, its too lot power and the sheyngo will say even they say-- Above the two of us there's only one and a half man -- the regent they'll count it as half person. so even true today.   

**Q:**  One is Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, one is Dalai Lama and the other one's the regent...one and half persons, that's all.   

**Q:**  How do they say that in Tibetan?   

**A:**  [Tib. མི་ང་གཉིས་ཀྱི་གོང་ལ་མི་གཅིག་དང་ཕྱེད་ཀ་མ་གཏོགས་མེད].   

**Q:**  That's hysterical.   

**A:**  They don't care diplomat relations, they don't care anything, that's why they say the Nepalese, you remember in the history we have this incident of some one [called] Nyima [Tib. ཉི་མ] something and the thief called Kuma Kangtsug [Tib. རྐུན་མ་རྐང་བཙུགས].   

**Q:**  [called] Gyepo [Tib. རྒྱལ་པོ] something.   

**A:**  Gyepo something and all this, they broke into the Nepalese Office and they even turned down the Nepalese down a couple times and they go and complain to the foreign office and all this but every decisions over. sheyngo's are strange, you know, one of the sheyngo's beats up this interpreter for Tan Guansan, the Chinese General, he lashed the interpreter of the Tan Guansan. I think this is 1950, not so late, I think 1955 or 56, somewhere around there.   

**Q:**  During the Mönlam?   

**A:**  During the Mönlam, Tan Guansan's probably number two or three persons in the Chinese whole setup. And he started riding bicycling near the courtyard, [of the Jokhang] khyamra [Tib. འཁྱམས་ར] and he got a hold of him and straightway, without talk, straightaway 50 lashes. By the time they complain goes up and down, he's already lashed down. And the dewashung can say "oh monks do all sorts of rash things." [Tib. གྲྭ་པས་ཐོ་ལོང་མོ་ལོང་བྱས་པ་རེད] That's all, what can they do?   

**Q:**  And that's what the thirteenth Dalai Lama told Sir Charles Bell, the monks are hard to control them, they do what they do.   

**A:**  Yes, they're really hard to control sometimes, they do whatever they want to do, even t the secretary, the cabinent secretary, Dumra's [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར] daughter was lashed by one of the sheyngo just for wearing some...I don't know...some shoes or something, some foreign made shoes [hin. jur ta].   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  Ah. sometime in the fifties, I think in the fifties, and by the time Dumra came to know about it, he started to run to drönyerchemmo and drönyerchemmo didn't have time to do his tea as he had to rush and run to sheyngo to get stopped. You know, later in the fifties, the drönyerchemmo has a lot of control over sheyngo, where he really tried to control sheyngo very tight. Because, otherwise, sheyngo misbehave a lot. So he have to run, personally, rather than send a message, or something, and by the time drönyerchemmo, reached, the poor girl is already lashed 200 already out.   

**Q:**  On her buttoks?   

**A:**  Yes, 200 hundred, so, thats, I mean you can't take that back. What else can you do? sheyngo also knew that they are going to run [to stop them] so they do it quickly, decision quickly, lashed out quickly, throw it out quickly, finished by the time someone comes to.   

**Q:**  So the disciplinary officer in the tratsang is the gegö.   

**A:**  Gegö, tsogchen is the sheyngo, and in the khamtsen is khamtsen gegen.   

**Q:**  But under the sheyngo is the geyog.   

**A:**  There are two systems, during the Mönlam and Tsongjö, there are extended sheyngo staff and everyday is a lesser staff; and when the extended period under sheyngo, two chagdamba [Tib. ཕྱག་དམ་པ] will come and under the chagdamba, two nangma will come and under the nangma, two chabril will come. So that is one set. So then parallel to chagdamba, there's the shanggo shingnyer [Tib. ཞང་གོ་ཤིང་གཉེར] comes. Its a parallel to chagdamba, but under sheyngo. So, if you draw tree, sheyngo will be here, and then comes chagdamba and then shanggo shingnyer . So under shanggo shingnyer, which actually is a fire wood nyerba, there are 19 geyog come. Under chagdamba, there are two nangma, under two nangma, there are two chabril. And under chabril...I don't know...jama and things like that, I think. So and all the thabyog will come under here when it is extended, it comes under geyog. So, this is the kitchen staff, actually.   

**Q:**  The geyog? or what's the kitchen staff?   

**A:**  Shingnyer is in kitchen, so the geyog are have to based in the kitchen. So, that is,.. and during the normal period, everyday period, the chagdamba are not there. So the nangma and chabril will stay. sheyngo and nangma and... each sheyngo will bring each nangma, there will be two nangma and each nangma will bring each chabril, there will be two chabril. So the nangma is the sort of, you know, normally the sheyngo will bring their own personal person, a shagtsang fellow. And the young ones, the younger ones were chabril, whose job is to carry his stick and hat and shout "Oh chojo" [Tib. ?] when the sheyngo is going around. 2 sheyngo, 2 chagdamba, 2 shanggo shingyer, 2 nangma, 19 geyog, 2 chabril.   

**Q:**  He has to shout that everywhere?   

**A:**  Everywhere sheyngo goes they shout. [yes] "Oh Chojo" they shout all the time, everywhere. Wherever he is going.   

**Q:**  Even in Lhasa, during Mönlam?   

**A:**  Oh yes, more so. Yes, they try to show off too.   

**Q:**  And he's got this big long thing. What's it called?   

**A:**  Jagyug [Tib. ལྕགས་རྒྱུག], iron stick. Big long Jagyug. And the chabril will carry it on the shoulder like this, sort of like you're carrying the gun. Soldiers carry the gun type of thing. And put the hat of the sheyngo on top of the jagyug and then they go walk, that's how they walk. And they keep on shouting "Oh, chojo" all the time. I think in Lhasa, during the Mönlam period, I think geyog will carry rather than the chabril, this stick, geyog will carry rather than chabril.   

**Q:**  What do the geyog do the rest of the time?   

**A:**  Geyog are the assistant to those, so they will see whether the monks are behaving properly or not properly. The geyog have a lot of work, a lot of work to do. And the number one, every meeting where the monks are behaving or not behaving is in there, is anybody fighting or anybody doing something mischeivious, the geyog are responsible to all this to see that, and then the geyog have to go and get all the incarnate lamas, tsogchen trüku, everybody's house they have to go.   

**Q:**  To do what?   

**A:**  To collect their cloak [Tib. ཟླ་གམ] and again to make a ways [clear the path], geyog will bring a big stick and say "pan gyog she " "pan gyog she " [Tib. ཕར་རྒྱུག་ཤེ] that means, everybody get away, get away.   

**Q:**  I see, when the incarnate lamas going somewhere?   

**A:**  Whan I go there, one geyog will come definately.   

**Q:**  When you go where?   

**A:**  During the Mönlam, or for tshog [prayer meeting] wherever I go, geyog will come, Mönlam, so the geyog will carry the robe and stick in hand.   

**Q:**  What do you mean the robe?   

**A:**  That we wear, the dagam [Tib. ཟླ་གམ]. Dagam we don't wear outside so that's what the geyog will carry on the shoulder...and say "pan gyog she " "pan gyog she" so to make the ways out. Make right of way. [So move away,] Yes you get the right of way. [so there is a lot of work] Yes, thats a lot of work.   

**Q:**  And these geyog are in every tratsang? Each tratsang has a separate ones or is that again tsogchen only?   

**A:**  Geyog is tsogchen level however but come from different tratsang. geyog also has four senior ones, and the senior ones will not go out, very few will, like Huthogthu [mong. hu thog thu] may be taken round by the [senior] geyog, mostly the senior ones that sit there with the shanggo shingyer.   

**Q:**  Shanggo shingyer?   

**A:**  In the kitchen there.   

**Q:**  And that's with one or two shango shingyer?   

**A:**  One, only one.   

**Q:**  Shanggo means what?   

**A:**  Just shanggo.   

**Q:**  Like uncle?   

**A:**  Like uncle type of thing and also old monks who don't do much study or are dobdo are called this.   

**Q:**  So, are these geyog like permanent jobs, they're for a long time?   

**A:**  Mostly   

**Q:**  sheyngo's for one year?   

**A:**  sheyngo's for one year, everything sheyngo appoints, okay? Everything sheyngo, I think, sheyngo appoints, --chagdamba, Im not sure-- but I think sheyngo appoints. I don't think it is a government appointment, I think it is sheyngo appointment. Normally, once you get a geyog, you are likely to get every year, but every year you have to get a new approved by each sheyngo. But most likely sheyngo will take you, unless he is unhappy. Either your financial contribution to him or some personal reasons, but most probably geyog will be there, mostly.   

**Q:**  So, when a new sheyngo is picked then, all the geyog have to give like gift?   

**A:**  Yes, they have to give tremendous gifts and geyog go broke that time. Total broke. Yes.   

**Q:**  Geyog make that much money?   

**A:**  Do make something, but then, you know, poor geyog the shanggo shingnyer take a lot of money, lots; every mistake that the geyog does during the day, in the evening they have a confess session. In the evening, and every time at the confess session, the geyog have to pay money to shanggo shingnyer. The four senior geyog sitting there and the shanggo shingnyer sitting face down and the shanggo shingnyer will say, "you did something something, you did something." They have some kind of note, somebody get information, --you made some mistake your hat has fall down, your...robe they tied it here, has slipped out, you have forgotten to collect so and so, and you have no reach there, you have not done that, and hundreds of these come. And everytime they have to put one money on the table.   

**Q:**  Can you swear by the three Jewels?   

**A:**  Yes. And then they don't have enough money, they sort of send hands out like this, and the next one will put money in hands like this. So they keep on paying it there and then they finally he is through and the next one will come and then he goes back and with additionally money starts the same thing with another. And afterwards he says "You owe me this, you owe me that -- I'll owe you this, I'll give you that money and you'll owe me this."   

**Q:**  That's everyday?   

**A:**  Everyday. During the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  Oh...just during the Mönlam.   

**A:**  During Mönlam and Tsongjö, its everyday.   

**Q:**  Now, Tsongjö is separate from Mönlam but Drepung is in charge of that too?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  I didn't know that. Tsongjö is in the 3rd lunar month?   

**A:**  End of the 2nd month.   

**Q:**  How many days?   

**A:**  About 12 days.   

**Q:**  Nobody really talks about that... people only say that its Mönlam that   

**A:**  Because Mönlam overpowers Tsongjö ...but Tsongjö is equal... sheyngo make more money in Tsongjö than Mönlam.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Mönlam is busy, rushed, there are a lot of things happening, so that they don't get deep down to something and Tsongjö, the days are much longer and they have a lot of time, they are not that busy like in Mönlam, so they go around and dig a lot of cases and disputes and try to catch thieves...things like that, they do more...so because everytime whatever they can do, they get something too... I mean, like, if you catch thief, you can gobble up all the property.   

**Q:**  Whose? the thief's?   

**A:**  The thief's property, sheyngo gets all of it, straightaway.   

**Q:**  How does you know he's a thief?   

**A:**  Well, there is a complaint here and there. it comes from here and there and you know some stolen this and that...and somebody else will come and say "I'm quite sure the thief is so and so." Probably They arrest so and so and lashed out. And lash them out and they say I'm not alone...who else with you... and they go and catch all of them. So that's how they catch all the thieves. And the moment they catch the thief, more or less they get approved and they just gobble up all their property. The whole property.   

**Q:**  You mean like rugs and pots?   

**A:**  Rugs, pots, money, clothes, chupa, amulets [Tib. གའུ] gold, silver whatever, well they take it with them, then afterwards they sell it. There's no time to sell at that moment. They just store it, that's all. And the moment you enter in the house, you know what the geyog will do? Whatever they can see they start putting it in their pockets, including geyog and thabyog and chagmamba. That's what they do. Thats what they do.   

**Q:**  You mean, if they go to a monks house?   

**A:**  Whoever it is , if you happen to be a thief, they have to be a thief. Everything is going to be taken anyway so will be take.   

**Q:**  But they couldn't go to just a regular person's house and take the stuffs?   

**A:**  No, no, not like that. Unless its a complaint in the court and confirmed. Then they do that very often. Then, if the thief is caught, first thing they remove are the watches and then their thumbring and earing and everything they take it away. And the sheyngo will inquire "Where did earring go?" Someone says "I don't know, the geyog get it. That's what happens.   

**Q:**  So that can be very profitable.   

**A:**  Oh yes, Very profitable. They make more money in Tsongjö. And then they also go through this protectors [Tib. ལྷ], they will go the protectors and say, "oh there are a lot of theives, so please help us to catch them. We heard there's a lot of thieves going on there so please we've got a few days left, please help us to catch them". Sometimes, those, they will offer advise you know, saying why don't you do this, this and this.   

**Q:**  Protectors, meaning the,   

**A:**  The oracle.   

**Q:**  The ones who go into trance?   

**A:**  Yes. some of them will say, "Yes, do this and do that" and they help a lot.   

**Q:**  I see, are different tratsang associated with different oracles? Or is it just personal?   

**A:**  More personal, more personal...a little more personal. But Drepung associated with Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང], Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག] and Tenma [Tib. བསྟན་མ], generally. Then the personally some khamtsen will havce different and tratsang really different here and there, you know. This is another total set of all this, a total different world there again at work.   

**Q:**  So that's Drepung, or did you say Loseling?   

**A:**  Drepung.   

**Q:**  And like Sera would have different ones?   

**A:**  Sera would have different ones, Sera will have Thawo [Tib. ཐུབ་འོག], whole different set up there.   

**Q:**  Like Shungden [Tib. ཤུགས་ལྡན] and that, who   

**A:**  Shungden doesn't belong to any one of those big monasteries, no...new comer.   

**Q:**  New comer . But these ones like Gadong. Say they are supposed to be monks too but they're not monks?   

**A:**  You mean the oracle?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Sometimes they're monks, sometimes they're not. Doesn't matter but...whether you are monk or not monk, you wear monks robes.   

**Q:**  When you do this?   

**A:**  No, everyday.   

**Q:**  Well, can they get married?   

**A:**  Yes, the famous Gadong Oracle has four or five sons.   

**Q:**  And then he has like a labrang or what? I mean that he inherits or what?   

**A:**  No, nothing, nothing.   

**Q:**  How is someone like that picked? Is that under the control of the monastery?   

**A:**  No, whoever get the trance and the correct trance. And that one can be picked it up, it doesn't matter, whoever you meet, you have nothing to do with that monastery. You get a trance and it proves to be the correct one.   

**Q:**  How would you prove it?   

**A:**  Well, there are under lot of different tests for that. Another already approved oracle, a different lamas, different, like a Nechung and Gadong, I think has to be approved by the Dalai Lama and others, I don't think they have to be approved by the Dalai Lama. But in the case of the Tenma it is hereditary-- always the daughters of the family got Tenma.   

**Q:**  So the oracle is a female?   

**A:**  The oracle is female in the Tenma case, the oracle is a female. I think Thamba Simkhang [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང].   

**Q:**  Tenma is spelled how?   

**A:**  [Tib. བསྟན་མ] Ah...in Drepung, up there, there is a little, now I believe there's a little garden, there, that's Tenma house.   

**Q:**  Outside the wall?   

**A:**  Outside, quite a way out. Sort of upper part there, on the other side of...that's hereditary, Tenma.   

**Q:**  Is that the only woman?   

**A:**  No, Pushar [Tib. ཕུ་ཤར], another one of them called Pushar, that's also a woman. There are quite a lot of women there now.   

**Q:**  Okay, so that's a little bit about the discipline, let me get back to the shöndre. So, I still am not quite sure how this goes. You (enter) the monastery about eight or nine years old...just a regular monk...now how would you usually do it, let's say, ummm, why don't you explain if you were a parent and you had a son, how this would all work?   

**A:**  You want to enter monastery?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  The way you enter is first you look for somebody who take you, a gegen. Not necessarily the teacher who'll teach you, but who'll be responsible for you in the khamtsen or tratsang.   

**Q:**  You have to have one of those.   

**A:**  You have to have one of those. So that fellow will say well, he's been one of my gidru and I'm going to enter him.   

**Q:**  Well, how would you find someone like that?   

**A:**  Through friends, through families, and then also there are systems like you know, different villages belongs to different khamtsen. You know, through the different contacts. That's a very very strong system. Like in Nyare Khamtsen, the whole Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ], Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ], belongs to Nyare. Mangkham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས] belongs to Phukang [Tib. ཕུ་ཁང]. And sertain portions belongs to Tsha [Tib. ཚ་བ], or Amdo goes to Gomang and also divide where which part of the Amdo they go.   

**Q:**  So Nyare Khamtsen is all Khampas then?   

**A:**  Mostly Khampas, and then are are like from the central Tibet, Üba [Tib. དབུས་པ], who comes into Nyare Khamtsen, actually have a personal friend, somebody, and who is will say, "Alright, I'll take your son." And then, they say "OK, I'm going to join the Nyare Khamtsen."   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  You can do that.   

**Q:**  Even if you are not from the normal area?   

**A:**  Even if you are not from that area...you can do that if you choose...provided that the other side does not really raise hell out of it.   

**Q:**  The other side, like normally the Üba would be from where?   

**A:**  Depends. Like if you are from Tsang [Tib. གཙང] it will be for Tsangpa, [Tib. གཙང་པ] if you are from Kongpo you are for Kongpo, Lhasa, it depends...each kudrak has its own khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Oh yea.   

**A:**  Yea. Each one of those.   

**Q:**  No kidding.   

**A:**  Everybody has his own.   

**Q:**  Only one khamtsen, one in each monastery?   

**A:**  One in each monastery.   

**Q:**  I see, so Surkhang [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང] would have one and   

**A:**  I think Surkhang probably belongs to Tsangpa.   

**Q:**  There is Ngari [Tib. མངའ་རིས] Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes, there is Ngari in Gomang. In Loseling there must be Tsangba. Tsarong [Tib. ཚ་རོང] is Tsangba, Surkhang maybe not.   

**Q:**  But there isn't anything called like Üba?   

**A:**  No, there is no khamtsen called Üba Khamtsen , no. I think one, either in Gomang or sometimes called Üba Mitsen or something, But it doesn't mean that all Üba belong there.   

**Q:**  So, would you, would the gegen have to go to the other one and say we want to put him in, do you mind?   

**A:**  No, you don't, you don't. You go ahead and do it and don't say. If they want to complain, they complain. And they you try to settle later.   

**Q:**  Why would they care?   

**A:**  Depends, if the family's a wealthy family and sort of, you are losing your support. That's why they care. And Labrang, they a lot because there is a considerable benefit to the khamtsen if they have a labrang. So they care a lot. And if you are just nobody, I don't think anybody care. So, the monk who is responsible, will tell the khamtsen gegen that I'm entering so and so and please enter his name on the list and then he puts his seal on the list.   

**Q:**  The teacher?   

**A:**  The teacher. That means under his seal. So he'll be responsible.   

**Q:**  But isn't there something where the abbot or somebody has to say "Are you from a good family?" or you know   

**A:**  Not in this time.   

**Q:**  Not in this time.   

**A:**  Not in this time.   

**Q:**  I see   

**A:**  This becomes a sort of vinaya rule, the monk's rules, that comes much later or even before. That's different matter.   

**Q:**  So this is, he puts the seal on?   

**A:**  He puts his seal on the list when he comes into the entrance and so and so gidrü and then he is responsible thereafter. Thereafter you become a monk whether you are a vinaya monk rule or not [i.e. whether you have vows] You shave your head, put a robe on and start enjoying it.   

**Q:**  What are you called then?   

**A:**  They call them new monks [Tib. གྲྭ་པ་གསར་པ].   

**Q:**  Like getsül, they don't call them?   

**A:**  No...don't call that, that is the technical name for...I don't know...   

**Q:**  So you're just called new monk?   

**A:**  Just new monk.   

**Q:**  But he wouldn't have any vows? I mean   

**A:**  It doesn't matter.   

**Q:**  Well, if somebody gave him vows, would he   

**A:**  Not immediately.   

**Q:**  No?   

**A:**  Not necessarily.   

**Q:**  So he'd just go to live with his teacher?   

**A:**  Yea, with his teacher or maybe he has his own set-up..who knows? If you are wealthy people you can have your own set-up and start living there.   

**Q:**  A room or what?   

**A:**  You can get a room out of khamtsen sometimes and you can set-up anything.   

**Q:**  I see. Now, so you have to have teacher but you don't have to live with a teacher?   

**A:**  Supposed to be, but not necessary. Not necessary.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  And then one day you have to go and see khempo and then that is supposed to be the main thing. That is the, somehow, I don't know how tratsang's khempo comes in, Probably khamtsen informs him. When you enter your name on the tratsang list before khempo of tratsang, that you enter, I have no idea.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, you may only be on khamtsen list first?   

**A:**  Yeah, you're on the khamtsen list first. Definately. Without khamtsen, you can't go into tratsang, because tratsang has to categorise, which comes khamtsen you are under.   

**Q:**  But is there something like having to give tonggo or something at the khamtsen level? If you   

**A:**  Yes, you have to serve the sarja [Tib. གསར་ཇ] [new comer's tea]   

**Q:**  Sarja?   

**A:**  Sarja, even if you are not chöndze and you are an ordinary poor man, you have to give sarja...they call it shugja [Tib. ཞུགས་ཇ] "tea of entering."   

**Q:**  Shugja.   

**A:**  Shugja. Tea of entry.   

**Q:**  So all the monks in the khantsen?   

**A:**  All the monks in the khamtsen and you may give gye, you may not. That's depends for the shugja. And you can enter within in the month they will expect you to have shugja done.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, within a month. In the shugja, is that the mangja time or is that the time of tsomja time?   

**A:**  Yea, tsomja time. Some people, some very poor monks who come with nothing, and then like 10 or 20 of them together, they will serve one shugja. And if they, you know, some poor monks, come from Traya...that's a very poor ones, who walk through with the beggars, and they will come in the Nyare Khamtsen and they remain, they come in and the Nyare Khamtsen courtyard and stay there. And they immediately, the nyerba will give them a tea and thukpa all this and as a total beggar and then they say, "Okay, now who is the next...who is next?" So some senior monks turn by turn have to take them.   

**Q:**  As their gidru?   

**A:**  As gidru. Yes they have to take it. And then the gegen is totally responsible to provide the shugja. Giving a place for them to stay and feed. They are total responsible.   

**Q:**  And that's just for the Traya monks?   

**A:**  That's for the...anybody comes from the [places belonged to the khamtsen] calld khamtsen's thobkhung [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས]. Anybody.   

**Q:**  What's that called?   

**A:**  Thobkhung.   

**Q:**  Is there a book?   

**A:**  Not really a written book. It is unwritten understanding there. Any Thopkhung that comes in and anybody, let's say, when you have, I remember that very often, 15-20 or 30 young [from] Traya, Gonjo, all the type they come and sits down there and then they, some monks like nyerba, go up and down and they say "Hey, you have anybody, any letter to anybody, anything like that?" And they say, "Yes, I have my uncle is here, my aunt and something here and there's a letter for the nyerba to read the letter and call the monk and that monk will pick up. And those who have not been picked it up were left there and then they will say...you know 20 more left there. Here's now twenty more. And who are they and then you said last time up to here and now its your turn. They go from the beginning and start.   

**Q:**  It starts from seniority.   

**A:**  Seniority, it comes from the seniority. This is the senior tax. There escape the seven more probably [the highest 7 seniors]. And after the seven, then it will start, sometimes it will go from the top. And it comes up to the tsondu and they doesn't go below the tsondu. It all has to be tsondu people. And they will come and then they say there are twenty of them and will call 20 monk who are in their turn. And 20 will come out, so "Who gets whom?" So nyerba will say "OK, take off your shoe lace," and they will take off everybody's one shoe lace out and they will be left there and they each one of them pick up a shoe lace. That's how they pick it.   

**Q:**  I see... And they have to keep them for how long?   

**A:**  Well, supposed to be forever, but...then   

**Q:**  Well these guys, I mean these people from Traya don't stay for long, do they?   

**A:**  Oh, they do. Some of them, many of them stay for a lifetime.   

**Q:**  Some of them go back after a few years?   

**A:**  Some of them go back after a few years but most of them stay for lifetime.   

**Q:**  So they become what, like servants for the gegen?   

**A:**  No, you can't be really servant either, you become gidru and you start helping a little bit in the house...he'll probably say sweep the floor or...but whatever he eats he has to share with him...all of a sudden you've got extra expenses, that's what happens.   

**Q:**  I see, even if you already have gidru.   

**A:**  Yes, even you already have gidru and then some big...some big shagtsang will volunteer or they want more people, more workers, more helpers, that's very few cases. When they have volunteers, they really select, then you can't do that type, you can do it later...but not that time much, but that's very few.   

**Q:**  When the shagtsang needs people?   

**A:**  Yea, they really look for them.   

**Q:**  How do they look, I really don't understand how they do this, do they interview people?   

**A:**  No..not that way, you know say there are 800 or 900 monks in the khamtsen, right? Everybody knows everybody...so you become friends okay, would you like to join me now, sometimes they just join the shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Somebody else's gidru.   

**A:**  Somebody else's gidru will go and into someone else's shagtsang; very often that happens.   

**Q:**  See, because I found in Ladakh, when I was in that monastery, that some of the monks became very rich through being painters [Tib. ལྷ་བྲིས] for the Indian army painting pictures of dragons and that, very wealthy. You know, they didn't know what to do with their money basically, much and so they were the ones taking in two or three gidru because they had a lot of money so they'd spend it on gidru. But if somebody had three or four already they'd still make them take one more?   

**A:**  Oh, yes...that's turn by turn whether you have two or three or ten or none, doesn't matter, it's your turn.   

**Q:**  Is this a pattern in the monastery, that richer monks tend to take more gidru?   

**A:**  No, no it's not, not in Drepung. Mostly the shagtsang business they have their nephews or some of the other relations that come through.   

**Q:**  And then at some point, then you have to go to the khempo, the teacher takes you?   

**A:**  The teacher takes you to the khempo, no, teacher takes you to the --No, the khamtsen gegen takes you to the khempo. For the tratsang, it is the khamtsen is the responsible. For khamtsen, your teacher is responsible, so that's what I think khamtsen gegen takes you to the khempo. They call it new audience, khembo sanjey [Tib. gsar mjal---so khempo may have then 10, 20, 30 or 40 monks whatever that day.   

**Q:**  At the same time?   

**A:**  At the same time.   

**Q:**  And says the same thing to all of them?   

**A:**  I dont think they say too much. no, I don't think so... some khempo will say "Well, you have come to this great monastery and you have to learn abd behave" and some khempo say not a word. (Just) touch their heads, whatever.   

**Q:**  Nobody asks them, "Are you from a good background or a bad background"   

**A:**  That was when you take a vow --that period..."Have you been killing somebody" then there's a set pattern of answers, "No, no, no, no, yes, yes, yes, yes" that sort of thing.   

**Q:**  I see, that's where you take the vows...that's separate still?   

**A:**  That's totally separate.   

**Q:**  That's before or have to be after, or anytime?   

**A:**  That can be before or after.   

**Q:**  So the khempo's time is when you registered in the tratsang?   

**A:**  Tratsang   

**Q:**  Then you can go to the tsogchen?   

**A:**  You already...but the moment you join khamtsen you start going to the tsogchen, nobody says anything, nobody know whatever it is...whether the khamtsen, who knows.   

**Q:**  There's ten thousand monks.   

**A:**  Yes, there's ten thousand monks, whose gonna know who's who. There's no way. Even a non-monk can shave hair and wear a robe who'll know?   

**Q:**  If what?   

**A:**  Even if you are not a monk and shave hair then go tsogchen and collect money, who knows?   

**Q:**  I see, nobody knew?   

**A:**  Nobody knew.   

**Q:**  Nobody tries to say, where is Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང] or something like that?   

**A:**  Oh, they may try to say, during the gye, you know, if you are physically present, no one will read your name, you will just physically move, you just put your hand out and they give you.   

**Q:**  I see, you don't get gye when you are sitting there, as you leave somebody has a box of money like?   

**A:**  Yes, somebody has, two or three people, four people this end and four people that side.   

**Q:**  By the door?   

**A:**  By the door and carrying the money or by the street where they go out, carrying money and you go then, you go one by one and they give you the money. And then, the sheyngo will come back round, three or four times...by the time the sheyngo comes in here, whatever money is left, they just give it them...[i.e. a handfull]. that's another thing, the sheyngo, nangma, chabril all those types.   

**Q:**  All those do that?   

**A:**  All those, maybe they come three or four times.   

**Q:**  And [they get] whatever is in their hands?   

**A:**  Whatever the hand is, you normally get. And sheyngo will also not enter unless the, will not enter unless their hands got a newly picked up lot of money [[so that the handful will be lots]] You know they don't really go out to this level because it has no use. So the sheyngo will look in there and see how many is inside there and shoo people out and they enter. [to maximize what is left in hand when it is his turn].   

**Q:**  Now, if you're at these things, when you all leave, do the trüku leave first?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The trüku leave first.   

**A:**  No, no, the trüku leave first and then the seniority. I mean you can't really leave it like that. Unless in the kelen [Tib. སྐལ་ལེན], where you are not inside, [waiting outside for gye] you are outside, you know? Then some of the sheyngo may say, okay, get in this line, get in this line.   

**Q:**  In this line?   

**A:**  No, you know, when the monks are sitting like this line.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, this line?   

**A:**  This line gets up and, and they all will try to leave, and next line, then this line gets up.   

**Q:**  The ones inside say it?   

**A:**  Outside, the sheyngo may say it.   

**Q:**  Oh, those are the people waiting outside for the gye?   

**A:**  Waiting outside, the sheyngo may say get up this line and then   

**Q:**  I see, those are the people who aren't at the mangja but who came   

**A:**  Who came only for collection. They don't get something to drink, they're sitting there for a while and...see the mangja is two hours, say about two hours and probably they come for fifteen minutes.   

**Q:**  At the end?   

**A:**  Sort of in the middle. And they'll be sent first.   

**Q:**  They'll be sent first, where?   

**A:**  They'll be given money first, before the inside ones start coming out.   

**Q:**  Before going inside and start coming out, I see.   

**A:**  The outside ones comes later and leaves earlier.   

**Q:**  Now, I wanted to ask you about the timings again of these three tsog because this book I was reading, it made it sound like it was ones in the evening, the khamtsen, the tsomja, like 4 or 5 o'clock.   

**A:**  Probably, yes.   

**Q:**  Oh, yea.   

**A:**  Yes, it would be like 4 or 5. Because mangja comes early morning, after mangja, say mangja takes two hours, okay, say something like at 6 mangja start. For 2 hours, it already 8, then there's the shogchö [Tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས]. tratsang has a shogchö, a short period of debate and saying prayers at tratsang. There is no distribution or no tea or anything in the chöra.   

**Q:**  What's that shogchö, how do you spell it?   

**A:**  [Tib. ཞོགས་པའི་ཆོས་ར]. And that maybe 45 minutes or so, so will be what? Already   

**Q:**  Nine.   

**A:**  Nine-something. And then the thraja comes, say about two hours Or maybe more. Then nyinchö [Tib. ཉིན་ཆོས] the miday chöra comes. After traja, nyinchö comes. When the nyinchö's over, then tsomja comes...so that'd be 3:30 or 4 or 5.   

**Q:**  But inbetween, do monks go back into their own shag and eat or do they just   

**A:**  Well, they just get around...they can go to shag and come back, do whatever...their flexibility's there. It's not really, it looks...one after another, but everybody doesn't go to everything. So somehow, there is flexibility of anything. Flexible in general. And nobody really pay much attention if you don't go for the tsog. Where you have to eat tea and all this, but some they will pay attention when you talk about chos ra but they are nothing.   

**Q:**  Some pay attention if you don't go to chöra?   

**A:**  chöra, yea.   

**Q:**  But that's only if you are pechawa?   

**A:**  Pechawa or dönsang kesang [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་སྐད་བཟང].   

**Q:**  I don't even know what is dönsang kesang.   

**A:**  Dönsang kesang is one group, it is another group of monk who will be responsible for these tunes and singings and all this. And there are another training completely separate.   

**Q:**  And that's what? What is the spelling?   

**A:**  [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་སྐད་བཟང], good voice. So dönsang kesang have another total set up separate, under umdze's control. This is parallel to the geshe.   

**Q:**  Is it?   

**A:**  Yes, almost parallel.   

**Q:**  How come nobody has ever heard of this? I never heard of this.   

**A:**  This is a small group of monk, a small thing.   

**Q:**  And this is based on, like, the ability to chant?   

**A:**  Ability to chant. The dönsang kesang is a total setup, another one.   

**Q:**  So they don't do debating and that kind of stuff, they just practice singing or what?   

**A:**  Some, mostly, their main job is to memorize prayers and then practice the singing...the tunes, the different tunes, tratsang have the special tunes, khamtsen have special tunes...oh, yes...khamtsen has total special tunes, tratsang has total special tunes.   

**Q:**  So you could tell a tune that this is your khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes, this is Loseling tune, this is that tune, this is Nyare, this is that according to the tune, yes, definately.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, no kidding, I didn't know that.   

**A:**  That is total different tune.   

**Q:**  And that's just tradition?   

**A:**  It's tradition.   

**Q:**  So the same pecha may have a different tune? Is that possible?   

**A:**  Yes, same pecha will have different tune.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Loseling has different tune. Gomang has different, khamtsen has diferent tune. So then the dönsang kesang are the sources of that authentic source. And they'll be responsible, they'll be practicing it, all of it different, and if some gye...some will join on both sides--pechawa as well as dönsang kesang. And then from the pechawa, they even give exemptions because they are going to dönsang kesang.   

**Q:**  They give what?   

**A:**  They gives some exemptions.   

**Q:**  Exemptions, I see.   

**A:**  Because he's responsible in there too. Yes, they have that total different system. These tunes they have.   

**Q:**  How many would you say that there were? And this is at the tratsang level?   

**A:**  Tratsang level, khamtsen level, and tsogchen level. All three levels. And it is more sort of organized in tratsang and tsogchen, less in khamtsen but it's there. It's there.   

**Q:**  When you say they are at all three levels, its the same people though. No?   

**Q:**  Not necessary. Some are in the tratsang level dönsang kesang but not in the tsogchen dönsang kesang...tape goes blank.   

**Q:**  Not necessarily in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  No, also tratsang.   

**Q:**  So how are people recuited into it?   

**A:**  Actually they say the umdze will do it mostly.   

**Q:**  Now these umdze are in tsogchen, tratsang umdze, khamtsen umdze.   

**A:**  Yes, oh yes.   

**Q:**  You were telling me about this dönsang kesang and the different levels, how people are recuited. Like three things simultaneously going on?   

**A:**  There's two stages. Dönsang and then finally, I think kesang.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  I think first become dönsang and then kesang. Then when you say dönsang and kesang it becomes one category. Three things simultaneous level. In the monastery, there are so many things going on. The administration is whole thing going on; like the group people who become a sheyngo and nyerba, chandzö and bungdzö and gegö, all this is one category. Then the dönsang kesang and umdze is another category. And then the pechawa and geshe and the lama shunglenba [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ], there's another category. So the khembo comes in the middle. Under khempo like three divisions, gegö, sheyngo, etc that's one category. Then comes the dönsang kesang as another category, and then the lama shunglemba and the geshe and pechawa   

**Q:**  Lama shunglemba is the teacher, is the one in charge of teaching?   

**A:**  Not the teacher...its supposed to be [the one] in charge of the monks who are doing study. The three top ones are Gegö, shunglenba and umdze, these are the three, they are called the three uchö [Tib. དབུ་ཆོས་གསུ]. That is the three pillars of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Is it said pillars in Tibetan?   

**A:**  I don't...they do have their own way of saying it...the dönsang kesang will tell you they are the pillars, yes. Actually its true-- for outsiders, even inside the monastery, people will, if you don't pay attention, it'll look like all the monks are saying the prayers and thing like that, but there are a group who are really responsible for the whole group there. Totally responsible for the tunes and things and umdze can make a lot of mistake, that's true. But then they are there to correct immediately.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  For example, the present, when we lived, 1959, the Loseling umdze who became tsogchen umdze in India, didn't know anything about it except he had very good voice. So he doesn't have even words, few words, but beyond that he doesn't even know. So he only know how to start. Well, very good voice, he start "oommmmm" thick voice and they pick up like "wawawawaong wawawawaong" and he doesn't have words.   

**Q:**  So, why did they pick him as?   

**A:**  Because his voice...and because of his looks, good voice. Pool all together. But the core group there is the dönsang kesang, they really take the tune, they shape it.   

**Q:**  Is that considered prestigeous in the monastery?   

**A:**  I don't think so. It's not that prestigeous either. But without that, they can never be function. No way.   

**Q:**  So of the prestigeous, they most do what - the pechawa?   

**A:**  They are not really prestigeous either. No, I mean they are sort of (one) of them but don't really see anything as prestigeous.   

**Q:**  So what's prestigeous in the monastery?   

**A:**  Geshe, one thing, and uh, and the officials beside the trüku and chöndze. So the ultimate goal of the dönsang kesang is to be umdze. But then sometimes you know some funny thing happen and umdze will be changed.   

**Q:**  Like umdze is for how many years?   

**A:**  Oh, I think they remain there, though the khempo, everytime, the khempo will decide, but khempo, everytime they decide, I think 6 years, I don't think they change much. When the new khempo comes in, there will can I continue, and they say yea, they will continue, so probably, I think, automatically. But then if something happens to the present umdze, then there is choice of new umdze, then khempo has lot of to do. But gegö are appointed by khempo, but not like this, I think like 6 years after they appoint, its very strange.   

**Q:**  What do you mean?   

**A:**  Khempo's period is six years...so this khempo, the moment he comes in, he will try to appoint one gegö every year, but not for that year, probably for the next two or three years.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Well, because, it's only that when he join in that the previous khempo had already appointed one or two gegö already there.   

**Q:**  Really.   

**A:**  Yeah, that happens. So then the   

**Q:**  That khempo would really have to check on that system.   

**A:**  Yes, and this khempo get his chance to push it a little now.   

**Q:**  But the gegö is only for one year.   

**A:**  One year.   

**Q:**  One year at a time but the umdze is like?   

**A:**  Lifetime.   

**Q:**  Lifetime, so theres not much opportunity for the dönsang kesang to go up?   

**A:**  No there are not. For they are not that well-known, and also its a small group who is really important, one of the most important ones, but they, sort of, people pay no attention about that.   

**Q:**  And they have separate teaching and   

**A:**  They have separate system.   

**Q:**  So how does somebody say, "I'm going to become dönsang-kesang."   

**A:**  Do whatever you want to do, start picking up yourself.   

**Q:**  Like at what age would people start separating out?   

**A:**  Oh, there's not even age limit, they will go anytime. Anytime. Five, I don't think the old ones change much but something like twentys and thirtys and teens too. So...somebody who had very nice voice or something, extraordinary, then, of course, the dönsang kesang will approach them and then umdze would approach them, even to the extent of khempo will even approach...it may happen. But otherwise, most of them either if you have a friend in the dönsang kesang you go with them and you become dönsang kesang and I think they maintain a separate list also. Separate list also.   

**Q:**  Is there any advantages like special gye or anything like that?   

**A:**  No nothing. nothing. They have more problems. They have to meet separately more and practice much more than we have to meet and practice, much more.   

**Q:**  So, they're more concerned with the sounds than the words, what the words mean.   

**A:**  They're not concerned much with what words mean, they simply concerned with the sounds where to take high...and it has to be "thick" voice or "thin" voice or whether it is "oo" sound or "ee" sound or whatever...and how high should be, how low should be, that's what they do. That is there job, they have to memorize a lot, because you know in the monasteries the readings, they don't read books, everything have to come out by heart. And these are the people who are responsible because everyone will say one hundred different things. Someone saying yes this is right, and something wrong thing but the core group is there to (pick) up... They really   

**Q:**  You mean like at mangja?   

**A:**  Yes, every meeting they have, every prayer they say they memorize and they have to come, they have to come. If they're not there, they really come, they are really ones who come to traja, mangja, they don't come much to the chöra. The chöra is mostly the geshe and debating. But then they, the kurim [Tib. སྐུ་རིམ], they have to come. In the nyinchö, they have the singing.   

**Q:**  The kurim is what?   

**A:**  The kurim is the evening chöra.   

**Q:**  Evening chöra. Why do they have to come there?   

**A:**  Oh, that is mostly praying, a lot of singing goes on, a tremendous amount of singing.   

**Q:**  Chanting?   

**A:**  Chanting, a tremendous amount of chanting.   

**Q:**  I see, so they have to come to that.   

**A:**  They really do, that is their core. And then some difficult, complicated chanting, maybe probably, see it only few of them chanting, nobody else.   

**Q:**  Do, like, does the teacher, does your gegen, usually is he the one who says, "Why don't you do this?"   

**A:**  He can do, he can say it but sometimes the gegen happens to be dönsang kesang you will also follow that to that direction too, but that is not set at all. You move up and down. Changes tremendously.   

**Q:**  Now, how do you get into the tsogchen level or the tratsang level, I mean how does that work? You are in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Umm, you are in the khamtsen and you took interest to the tratsang tunes, you (have) a friend in there and you start getting into it, and then you get into tratsang and then tratsang from there you also get into tsogchen. Tsogchen called group too and tsogchen has a different tune, completely by itself. So you took interest in that.   

**Q:**  Do people ask you to come and join, is that what happens?   

**A:**  Some people do, some people do, they ask were going there, well why don't you come in? Try to see if you can memorize that and this and that, some people have interest, a personal interest to you.   

**Q:**  But there's no more   

**A:**  There's no more financial benefit.   

**Q:**  If you're in all three or if you're just in one.   

**A:**  There's nothing. There's not at all, absolutely no financial benefit. No exemption (from) anything.   

**Q:**  So just personal interest.   

**A:**  Just personal interest. And this is the hard one.   

**Q:**  So how many people, do you think, do that? There aren't many pechawa.   

**A:**  Pechawa a lot, right...I think dönsang kesang relatively not so much, I think about 40- fifty.   

**Q:**  In all of Drepung?   

**A:**  Probably, that's a very small group. But if its not there, you can not have it. That's that. So when it goes very low category, then tratsang try to force some people, say you have to...they try to do it, but mostly   

**Q:**  Now, are the musicians like that too, the people who learn the instruments? Is that the same thing, you have to have them too?   

**A:**  Well, in the case of Drepung, they don't use any instrument at all. No.   

**Q:**  None?   

**A:**  None whatsoever.   

**Q:**  No gyaling [Tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] nothing?   

**A:**  No gyaling, no big horn, thungchen [Tib. དུང་ཆེན], nothing at all.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  That's just the Loseling system.   

**Q:**  That's just Loseling, but not all of Drepung?   

**A:**  Gomang too.   

**Q:**  Gomang too.   

**A:**  Deyang and Ngagba are the only two that use the instruments.   

**Q:**  I see, what about the other great monastic seats?   

**A:**  Sera Je and Mey, I don't think they use it, no....Ganden, yes, Shartse, Changtse [Tib. ཤར་རྩེ་བྱང་རྩེ] they both do this.   

**Q:**  Is there any theoretical reason why that's true?   

**A:**  Loseling used to say we are a tshenyi tratsang, and that's why. But on the other hand in the Loseling gönkhang [Tib. mgon kgang] [the chaple where the protective deities are kept] people do it that there, another set of gombo [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བ ] [monks doing prayers in the gönkhang] set up again, then they're learn instrument and torma making everything. And uh   

**Q:**  But those would be (people) from Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ]?   

**A:**  No, a part of Loseling.   

**Q:**  A part of Loseling?   

**A:**  A part of Loseling.but its in a smaller chapel they are meeting; its not in general meetings they are meeting at all.   

**Q:**  And how are people picked for that?   

**A:**  Some people who from already having little knowledge of ritual here and there, some sort of one picks the other up and get into that category again. There is no set up pattern. Many of those monks you can't forget one thing is that they come from another monastery, so some of the already have pretraining and a little bit of knowledge, so that have interest to get into that.   

**Q:**  So then in your tsomja and those things, they'd never play instruments? What about the bell, do they have a bell [Tib. དྲིལ་བུ]?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  Damaru, [the small hand drum]?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Nothing?   

**A:**  No, nothing. It was a site separate than usual where you may do it. But none whatsoever in general.   

**Q:**  So when, like the monks do like their own private prayers, they don't do it all?   

**A:**  They may.   

**Q:**  They may, because I saw monks always doing with the sound "ting ting"   

**A:**  Yes. But in Drepung, you can not.   

**Q:**  You can not?   

**A:**  You can not, you can not, but we trüku, we have to give, one of the exemption is you can play damaru all the time.   

**Q:**  Well, then, why do people use them, what's the difference between using them and not using them?   

**A:**  Ha. At certain level, you know, I mean, after you out from there and then you can use it.   

**Q:**  You mean its a higher level not to use it or to use it?   

**A:**  The higher level later, I mean later, this is the beginning of study, more for study rather than playing the instrument.   

**Q:**  So the higher you get, the more people use damaru?   

**A:**  Yes. But that's why you find a lot of geshe who don't know how to use it damaru, you give them damaru and they do all sorts of funny things. They act like a monkey.   

**Q:**  Because they never even use it?   

**A:**  They never knew how to do it, they never had to, all of a sudden they've got it in hand and they don't know what to do and in damaru they go (sounds like a galloping horse)...   

**Q:**  Is that considered tantric, the drums and these?   

**A:**  Yes, it is part of.   

**Q:**  So those who go on to Gyüdö and Gyüme, they have to do it?   

**A:**  Yes, they have to.   

**Q:**  And they use it in their prayers?   

**A:**  They use it.   

**Q:**  And they use the instruments too?   

**A:**  Yes, but different system.   

**Q:**  So, what is there, more prestige to being, whatever, I mean, let's say your the dönsang kesang on the tsogchen rather than khamtsen level?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  Nobody cares?   

**A:**  Nobody really cares but tratsang dönsang kesang probably have little more prestige than anybody else...only advantage what they get is good seat. they have to be near umdze, no matter how junior you may be you be sitting there. Sort of they will "block", totally they will block, so I think maybe forty, fifty,...maybe a little underestimate it, they used to block a whole line in their room...quite a lot, quite a lot.   

**Q:**  That should be couple of hundres in that open courtyard?   

**A:**  Yes. Open courtyard, they probably, like two (and a) half line. Two whole lines. So, Loseling, may have like 40 fifty, sixty, maybe a hundred monk. And in the Gomang may have some, Deyang have some. In the tsogchen they all get together, they don't get sit among the line, all together,...that's the advantage, no matter how junior you may be, you'll be sitting over there. And that is the only advantage they have, nothing else.   

**Q:**  So the more juniors sit more on the two ends?   

**A:**  And the sides, juniors in the center and the dönsang kesang have that advantage and the geshe go in center, the chemmo or the umdze sit there.   

**Q:**  Chemmo is what?   

**A:**  Chemmo is umdze , so chemmo is sitting on the side of the center line, so dönsang kesang occupy the side line. This is the way they really go. Umdze immediately sing "Ooooh" what he sing, only the dönsang kesang will know what it is.   

**Q:**  How many do you think there are, different tunes?   

**A:**  Oh, a lot, a lot.   

**Q:**  And is it the same kinds of prayers all the time, is it or   

**A:**  Everyday...yes, they repeat, but every festival, they have different prayers and there are always festivals, they have different things for each different   

**Q:**  For festival, you mean like what?   

**A:**  Well, for Ngamjö, there's something else, for Jönga Chöpa there's something else, for [the prayer called] Chamön, [Tib. བྱམས་སྨོན] there's something else, for this there's something else, for that there's something else and so the tratsang also has, even for the everyday prayer, the [winter debating session] günchö [Tib. དགུན་ཆོས] has different and [summer debating session] yarchö [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས] has different and that is a line long job, it really is actually a lot, a lot.   

**Q:**  How do the young kids, if they don't go into pechawa or they don't go into dönsang kesang, what would they do?   

**A:**  Hang around, I mean they some enter your name, and sexual dates and go to Lhasa what ever. That type of was also there too.   

**Q:**  But there isn't much else to do, either you go to the chöra, or where does most study happen, privately or?   

**A:**  Privately, most study is mostly privately, chöra is only debate, then the praying, then the singing.   

**Q:**  Now, how do you get a teacher, I mean, you have to...you have a gegen, but now you want a real teacher?   

**A:**  Under whom you want to study, you look around and you go to that teacher, "can I come and join you" Can I learn from you.   

**Q:**  But like, little kids, you go in the monastery, you are like 8 or so? What age would people start to even think about that?   

**A:**  Some kids start picking up their own teacher by 9, 10, 11, yeah, they can. They can then and some maybe start picking up much later.   

**Q:**  What do they learning to start, to write or to read?   

**A:**  No, no, no, no. Write and reading. Reading is always taught by a different...normally taught by your own teacher who put the seal on it [who got you in monastery] or he may say "Go to so and so" Otherwise that's sort of his responsible. Thereafter, every other teacher learning Buddhist texts or learning tis meaning or debate system or some famous, some not so famous so you look around and whatever, whoever you like, you go there. Nobody will say you go there or here...but one day Loseling monks not go much different to Gomang or vice versa, not much interchange Loseling remain with the Loseling monks, Gomang with Gomang--but the khamtsen go on changing, within Loseling khamtsen change often.   

**Q:**  But if you're poor, it must be hard to get a teacher?   

**A:**  No, no, no...to get a real teacher you don't have to do anything, you just take the book and go, that's all, he doesn't teach just you alone, no, he probably have 10, 20 pechawa people come in together, go there sit together, ask questions.   

**Q:**  You have to go and ask him if you can come?   

**A:**  Oh you just get permission, allow you to come, probably say yes, most of the time they say yes and then there's no reason why they should say no, and then you go there and sit.   

**Q:**  What happens if your initial gegen can't read?   

**A:**  He'll ask someone else.   

**Q:** ö Has to pay?   

**A:**  No, no, no, no...He says so and so is teaching and you go there and he tells the teacher, "teacher! please teach him a pecha" That's only thing [he says].   

**Q:**  I see, so if a monk wanted to... Why don't we go back, before we talk about education, that's gonna be   

**A:**  Yeah, that's totally different.   

**Q:**  What is a mitsen, what does that really do?   

**A:**  Some khamtsen have mitsen, there are some independent mitsen too.   

**Q:**  Independent of khamtsen?   

**A:**  Independent of khamtsen. Like böbashung, now I remember. There's one mitsen called böbashung. Böbashung is not belong to any other khamtsen and a lot of different khamtsen, a lot of Üba, Üba will go into böbashung, can join böbashung.   

**Q:**  That's in Loseling?   

**A:**  I think böbashung is Loseling, I'm not sure whether they have Deyang in it or not. I don't think so. Okay, then there's another called gyeba [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] mitsen, that's also sort of independent of khamtsen. A lot of different people joining gyeba. You know why they join gyeba? or böbashung? Because they are eligible to be the sheyngo.   

**Q:**  I see, specially.   

**A:**  Specially, (eligible)to be....They...sheyngo comes turn by turn, Loseling, Gomang, Ngagba and Deyang, Deyang and Gyeba, Gyeba and böbashung, böbashung and Gomang, like that, it's almost like tratsang in terms of getting a sheyngo.   

**Q:**  So there's only a few people?   

**A:**  Only a few people.   

**Q:**  So you have a higher chance?   

**A:**  So you have a higher chance. So a lot of people join in böbashung, lot of people join in gyeba to get more chance.   

**Q:**  But you can join after you join something else?   

**A:**  Oh, yes. You can join after something...But, böbashung you have to be böba and gyeba, I think, you have to be some...and then there are other mitsen: tsümey [Tib. ཚུལ་སྨད] mitsen, nyango [Tib. ཉང་འག྄ོ] mitsen, all these mitsen, I think they are not entitled at all. They are very few people. They're have to part of Tsa Khamtsan or something. So very few mitsen are there, mitsen are normally supposed to be under khamtsen but then, there are exception of böbashung and gyeba.   

**Q:**  Now, böbashung and gyeba are disciplinarily under the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Disciplinarily are not under one khamtsen at all, no, no.   

**Q:**  They have their own phashi [Tib. ཕ་གཞིས] [patrilineal estate]?   

**A:**  They have their own, every khamtsen and mitsen don't have phashi.   

**Q:**  But then they can't have their own, like tsomja anything?   

**A:**  Oh, they do, they have their own house, their own meetings, and things like that...(mumble) yea they do.   

**Q:**  They have to have income to have that?   

**A:**  Oh, they do, like every other khamtsen, and then somebody who joins them, gye, distribution, everything, endowment, and all these are there, its a total set up.   

**Q:**  So how big would böbashung be?   

**A:**  About somewhere I think about 200 people.   

**Q:**  So it's pretty small.   

**A:**  It is small, böbashung is often filled up with kudrak, we call it -- kudrak -- monastery kudrak, not Lhasa kudrak.   

**Q:**  I see, why?   

**A:**  They are the person who become sheyngo and chagdamba and gegö too.   

**Q:**  I see, they...does that go in turns also?   

**A:**  sheyngo goes by turn.   

**Q:**  And chagbamba?   

**A:**  Chagbamba is sheyngo's choice but I think they have to be one of those categories, I think.   

**Q:**  What of?   

**A:**  Ummm, I don't think that anybody can pick up any khamtsen person and make chagdamba, --böbashung or gyeba or some, some in one of those categories of becoming the official of that category...tsümey, [Tib. ཚུལ་སྨད] mitsen also-- I don't think there's a tsülmey sheyngo, tsümey chagmamba is there, tsümey mitsen doesn't have a way to go to chagdamba. I don't think they have a way to go, this is complicated to do. I don't think its written anywhere. Its sort of their known and known and established.   

**Q:**  So what you're saying is that some of these things are not, everybody isn't eligible for them, only certain people in certain khamtsen.   

**A:**  Oh, no, only certain khamtsen and certain categories are eligible to go into the sheyngo route.   

**Q:**  So, the sheyngo -- why don't you say the sheyngo order again, a little slower, that the sheyngo rotates between, the two sheyngo.   

**A:**  Oh, the sheyngo rotates between Gomang, Loseling, Deyang, Ngagpa, böbashung, and gyeba, I think there's six. So, two sheyngo every year, so I think they like it change up and down, I don't how exactly it works, but anyway   

**Q:**  Who picks them?   

**A:**  Laji is responsible. Laji is responsible.   

**Q:**  The senior laji, the small laji?   

**A:**  The laji gathering, the big laji gathering. Not senior laji, yeh, its called laji chekhag [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག] -- its bigger laji, means smaller group.   

**Q:**  Bigger laji means the smaller group.   

**A:**  Laji picks, sort of, picks, but they can not pick up and say you go. You know, they rotate, otherwise, they fight, so they have to follow the rotation system; this they are people looking for opportunity all the time.   

**Q:**  Who is?   

**A:**  Oh, the members of the gyeba and tsümey, they really looking for opportunity. So those who are looking often have one or two opportunities, like you can come as a Loseling sheyngo or gyeba sheyngo, or come as a böbashung sheyngo, so this is a sort of opportunity they have.   

**Q:**  This is picked by the, you said, by the which laji?   

**A:**  Drepung laji.   

**Q:**  No, but within the laji.   

**A:**  Big laji.   

**Q:**  The one with less people.   

**A:**  Smaller one.   

**Q:**  And each one of these has to put up, let's say its böbashung's turn, they have to put up some names?   

**A:**  No, they will inform böbashung, say, it's your turn, bring your list and they will inform the abbot, whoever it is, to bring their list. They will prepare their list.   

**Q:**  A list of like how many people?   

**A:**  Oh, four or five and then goes.   

**Q:**  Do you know what the head of the mitsen is called?   

**A:**  There is no head.   

**Q:**  There isn't any. So how do they make any decisions?   

**A:**  Again, they have their tsondu, everywhere is tsondu.   

**Q:**  Do you know if the mitsens have seniority and things?   

**A:**  They do. They do have seniority, almost just like khamtsen set up. There is a mitsen senior, gempa [Tib. རྒན་པ] also. There is somebody called mitsen gempa. They do that and then they, it goes like khamtsen gegen type of thing, sort of like you know after mitsen gemba they will go to the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Do people join these right when they're small or do they...?   

**A:**  Some join from the small, some join much later period and they you give big tonggo there and big distribution and big endowment and you get exemption and go into tsondu. Böbashung and gyepa prepared that way. Sort of works out that way, if you are eligible to be sheyngo, you think you can be, so you really want to go there, sort of get a way through, you know, sort of passage, if you have to join one of them or they are able to object to, but you really have to put a lot of financial benefit to the mitsen-- actually, actually the böbashung and gyepa are quite rich because of their endowments.   

**Q:**  They have to do business with the endowment...make a lot of money?   

**A:**  They also do that and then beside that a lot of big shagtsang are always members of those.   

**Q:**  Oh yea?   

**A:**  Most of the big shagtsang are people who become officials like sheyngo or jiso, they are always part of one of them.   

**Q:**  How many big shagtsang were there at Loseling?   

**A:**  It's very hard to say, anybody is entitled to make up their own shagtsang too. Or categories whose becoming gegö this time...they always try to make their own shagtsang, so who knows?   

**Q:**  So what would you do if you want to make your own shagtsang? What do you have to do?   

**A:**  Nothing. You get your few nephews and two people join in together, you get your economic a little bit more standing established, whatever you do, business or whatever you do, something within the monastery rule; you do something or you get help from your family, from outside, from Lhasa, from the villages or something you economically set up and you try to get a little big house and get a few more people and call it a shagtsang. There is no sort of limit here with this sort of level you can call this shagtsang and on this sort of level like a millioniar, you don't have that limit, that has to be attained before it can be called shagtsang.   

**Q:**  So where will you get a bigger house? You can get a house, you have to go to tratsang or khamtsen.   

**A:**  Khamtsen, tratsang doesn't have house. tratsang only has the tratsang house, nothing else. Sometimes, they sort of you know, internally pass the shag [Tib. ཤག་ནང་བཤུག] to each other which is illegal, which is very difficult to get done. But, still, it is possible.   

**Q:**  What is that called?   

**A:**  [Tib. ཤག་ནང་བཤུག], means "Internally pass on the house." Though the houses belong to khamtsen, then you are occupying it, and somehow you get a little bigger and then you are leaving it and they sort of give it back to the khamtsen and another shagtsang tried to get it, and then you may pass on that too, or maybe some shagtsang will just be finished, no more left, and you try to get that, no matter whoever left, the last person of the shagtsang or from the khamtsen, thats how you get a bigger house.   

**Q:**  What do the monks call their own place, where they live?   

**A:**  Shag. Everything's called shag.   

**Q:**  Shagtsang is a little bigger like a household?   

**A:**  Yea, like a little bit bigger, everybody will now call that a shagtsang, so if you have so many gidru, people may start to call you a shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Do shagtsang have names like?   

**A:**  No, no, no, no. So and So, who ever the head is. Its called so and so shagtsang.   

**Q:**  And some are quite wealthy? Yes From Generation?   

**A:**  Very wealthy, very wealthy...some are very wealthy and some are not, some are just establishing new...because you know, one gegen who works so hard, right, collect a lot of money, accumulate a lot, he dies and they become that of the next shagtsang whoever it is. His property automatically goes to the shagtsang, so he may have some another one, he accumulate a little more, he dies and his next one becomes head of shagtsang and then already there are members already in that. Sometimes some shagtsang will have two or three sheyngo in one shagtsang.   

**Q:**  How could that be, how could be shagtsang so much?   

**A:**  Some shagtsang will have like 10-15 people...a big shagtsang.   

**Q:**  But they won't take in like adults, they taking in younger kids and   

**A:**  They can take adults in. You can combine shagtsang together. They do, sometimes they do that.   

**Q:**  Then why would they do they, just for more power or   

**A:**  Whatever the reason, maybe some are neighbor or friends, you know they like to stay, spend time here and there, and they started staying there and so they say, okay, lets become one, so what. Monk is monk, they are so easy, happy go lucky too, they really don't calculate so much. They don't...Ok let us join together, maybe some shagtsang have business interest, some are outside and together. That's another thing and maybe two people have one good area, this side and that side and say well let's merge together. There are various reasons.   

**Q:**  And then within the shagtsang they have to have some way to organize?   

**A:**  Within the shagtsang, then I think it goes seniority. And efficiency of the individual. Whoever is more efficient. More justice. Go by the other one and uh, otherwise they clash, right, they break shagtsang, just like that.   

**Q:**  But then are there cases where like a younger person splits it but the older person doesn't want to give him much of the shagtsang?   

**A:**  Oh, yes, they will leave shagtsang too, a number of people leave from this shagtsang and go to another shagtsang. Oh, yes there's a lot of that, then it totally depends on the senior people down there how much they want to give.   

**Q:**  The senior people in?   

**A:**  Inside the shagtsang, if you come in as a beggar with nothing and you want to go another, they wont give you much. And if you come with a lot, you can demand too.   

**Q:**  Do cases go to the monastery to decide that?   

**A:**  I don't really think monastery decides much and this sort of becomes quite a big cases. May even go to the dewashung.   

**Q:**  If it is a big case...(overlap) do you know of any?   

**A:**  No, I don't recollect, but I think there are. shagtsang and all the big ones, they call them kungö, the senior ones are called kungö, sometimes there are two or three kungö.   

**Q:**  By the people in this shagtsang or everybody?   

**A:**  In the shagtsang. And then you know, if the shagtsang is a big one, then it influences others and they also call them kungö too.   

**Q:**  No kidding.   

**A:**  Yes. Phara [Tib. ཕ་ར] Jiso is one example. In there, there are two kungö. Call them senior kungö dreba [Tib. བགྲེས་པ] and junior kungö shönba [Tib. གཞོན་པ].   

**Q:**  But they are not kudrak or anything.   

**A:**  No, they are just shagtsang. But they call them kungö.   

**Q:**  So they would have a lot of rooms, a big house, and a lot of money?   

**A:**  Oh, they would have a lot of money. Then you know they have this, even this Phara Jiso, in order to not clash, and probably they are looking after the interests of different things, one would look after the interest of northern activity and southern activity business and then they are meeting among themselves and then they meet and decide and set up the policy, otherwise they are function independent. It is a, you can say, its almost a corporation type of deal.   

**Q:**  But it could also be that they have like relatives?   

**A:**  Oh, they have relatives, that both kungö have relatives, will join in and become junior things like tratsang nyertsang and start coming up (in rank), I have seen it. So by that generation, there probably be four or five kungö...so that's what happens, so when there are more kungö and each one of the kungö will take a line and separate, and they're totally responsible-- each individual is responsible for his own line..however   

**Q:**  Oh really. You mean, there isn't like one person at the top who says, "yes," "no," "we shouldn't buy this," "we shouldn't sell this."   

**A:**  Yeah, but the person, one is very efficient they may respect, but even then they may decide the other way, this very often happen in the shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Who would [end of the tape]   

