# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.09 : Tape 9  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ;ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Cleveland, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted, recorded in English and Tibetan translated completely into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ;ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 50  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview, he continuers his discussion from tape M.0009.08 about the famous incident that occurred regarding the distribution of Gen Lamey's wealth once he died. Then he discusses the conflict over whether the scholar monks should get more salary. He also discusses some aspects of the education system.   

---  
### Tape 9  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_09/M_0009_09.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  (Continues discussing from Tape 8, the Gen Lamey incident) If I remember correctly, the meeting was continued one day, I don't know what time they started, but then it becomes hectic and becomes very much discussion up and down and they continued the whole day, the whole night, and the next day without stopping. Both side is going on and up and down. I do remember, they finally, when the manager, our manager walked out from the tsondu was sometime like a, the next day, the second day before noon, around about that time he walked out and after he left the tsondu then the shöndre are (cooled) down a little bit I think. Cooled down a little bit and have a little more discussion, then finally the tsondu decided to go along with the shöndre's decision. He was really   

**Q:**  He was the one arguing not to do it?   

**A:**  So the tsondu says, No. And then they said no. And they looked at him. And he said "Absolutely not." He, at first, I do remember, he didn't go for tsondu and then they came and called him, that's why I remember, and then he didn't come out that whole day, whole night and he walked out and then there's a big thing going on up there.   

**Q:**  Now, he was not, you didn't pick him, you were too   

**A:**  I'm too young.   

**Q:**  He's the second one after the first chandzö?   

**A:**  Labrang's second chandzö, yeah, second chandzö. He's a very capable man, a very, very capable man as far as that period is concerned.   

**Q:**  He's the one who was a khampa himself?   

**A:**  He's khampa himself.   

**Q:**  And his relatives, is that the one?   

**A:**  And his relatives and even the Tshaja used to come all the time.   

**Q:**  He was about how old?   

**A:**  It seems he was about 50 at that time. Probably he was about 50, late fifties. He was well respected in Drepung. In terms of not as geshe or knowlege but as somebody who can think and talk.   

**Q:**  But he was a geshe or no?   

**A:**  He is geshe. Not an outstanding geshe.   

**Q:**  So what would be the difference between an outstanding geshe and just a geshe?   

**A:**  Oh, just a geshe is just a geshe, outstanding geshe is outstanding geshe.   

**Q:**  No, but, like there's a test, everybody has to take a test.   

**A:**  Yes, geshe have lot of...that I think we'll talk in education system, there's a lot of different ways.   

**Q:**  Okay, we'll leave that, okay, so that's one case that we can look at.   

**A:**  I think this is one incident I remember.   

**Q:**  And there's tsidrung around.   

**Q:**  Okay, that's one incident, now can you think of any other ones that   

**A:**  In the monasteries   

**Q:**  There was that one that you said about paying the pechawa.   

**A:**  That was the Gomang Tratsang's incident, and I think   

**Q:**  I still didn't understand what you said, though, you said that, I couldn't understand you're   

**A:**  The pechawa wanted more money.   

**Q:**  Yeah, but that seems, they study harder, why did people object?   

**A:**  Oh, they don't object for studying harder, what they objected is getting extra grain.   

**Q:**  Well, I understand that.   

**A:**  So, I think that was the main thing and they also fought for some kind of exemption of shöndre as well as more money and more grain for the pechawa, I think that was the base, and so finally they didn't win. The gentleman whose in New York, he had a life long incident, he was in Namgyal [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] Tratsang, in some kind of trouble there, they throw him out, then he was somewhere else, and then he was thrown out from there too, with some case and finally Drepung. And from Namgyal, he went to Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] and had a trouble with Kündeling and then joined the Gomang and then he had trouble in Gomang and thrown out. Probably that's what happened.   

**Q:**  He was a pechawa?   

**A:**  He was a very well known pechawa, geshe, sort of very good geshe, well-known geshe. Too, but he had this incident. He's the one who had that book with Osolo or something in Switzerland some art book, he took that in some ....He is an author of that too.   

**Q:**  How did this happen now, let's say a pechawa gets the idea that we ones who are studying should get more money that just the working monks, so what would he do, how did it happen, what did people do?   

**A:**  Probably he was karam gyorpön [Tib. བཀ་རམ་སྐྱོར་དཔོན], so he was some kind of leading role and he had meetings of few number of pechawa and they probably would go to see khempo, pechawa are normally acquainted with khempo rather than chabu, so he might have gone to chabu, I don't know, he can tell the detail how they did but, so then tell them that we felt this way .... so he may file a petition or write, he knows how to write, he is quite a good writer too, so he file them and that's how they start. Probably went to chabu or khempo or then they come to the meeting and then disagreement will come and   

**Q:**  What kind of meeting, then what do you think happened next?   

**A:**  Probably khempo will call the chabu and chabu, Gomang chabu and they have meeting. And probably the chabu would not agree definitely straight away because they are a little bit of anti-pechawa feeling too among them. A little bit, yes. Underneath.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  They are not pechawa and they always become the khempo and things like that, they become big boss.   

**Q:**  The pechawa become?   

**A:**  The pechawa, after geshe, they become a khempo and things like that. Some are more well known, somehow, but they are nobody in the thing. Geshe is something goes out, and then you know, somebody and they becomes totally different person and they   

**Q:**  What do you mean, I don't understand?   

**A:**  Totally with some privileges, some titles, and somethings and   

**Q:**  Where do the geshe go, I don't understand.   

**A:**  Different monasteries and become the abbot and the   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, like the branch monasteries, gönlag [Tib. དགོན་ལྷག]   

**A:**  Yes, gönlag or shigön [Tib. གཞིས་དགོན] and things like that.   

**Q:**  Shigön is what?   

**A:**  Shigön is the base monastery, and whereever they're from, local native monasteries. They go back these areas and become abbots, even though they might not have been a gönlag, but you know, in shigön they become abbots and things like that, so some geshe from the trasa [Tib. གྲྭ་ས] [the three great monastic seats] means something more greater than anybody else in any other part of Tibet. So they're somebody, so whenever they come back, they're somebody so these chabu and bungdzö remain in that area that level so there are little bit, little bit of prejudice, I think. Sort of undercutting, totally undercutting. So   

**Q:**  Among the kind of administrative...chabu, gegö, and so on.   

**A:**  Among the administrative, chabu, gegö, and so on. There's a little bit of under current thing and so that...definately theres is anti feeling.   

**Q:**  What was interesting, was that to me it would seem that the khempo and the other people would say, see, that's a good idea, because we want more monks to study (tape interruption) so I hear a little bit about everything, so in this case he would have made a petition and there would have been some meeting.   

**A:**  Some meeting and naturally they, the opposition would come to the meeting and they disagree and   

**Q:**  Like what would be the arguments? What you remember from what you heard?   

**A:**  I did not remember anything of the argument, specifically what I heard at that time, but what I heard is that is try to get benefit extra for pechawa. Exemption in shöndre though tratsang really doesn't have much of shöndre , but he was seeking for exemption and more benefit: more money and more grains. And that's what he's seeking.   

**Q:**  More money meaning...phog?   

**A:**  Phog, much more exeptional phog and then, I'm not really sure, I think, whether he really asked the pechawa not to have to go to the traja to get the phog or to get like the shares, kela [Tib. སྐལ་བ]. whatever, something he had to....   

**Q:**  Like, salary.   

**A:**  Whatever, I think, he demanded and that's not acceptable and he went to the government.   

**Q:**  Oh, he went to the government?   

**A:**  The government, yea.   

**Q:**  Oh, that's what the problem was? I see, he went to dewashung.   

**A:**  Dewashung, yea.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  Probably went up to dewashung. It's not so easy.   

**Q:**  That's right because there was an office of reform in the new government that the Chinese had insisted on, some, to make, an office to make reforms in Tibet, I bet he went there and said.   

**A:**  Legjö Legung [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**Q:**  Something like that.   

**A:**  I don't believe so.   

**Q:**  You don't think so. You think he went to Yigtsang?   

**A:**  I think they went to Yigtsang, I don't even think they went to the Legjö Legung. I'm not even sure.   

**Q:**  I mean that's an interesting case because   

**A:**  I don't think that Legjö was established at that time. In the Legjö, you know they have these monk representative. Some monk kudrak went into the Legjö. And Legjö, is not only the Lhasa kudrak but also monks kudrak and they involved. A few monk officials went there, I think, they're reprensentatives.   

**Q:**  But you don't, I mean what you sounded like yesterday, is that you thought most monks weren't sympathetic with this?   

**A:**  Majority, you know that most monks will in the Gomang, if the pechawa are fighting, few Loseling pechawa will sympathize with them, the majority will follow the adminstrator's decision so they might not been sympathetic and beside himself, was another person, you know a person, that get incident everywhere...sort of, you know that's why   

**Q:**  His personality...played a role.   

**A:**  His personality played role of gaining sympathy.   

**Q:**  But were you saying yesterday that most of the monks would think that since the pechawa are working for their own...salvation that why should we pay them extra?   

**A:**  Yes, I said, why should they get extra because their liberation is their personal liberation. And everybody's working for liberation, maybe working little bit more academic way and others maybe you working little lesser academic way so that will be the general non-pechawa will have that.   

**Q:**  That they're also working for?   

**A:**  For liberation, for Buddhism, for development and for mm.. and monastery, they don't say we are working for the monastery, pechawa were not considered working for the monastery.   

**Q:**  Oh really.   

**A:**  No, working for monastery means, some material benefit for monastery.   

**Q:**  I see, so what would the pechawa say? That they're working for their own salvation.   

**A:**  No they will say "Well, we're working for internal development which indirectly benefits monastery"   

**Q:**  They're working for internal development.   

**A:**  Internal development and so that's why I (think) very hard to get privileges for the pechawa and difficult to gain recognition of their academic contribution is a contribution to the monastery. Because those administrative people would only have to think physical benefit and they would, I mean, its guaranteed there, you know, the academic contribution and spiritual contribution is taking granted. So they won't count in, because it's taking granted.   

**Q:**  So we were talking about how monks think, it's kind of interesting to us because we don't understand. We would think, you see that, the monastery is set up so people study, that the gelukpa view point [Tib. ལྡ་བ], right. So therefore, the people who study more that those who don't, should be made easy to be made a pechawa.   

**A:**  That's true, but, it is not.   

**Q:**  Isn't that interesting.   

**A:**  That's not the view. Pechawa has the facilities been provided but uh, not very much.   

**Q:**  Like what kind of things? I haven't heard of any...some people say they got special phog but I guess not.   

**A:**  No! Not that I know, Loseling doesn't have any at all. Gomang may have, I don't know, but Loseling don't. For example, Gomang has different, Gomang has a...Gomang gegö is changed like, three or four times a year.   

**Q:**  Oh really.   

**A:**  One gegö happens to be geshe and the rest of them from the offiial type of Gomang Tratsang. Loseling is one gegö, one year.   

**Q:**  You have to be geshe?   

**A:**  No, never geshe. Loseling geshe has official role. In Gomang, there's geshe role too. Ah, there are a lot of differences too.   

**Q:**  Does the gegö have to come from a kyidu or just anybody?   

**A:**  Gomang or Loseling both, its from anybody. It is choice of the khempo, I think khempo is appointed maybe two or three years in advance, so probably they have that.   

**Q:**  So that's one thing of trying to change the rules that was unsuccessful, because they didn't get success...anything else you can think of? I know there was the case of Ganden Shartse [Tib. ཤར་རྩེ]. With when the abbot was thrown out...because he wanted to do what, he wanted to do something similar, right?   

**A:**  That was Song Rinpoche [Tib. ཟོང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] . He was very strict, he wanted to do very strict. Yea and must be there quite a number of them.   

**Q:**  Must be a lot, ten thousand people, there have to be lots of these, all of them.   

**A:**  A lot of these incidents, I'm quite sure.   

**Q:**  But normally, if two monks have a dispute, let's say, over something, over property, who settles it? I mean, let's say they were in the shagtsang and then they split up and they say "That's my rug," and you say "No, that's my rug." I mean, where does it go?   

**A:**  I'm not really aware of many shagtsang disputes settled by the laji or gegö or shengo, maybe some there, maybe they go to gegö, I think they can go to anybody really, anybody with any authority and get to make decisions but then they're not happy, they always go higher up and but when the big disputes, like in the big shagtsang or something, then so many things involved probably go the government, oh I don't really know much of them.   

**Q:**  The dewashung?   

**A:**  Yes, I think so, I don't think they, not many of them was settle out by the laji , I really don't know much of laji set it down.   

**Q:**  See these are things that are really going to be important to get people to really know what happens, but there has to be structure, because let's say we have a fight and you go to the gegö and I go to the chabu...or I go to the khempo.   

**A:**  You go to the khempo, khempo probably have a more overruling power over gegö.   

**Q:**  Yes, but then there'd have to be some structure.   

**A:**  But then, what happens is...the disciplinarian action, probably the gegö will be the main in charge, but I don't really know whether the case is going to the khempo and gegö try to interevene, I don't think so...because it go to the khempo, it go with the khempo. So khempo, whether disciplinary or whatever it is, I think it will go to the khempo and khempo will make the decision. And if you don't agree with the khempo's decision, otherwise you have to go to either laji or dewashung.   

**Q:**  Yes, see there are two kinds of disputes we have to worry about, one are personal ones between individual monks or shagtsang or something like that and the other are between tratsang.   

**A:**  A lot of individual monks have been dispute is settled at khamtsen level...if it within the khamtsen level and if its within the tratsang, at the tratsang level it will be settled. If it is a physical fight or something, mostly gegö settles.   

**Q:**  That's tratsang?   

**A:**  That's tratsang level, two different ones and it is the level that settles. If it endulge physical sort of and it go beyond the shengo settles. But then, when the case goes beyond the physical level which is the scope of the monk, actually, it go beyond the scope of monk, it goes much more deeper, the big shagtsang dipute, then it goes too far beyond, and then I don't think the monk's level comes out. Though, I do remember, certain disputes in there, you know, yea, coming back, there's one instant of Jiso Tagkhare [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ] somebody accused something happened, he was the jiso of Gomang, that was another very, very important figure in the Drepung and played a lot of roles.   

**Q:**  Something happened there?   

**A:**  I don't know what happened, some dispute at his jiso level.   

**Q:**  Some dispute meaning?   

**A:**  Some fight, somebody's sort of revolting against him and accused him of having affairs with a woman, and it came to shengo level then and the shengo, I don't believe the shengo had lashed Tagkhare but the shengo lashed that woman, I'm sure, yea the shengo lashed that woman and somehow they settled it through, I do not know what really happened, that was a one big thing happened, the Tagkhare incident.   

**Q:**  How do you spell his name?   

**A:**  [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ]. It is his nickname which means "the Tiger with cut off mounth". I don't know what his real name is. [TN Note. His real name is Jinpa Trimey [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ་དྲི་མེད].   

**Q:**  Well, that's would be one important thing, that is to see how the process of how these things are settled.   

**A:**  I think the guy in New York will know...this is the Gomang case.   

**Q:**  Okay, let's turn now to look at the teaching and ordination, now, let's do teaching first. Tushi says that there's three things: shetra, [Tib. བཤད་གྲྭ] tsötra, [Tib. རྩོད་གྲྭ] and druptra [Tib. སྒྲུབ་གྲྭ].   

**A:**  Yes, but shetra, tsötra, druptra...are not in Drepung. Only the tsötra is in Drepung, there is no shetra, druptra.   

**Q:**  So why don't you explain in your own words, how education works you know what the different chöra and all these stuff?   

**A:**  Actually, shetra, druptra are mostly...druptra is where people meditate. And the meditation in the Drepung and all these, they taking meditation granted as individual job, sort of collectively they're not created at all. Shetra are normally when there's not much debate, people go over the books and explain it and goes through it. So these are the brief definition of shetra. And tsötra is a way you debate and go a little deeper into it and that is the tsötra. Tsötra is mostly analytical. And shetra, druptra does and does not, officially does not really have a analytical definition.   

**Q:**  But that's like a class, that's like a type of education.   

**A:**  That's how you learn, different ways of learning.   

**Q:**  Different ways of learning, I see.   

**A:**  So in the case of Drepung, in the case of Loseling, or Gomang, even there it is more or less shetra, no, tsötra rather than anything else. So under that circumstances, how does it work, now. Now, briefly, let's put this way...after Atisha and after Tsongkhapa [Tib. ཙོང་ཁ་པ], somehow, they identify, Tibetans identify more with sort of Mahayana style, though, even though before they do but much more so in after Atisha and Tsongkhapa, sort of a Mahayana thing and so they sort of have a very sort of big five subject, sort of that's what they really sort of concentrated on, a big five subjects. Namely, the transcendantal subject, what they call it Pangya Parimita in Sanskrit.   

**Q:**  What do you call it in Tibetan?   

**A:**  Pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན]. The root text was Matreyias root text given to Asanda, Abisamaya Alankara. That's Sanskrit. And in Tibetan Ngöntogyen [[Tib. མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན] the shorter form. Longer form is [Tib. ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དོན་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་རྒྱན]. So that's what they... took as root text of the transcendental studies. And ummm...then, of course there are a lot of commentaries and notably, one of the Indian commentaries by, in Tibetan we call it Senge Sangpo [Tib. སེང་གེ་བཟང་པོ] and his commentary is one of Drepa Dönsel [Tib. འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ]. So, I think in Sanskrit they call it Abadebega or something, I'm not very sure about Sanskrit, ok? So, all these and then that was the root text and in addition to that, Tsongkhapa's commentary and both Gyeltsab [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཚབ] and Khedrub [Tib. མཁས་གྲུབ]' [the two main disciples of Tsongkhapa] commentary. And however as we mentioned yesterday, each tratsang has its own documents, yigcha [Tib. ཡིག་ཆ] so what will happen is every tratsang will take their yigcha as a more literally as possible and more sort of authentic confirmation as possible, correct interpretation.   

**Q:**  These are called yigcha or tratsang yigcha, is there a long name like?   

**A:**  Oh, there...yea, Loseling yigcha, Gomang yigcha, like that type, they identify with it. So, there are two ways involved; one, memorizing the root texts - three I should really say; one, memorize the root texts, and the second, to read the commentaries and try to understand the root texts better through the commentaries, third, go to the teacher and listen to his explanation, fourth, take that down and debate it with colleagues and try to gain analytical understanding and understanding followed by the analytical debate. So, this was basic way of really studying, so in order to do this analytical thing, so you need to open yourself through in certain rules, how the analytical system works in that. So therefore, first and foremost what the teacher is, what they call the düdra, and the düdra very often refers as [Tib. རིགས་པའི་སྒོ་འབྱེད], for the opening of the wisdom or idea or whatever. So here they teach you how to   

**Q:**  Düdra is spelled what?   

**A:**  [Tib. བསྡུས་གྲྭ]. Some tratsang have their own düdra and some don't, in the case of Loseling, I thing they follow the Ratö düdra, sort of Ratö has its own düdra. So first and foremost, they teach düdra. Teaching system is the same, memorizing, giving explanation and try to understand it through debate analytical way. So first they teach düdra which will try to tell you how the debate system works, how analytical system do, which are the rules, how much you can go, how far you can go, and beyond that it is out of rule or be sort of, rules would be established.   

**Q:**  What example would that be?   

**A:**  Example, very strange example here now. Example of certain rules, they say the definition has to cover the meanings and if you try to give a just a definition, well, we call this tsenyi [Tib. མཚན་ཉིད], now this will be a little more difficult, then it has to be if these conditions are here, it has to be this one, and if this is this one, it have to follow all this, this, this condition right here. And what is the sign of not being that because this conditions are missing, one or two are missing, so therefore, it cannot be that. And that type of rule and then the second rule is, ok, theres a general bigger one and a particular small one, so the bigger one covers the small one. Example is, beginning always use the colors and the white. Every color is a color but white is also color but every color is not white. Red is also color but it is not white. So that type of another system.   

**Q:**  So color is the bigger one.   

**A:**  The color is the general bigger one because the red, yellow, blue, green are color, but white is a color but it is not red, so the white is a color but the color is not white. Like that type of system. Is like, I don't know what you call it, in the western they has same thing, so that kind of thing they will open it up. Open type of individual, these and then the fundamental basis of the phenomena, how it work, what really is, phenomena is, what it has to be, and what are the defination of a phenomena, and what is the defination of mind, and what is the defination of reasoning, how do reasoning works. How can you convince by giving reasons have to be this. These sort of basic rules and with a little bit of a trick here and there, it covers the düdra. And the düdra is not even a subject, counted as a not actual subject, it is preliminary subject. It is preliminary subject and then followed by the logic, they will teach you logic. And the root text for the logic is Paramanar Vartika...the Pharmana of the Dharma Kirti in Sanskrit.   

**Q:**  Which would be.   

**A:**  Indian scholar, in Tibetan called Tsema Namdre [Tib. ཚད་མ་རྣམ་འགྲེལ] by Lopön Chödra [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན་ཆོས་གྲགས] is the root text for all monasteries for logical debate. Each as I mentioned to you, tratsang and all commentaries, it is all thing, everything and beside Gyeltsab Khedrub's text. That is, the, one of the important subject out of five, however, Loseling does not have a class of its own for Parmana studies, this is strange. So, the Parmana studies are based, sort of relied on one month in summer in Sangphu [Tib. གསང་ཕུ] [special debate session held in Sangphu].   

**Q:**  Where's that?   

**A:**  Sangphu, across the river, other side of Sangphu. One month in Sangphu and another month, in winter, one and half month or whatever in Jang günchö. It's below Nyethang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང], above Chushü [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར], is a little village where they go. So, not all the monks go, but a few of the monks go, not few, quite a lot of them go. Mostly pechawa will go, many of them. So, then major study was, sort of, time alloted is this, all others will have year of allotment, but the tsema or the logic doesn't have, sort of, you have to do your own, by going to Jang günchö or Sangphu Yarchö [tib, dbyar chos]. [the summer debate] So that's what that covers.   

**Q:**  Yes, now, I still a little bit confused. So that's where the logic is taught in these for two months, one month each?   

**A:**  Yea, a month and a half, or more or less.   

**Q:**  And the other classes are going on, during the year, in the monasteries?   

**A:**  Other classes are in the monasteries, in the monasteries, now then the, if I talk to, next subject, is the... then we deal with that, is Pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན]. And in Pharchin, in the case of Loseling, almost five, six years and whole year round study for six years in six different classes.   

**Q:**  One class a year?   

**A:**  One class each year.   

**Q:**  Six levels, though?   

**A:**  Six levels, yes, that's right. So the first is düdra level and the next year from düdra you'll be transformed to the first year of the Pharchin.   

**Q:**  So I see, you would go like that, one year, just düdra.   

**A:**  One is just düdra, and düdra is including lurig and tagrik which is the opening of the mind and opening of the brief explanation of the mind and the brief explanation of the reasoning, so that includes lurig tagrik and düdra,   

**Q:**  Spelling of tagrik?   

**A:**  [Tib. རྟགས་རིགས] Reasoning. So sometimes, some people can be one or two years in düdra too, I think, it depends your own choice and your teacher's choice and things like that.   

**Q:**  But everybody's only in one class a year?   

**A:**  Everybody.   

**Q:**  I mean like, you don't have like two classes, one of this, one of that?   

**A:**  No we don't.   

**Q:**  Just one class a year.   

**A:**  One class a year. With the exception of tsema.   

**Q:**  So then you go from düdra?   

**A:**  Then you go from the düdra to Pharchin, the first year one. We call that gusum gyinkho [Tib. སྐུ་གསུམ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར], Three bodies with the gyingkho, [mandala]. That is because the first text in the Loseling yigcha says "gusum gyingkho ..." They're taking the first two words..ha ha, so it is the gusum gyingkho grade. They study from the gusum gyingkho up to, I think, it is to jig dutre nyangbey, [Tib. ?] maybe I'm wrong. So, anyway, that's first year, the first start. Second year, the way to studying is the same thing, follow, they have their own commentaries and all this sort of things and the second year will go into trang nge [Tib. དྲང་ངེས]. Trang nge is true truth. Which is the truth teaching and which is the, which can you take it as words, as what word says and which you can not take, which have to be interpreted. Which should be interpreted and which should not be interpreted in that. That all the base, only on Abasamaya Alankaya In the trang nge, there are side curriculumas like, Tshongkhaba's Legshe Nyingpo [Tib. ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ] will be add up. And Loseling has its own trang nge called Upela Trengwa [Tib. ut pa la'i phreng ba] in addition to that, the outstanding yigcha, you have two side yigcha, additional things like that.   

**Q:**  And when it comes up, it means you have to read it?   

**A:**  You have to read it and study it at that time and also you have to defend it as well as   

**Q:**  In debate?   

**A:**  In debate and all this you have to do. That is the second year, trang nge. And third year, is I think, is Semgye grade [Tib. སེམས་སྐྱེད་འཛིན་གྲྭ]. That is the Bodhi chita or the altruistic mind. They will talk. And then they divide it into two, they pray for more altruistic mind and action for more altruistic mind and they cover both, however there's another division of relative altruistic mind and ultimate altruistic mind, they will cover the relative altruistic mind and not ultimate altruistic mind in that year. So, that year is totally on the Bodhi chita, the altruistic mind.   

**Q:**  Bodhi chita in Tibetan is what?   

**A:**  Changchub kyisem [Tib. བྱང་འཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས] . Briefly they call that semgye. Semgye and but Loseling doesn't have additional side thing on that, however they will read that famous Bodhisatwa Chaya Abatara. Many do, many don't at that time. Year after that is Gendün nyishu [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་ཤུ]. Gendün nyishu, there's twenty different systems of Gendün, sort of, not really Gendün of the local dialouge [monk], but it is sort of twenty different ways of counting it, according to the Aba Samaya rules and we spend one year on that. And that year, we have side, again additional side yigcha, additional usual yigcha like Gendün nyishu and all sorts of things, I think Gendün nyishu has quite a lot of them. At the end. I'm going (brief-brief).   

**Q:**  That's good. Come in.   

**A:**  Next year, followed by that, called Samsu [Tib. bsam su ?]. Sumsu is some kind of meditation development and then the form and formless development and all this subject is probably for one year and then that year there is a lot of addition, additional, in addition to the usual, jidön [Tib. སྤྱི་དོན] and thachö [Tib. མཐའ་ཆོད]. Pharchin generally covers jidön and thachö. Loseling has three yigcha. One jidön, is general explanation, thachö is detailed discussion, view points and arguments, and disagreements and all this of note, and then there's tsatsig [Tib. རྩ་ཙིག] means root text commentary, three of them is Loseling's basic yigcha for throughout all this final six years, final six years of the period. So, then, in addition to that, you have like, Samsu and for Gomang, there's sumsu chemo, there's additional one, a huge one, and so, samsu, you do that. And then, the year after that, you follow, what happens? Looks like kabshipa [Tib. སྐབས་བཞི་པ], the fourth chapter. I think its the next year is fourth chapter. So that means you have to expect to cover, samsu is the lower part of the first chapter and then they expect to cover the second and third chapter that year too. I have to check, I forgot it, I think there is a grade of second chapter [Tib. སྐབས་གཉིས་པའི་འཛིན་གྲྭ] some sort, and then the next year is kabshipa, that is a big huge subject, a huge subject. I mean it is really lot to do, you have tremendous things to do.   

**Q:**  A lot of texts to read?   

**A:**  A lot of text to read, a lot of texts to teach, listen, debate, read and umm, put it on in addition to the usual yigcha, Tshongkhapa's huge thing, all the sentreng [Tib. gser phreng ?]. And in addition to that, they also expect you to cover the following left over eight chapters too. Eight chapters too. Following four more chapters, fifth chapter, sixth chapter, seventh chapter, eighth chapter, in addition to the fourth chapter. Its like a, fourth chapter, you spend most of the time and um, then they cover the rest of them, a little bit. Quite a lot, but then, always they expect you to come back and re-do it. Come back in the sense that you continue reading, debating, and not sort of left it here and you finish it off and not the book closed. That's the wrong way of looking at it. Followed by two next years on the Uma [Tib. དབུ་མ], that is the Madhymika, center part doctrine which is the direct [end of the tape]   

**Q:**  Yes, so that's the Uma.   

**A:**  The Uma and the Pharchin period normally covers the, what we call it, hidding meanings.   

**Q:**  Hidden meanings?   

**A:**  Hidden meanings of the Pangya Paramita or the trandscendental texts and Uma, the Madhymika is supposed to be the direct meaning of the Pangya Paramita texts, supposed to be. So, in the case of Loseling and Drepung, the Uma is only for two years, and the texts that you have to cover is now become tripled size.   

**Q:**  What do you mean?   

**A:**  It will triple the size, its a huge text because Loseling has separate Uma jidön, separate Uma Thachö, which Uma jidön means general explanation of Uma, text - root text, and then Thachö is the detail one. So on top of it, the root text have two; Nagarjuna's [Tib. ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ] root text and Chandrakirti's [Tib. lza ba grags pa] commentary of word commentary and then meaning commentary, but the meaning commentary, what they call it the Madhymika Awatara or Uma Jugpa [Tib. དབུ་མ་འཇུག་པ], they will take it as basic point of study by the Chandrakirti of the Indian called Chandrakirti. That is basic.   

**Q:**  What do they call it in Tibetan?   

**A:**  Lopön Dawa Trakpa [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན་ཟླ་བ་གྲགས་པ]. Lopön Dawa Trakpa's Uma Jugpa is the actually root text with the guaranteed of Nagarjuna's Uma Tsawa Sherab [Tib. དབུ་མ་རྩ་བ་ཤེས་རབ].   

**Q:**  That's about eight years now? Or is that six years?   

**A:**  Two more years.   

**Q:**  I think you have more than that already.   

**A:**  No, no, you mean this, already now it's going to be eight years. Yes, it's going to be eight years, sort of, two year in Uma.   

**Q:**  Six years in the Pharchin,   

**A:**  Six years in the Pharchin. And two years in the Uma, division is between the dangog [Tib. བདག་འགོག] and the tshegog, [Tib. ཚད་འགོག] whereas the self-stop and that is not existent of the self-identity, is the second year's subject and the first year is   

**Q:**  Dangog is?   

**A:**  Dangog means self-stop and tsegog, [Tib. ཚད་འགོག] tsema [Tib. ཚད་མ] is the perceiving mind and that is the stage after that it is first stage, and dangog is the second stage. Each one of those subjects, year wise divided subject, does have a tsoglang [Tib. ཚོགས་ལངས] also. Tsoglang means, okay that comes back separate a little....that's going too. That's about 8 years. Then the next four years, (mumbling), next four years, will be on vinaya stages, yesterday's, rules of the monks, like that, what do you call that, in Tibetan, is Düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ]. The root text for the Tibetan text is Do Tsawa [Tib. མདོ་རྩ་བ] which is not really a sutra but it is one of the Indian Pandits who wrote called root sutra, written by Lopön Yöntenwö [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན་ཡོན་ཏན་འོད] in Tibetan but in Sanskrit they have some different name for that. So anyway, it is Gunapati's root sutra, that will be taking as root text and the commentaries as usually follow, and tratsang yigcha is, there's dom, [Tib. ?] I don't think there's Düwa jidön. I don't remember, but there's dom. And, umm...I don't think there's thachö either.   

**Q:**  He mentioned something called "Soso?"   

**A:**  Soso Tharpaido [Tib. སོ་སོ་ཐར་པའི་མདོ] and Düwa is divided into lot of divisions in Düwa, mostly the vows that you have taken are called Soso Tharpai vow. Self-liberating vow. So, there are eight of them. So, out of these eight, Soso Tharpai vows, three of them's are lay vows and five of them is celibacy vow. So, celibacy vow, so that is the Soso Tharpai vow [Tib. རབ་བྱུང་སྡོམ་པ་དང་པོ་ལྔ། ཁྱིམ་པའི་སྡོམ་པ་དང་པོ་གསུམ། རྩ་བ་བཞི་དང་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད། བརྒྱད་པོ་ཉིད་ནི་སྡོམ་པ་འོ]. So, what you really study here is the how vows beginning, how vows existed, what are the different..., what happened during the Buddha's time and afterwards, why there's rituals involved later, and earlier why there are no rituals, and then the one who makes you fall down, what makes you break the vow and how you steal it   

**Q:**  How you steal it meaning how you cheat?   

**A:**  How you cheat. I mean there are twelve root breaking vows. Four root thing which breaks a vow is sexual misconduct, killing human beings, and stealing, and black lies. And so, then they will go detail, if you kill this way you don't get it, if you kill this way, you get it. If you do all sorts of things, so I mean, really, so even saying in Tibetan, if you know Düwa, if you know Düwa, you know how to steal it.   

**Q:**  How do say that in Tibetan?   

**A:**  [Tib. འདུལ་བ་ཤེས་ན་རྐུ་མཁས]. You know how to steal it because they tell you all hundred thousand different way to stealing it. And they example it, this is going to be real stealing, vow breaking or not, and that sort of thing, so do the sexual...so is the lying, so is the killing, so, I mean this is really detail. And then these are what we mentioned Soso Tharpa. And then, second year, these, I think this is divided, second year is, the first year you look up to the first root breaking vow and twelve close ones. And in the second year, you go thirty downfalls and sixty minor downfalls, no, eighty minor downfalls..plus semi-minor downfalls, there is....I don't know, maybe I forget, but there are a hundred and thirty four something [Tib. nyes spyod brya dang so bzhi]. That will be the, I think, the second year study. And third and fourth year will go over the, how to purify, protect, and that one quality because divided into upper portion and lower portion called shitö shimey [Tib. བཞི་སྟོད་བཞི་སྨད] so third and fourth year is the shimey study. In the third - in that fourth year, you don't have additional group, that group don't sit separately because they'll be two years you may have in there. So that will be bigger group there because this year you join in and the group find last year's group standing there. So this is now, is number two, call that number two, class number two, [Tib. འཛིན་གྲྭ་གཉིས་པ]. So if you stay two years in there and then the next year you be transferred in the first [Tib. དང་པོ]. This is the first class group.   

**Q:**  Class number two comes before the first? ?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  After people identify up to third class [Tib. འཛིན་གསུམ་པ] also, then the fourth, [Tib. བཞི་བ], then before that nobody says fifth class and sixth class, nobody says, some people will identify in the third and the fourth class but not much, but the second, they will, I think definately become the first class.   

**Q:**  That is the end?   

**A:**  That is the end of the classification of separate group but in the first class what you study is the metaphysical studies. Root text is Lopön Yignyen's [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན་དབྱིག་གཉེན] Dzö Tsawa [Tib. མཛོད་རྩ་བ], which is the Basabandu's Abidama Kosha, eight chapters and in addition to the, oh, Düwa, I forgot, In Vinaya, in addition to that they have to take Künkhyen Tsonawa's [Tib. ཀུན་མཁྱེན་མཚོ་སྣ་བ] Tsodrig [Tib. མཚོ་སྒྲིག྄], is mostly important text by Loseling, and the others too. And that is addition to the usual curriculum. And then, also the first Dalai Lama's Rinchen Trengwa [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་ཕྲེང་བ] also, that's not that considered so important, you can say, you can comment that, you can interpret it. Tsonawa's Tsodrig normally you don't debate much. Then Dzö, eight years, eight chapters.   

**Q:**  That's in which year, in Vinaya or?   

**A:**  That is the first year. Eight chapters Dzö, so here now there are a lot of difference and then, you just have to sit there till you get out of geshe.   

**Q:**  When, what do you mean?   

**A:**  In the Dzö, in the first class, some people remains there like a couple of, like thirteen, fourteen years.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Stuck there, no more to go, but still you not become geshe yet.   

**Q:**  Why is that?   

**A:**  Well, now, lets go to how does the geshe comes in.   

**Q:**  Why don't we go eat then we'll do.   

**A:**  Are you hungry?   

**Q:**  You're not hungry now?   

**A:**  I already   

**Q:**  I can wait another half an hour.   

**A:**  And what the geshe do? The geshe will, how does one become geshe? When you are in the first class, [Tib. འཛིན་དང་པོ], there is no every year, I don't know, the abbot is on six years, the period of one abbot is six years, maybe once or twice during the term of the abbot, they will give the geshe exam. I do not know how many people they will come up. And, during the geshe exam, they debate and the debate have to be done in the general gathering together.   

**Q:**  General gathering means?   

**A:**  All the monks of the Loseling will stay and then they, the abbot will come, everybody sitting quiet and then   

**Q:**  In the outside, not in the assembly hall, dukhang [Tib. 'du khang?   

**A:**  In the chöra, in the open courtyard. And one by one they will get up, in normal debate system there is individual debate and group debate. Individual debate is the one to one and or two to three, maybe two people answer and two at one try to debate, or maybe one people try to answer and two - three people maybe try to debate. All this are considered as individual debate. Group debate is a group of people who sit down, one or two of them answer and the rest of them asking questions. Group debates are known as thamja [Tib. དམ་བཅའ] in Tibetan. And it can be bigger groups, oe small group, khamtsen has its own group, tratsang have its own group, and tratsang classes have its own group, each of them called class group debate [Tib. འཛིན་གྲྭ་དམ་བཅའ] and all sorts of things, that is the group debate. Every group debate, whoever is the debater who study, he will bring the subject and he will debate on that, you can choose the subject whatever you want to debate, you can prepare it and you bring it and you start. But during the geshe exam, you can not, whoever is the debater who studying, he will come and he'll say "tee" clap and starting the point and then he will take his sign down and come near the sign and have to bow down and stand there and the khempo will give the subject on which he should start the debate. Khempo will say one word or maybe he say something, "root text" or something like "commentary" maybe something out of subject." Whatever, so then you take that word, you can't say "Say it again", no, you have to carefully listen, and sort of, and then you go down and so   

**Q:**  Like he'll say a word, like what? Like, Pharchin or what?   

**A:**  No, no, no, not that way, one particular difficult subject or defend view point of, what you are going to say, out of yigcha or Tsongkhapa's word or root text   

**Q:**  He won't say where it's from?   

**A:**  No, it won't. He just say one word. That's all, like [Tib. སེམས་སྐྱེད་པ་ནི་གཞན་དོན་བྱེད] . This is very..... Everybody will have to say no, but   

**Q:**  And then the person have to do what?   

**A:**  The person has to know where it is from, dealing with what, and whatever he has said, he doesn't repeat word, he says please give me explanation of that word, something like that and then he have to .... all the debate, started from there.   

**Q:**  So he has to debate with somebody else, he has to ask somebody else? He'll have to ask him something.   

**A:**  Somebody who sitting there, ask give explanation of that, so if both are sometime don't know   

**Q:**  Wait, wait, wait, the khempo says and the geshe candidate then he   

**A:**  Two candidates, right one is answering candidate and one is debating candidate. So, the khempo will throw one word and the debating one, will repeat it and ask for the standing one, please give the explanation of that.   

**Q:**  Wait, wait, the sitting one asks the standing one.   

**A:**  No, the standing one asks the sitting one, give explanation, so the sitting one has to give some kind of explanation and the standing one has to debate on it. Have to disgree and debate on it. So sometime both doesn't know. Even if you agree you go out and do debate, yes, if you agree there no more debate, but you have to take it over the opposite viewpoint. So, so, even both won't know.   

**Q:**  That must be very embarrassing.   

**A:**  Both are very embarressing but then they have to sort of debate round about it and somehow try to get it more clearer and clearer and clearer. And if you cannot get more clearer, then khempo may interfere few words sometimes try to make it a little bit more clear, may or may not. And who else can interfere? lama shunglemba, sometimes can interfere, sometimes, but nobody asks him to...and sometimes both will stand there, sort of you know and say like "what shall I say" [Tib. ཨ་ནི་ག་རེ་ཟེར་དགོས་རེད] somebody, you have to say something. But it is very embarrassing and then sometimes khempo dislike it and he will change another word, yea, and change another word, and sometimes three or four and then finished, almost sure you're not getting good marks.   

**Q:**  Normally, it's only one?   

**A:**  Normally one and one, no, then they rotate again, I don't know which month, during the geshe [debate exam] tsögyug [Tib. རྩོད་རྒྱུགས] period there's additional chöra, additional semester created and then they really go through the whole semester. Turn by turn, turn by turn, I think each of the geshe will probably have to be answering for at least about 10-15 times, comes up and debating equal number of times, you, all these geshe rotate.   

**Q:**  So the exam isn't just one day, its over a long time.   

**A:**  Its a long time, a period of like three weeks or something.   

**Q:**  And the monks all have to come all the time?   

**A:**  Everybody.   

**Q:**  Everybody comes, three weeks, oh, my goodness.   

**A:**  Stand there and watching. So, that is how   

**Q:**  Even the non-pechawa?   

**A:**  They come, but there supposed to be the whole chöra, whole day time chöra, nyinchö [Tib. ཉིན་ཆོས] will set up.   

**Q:**  Nyinchö is what?   

**A:**  Day time chöra, And in that chöra they will do...okay that is another system of chöra system they will do phog system, chöra system.   

**Q:**  Vow system, its like different but still.   

**A:**  The vows, ummm, yeah, that's in the western point of view, have to give that, because they think monks are monks. Celibacy and the vows.   

**Q:**  But then?   

**A:**  Then the khempo will go out and do all these five subjects, you know subject after subject they will sort of continue to debate up down, everywhere, then they, normally, at the geshe level everybody will have quite good idea how good that individual is.   

**Q:**  All the other geshe?   

**A:**  Everybody, almost everybody will have some idea, the outstanding will be outstanding, okay will be okay, mediums will be medium, and stupids are clear stupid. Even then, it will be further confirmed by this tsögyug , the examiniation, examination of debate and that will further confirm.   

**Q:**  Where's that?   

**A:**  This is what the khempo is doing just now, this is the geshe tsögyug.   

**Q:**  What are the other ones? You mean, there's a couple week period of the debating and there is one tsögyug?   

**A:**  No. This is called tsögyug, whole thing called tsögyug...and at end of the tsögyug, then khempo announce, khempo will announce, so-so-so-so-so are geshe lharampa [Tib. ལྷ་རམས་པ], so-so-so-so-so are geshe tsorampa [Tib. ཚོགས་རམས་པ], that's number one, number two, so-so-so are geshe lingse [Tib. གླིང་བསྲེ], so-so-so are geshe dorampa [Tib. རྡོ་རམས་པ] Some tratsang have dorampa, some tratsang doesn't have dorampa. So mostly, the outstanding ones, in addition to the good ones and okay ones who fall in the lharampa category and okay ones who fall in tsorampa and uh, then below that will fall in lingse category.   

**Q:**  Lingse is?   

**A:**  [Tib. གླིང་བསྲེ].   

**Q:**  But everybody passes, some don't pass?   

**A:**  Some don't pass.   

**Q:**  Then they're names just aren't not mentioned?   

**A:**  They're names are not mentioned and so and so need to go back, go away till the next term or something.   

**Q:**  Oh yeah?   

**A:**  Yes. And then those are the few people who are totally stupid ignorants, not very witty, not very clever, yet who are constantly working hard, will be given geshe dorampa. Dorampa, they'll be a few, not so many. Doramba are like stone [Tib. རྡོ] but in Amdo, dorampa are outstanding. But in Loseling it is stone. Real stone. So they have been working hard but learned nothing, will get a dorampa. Then some people, khempo says, inbetween lharampa and tsorampa, that means there's still a number of years they have to wait even they [unclear] right. Instead they have to wait to pass through the final examination on what they call it, so if you are good you be put in category of lharampa category and if you are not that improved, they will, they will   

**Q:**  In between these two.   

**A:**  In between they give too, you know. Even between both   

**Q:**  This is just the khempo's decision?   

**A:**  It is totally khempo's decision.   

**Q:**  A lot of power then. Now who decides when you come up? You do, yourself?   

**A:**  No, according to the years that you, according to the seniority in the first class and say how much khempo would like to send geshe in the tsögyug, maybe sixty, maybe fifty, maybe only twenty.   

**Q:**  In what?   

**A:**  In each tsögyug.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, so he'll say fifty people...   

**A:**  Yes, he'll say, he going to put like fifty people, I think, that's his decison. So that's how you do...and how you does is every year number of geshe get it, commissioned. So accordingly he will do it.   

**Q:**  What do you mean, accordingly, he'll do it.   

**A:**  So your not going to send every year, tsögyug. So you say, what you do, one tsögyug and you probably have a store of thirty geshe waiting for the final commission. They are named geshe already geshe and khempo will say from now on you are geshe lharampa, your role is you can not carry huge load on back and you can not do this, you can not do that, you should wear like this, you should, your dress should be like this, and there are lot of rules the khempo will tell him. From now on, you are geshe tsorampa and from now own you are geshe. Lingsi and dorampa, they will say from now on you are geshe, you are category of lingse, from now on you are geshe, category of dorampa or tsorampa, they will tell you. So they are all geshe, but they are not passed out from there because each tratsang has a limit of geshe that passed on every year. Lharampa have to take it according to the Mönlam's day, and dewashung's decision, tsorampa, they will take according to the Tsongjö's days, days of the Tsongjö and dewashung decision that also has to be shared by all three monasteries. So the number of Loseling gets much less. Lingse also in the Drepung tsogchen, they have to pass through in tsogchen and Loseling, the days of the lingse, how many there, accordingly they have to   

**Q:**  What do you mean the days of the Lingse? or days of the Tsongjö?   

**A:**  Like Mönlam has twenty-one days, for 21 days, they going to pass like 16-17 geshe.   

**Q:**  Every year?   

**A:**  Every year.   

**Q:**  All total?   

**A:**  All total. So you cannot have additional geshe there. Sometime only one additional is allowed, special ones, otherwise, we don't. So how you going to get those, and they all rotate, all the tratsang has to rotate.   

**Q:**  You mean, Loseling gets every year?   

**A:**  Loseling gets, no, not that well, Loseling sometimes gets four geshe, four lharampa, sometimes you get only one, sometimes you get two. They sort of rotate, so that other tratsang do too. So, therefore   

**Q:**  Can they say no at the Mönlam? Let's say that Loseling has said, the khempo has say, you are geshe lharampa.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And then you go to Mönlam and can they say no.   

**A:**  Dewashung can turn him down. He's not fit to be here.   

**Q:**  I mean, but who's got that authority?   

**A:**  Dewashung.   

**Q:**  Yes, but, who is dewashung?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama's tsenshab [Tib. ཚན་ཞབས], [the debate partners] plus the Yongdzin, plus Ganden Tripa, plus the Regent plus   

**Q:**  Oh, I see. So then   

**A:**  They can turn down. They come back and they still can be geshe lharampa. They will send another substitute one. They may send in the next year.   

**Q:**  I see, that's pretty complicated.   

**A:**  It's complicated, but khempo named lharampa, he'll remain as a lharampa, no matter how many times dewashung turned down, khempo will send it back.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  They do that...they do that, they go back the next year. And they cannot return to be, not to be lharampa. Sometimes dewashung will turn them again, send him as tsorampa, so then they will be difficult for the khempo to resist, but normally they do much that way.   

**Q:**  I see, now at the Mönlam, then the monks are debating with monks from other tratsang and that?   

**A:**  Yea, the Mönlam is that, that is more or less for sure, yea, It is, they do debate and all this, I mean, what can you really debate, the subject, what you study is so big and they were debating like two or three hours, that's all, so what they really can do, I mean, that is, they count, but then the dewashung's work left, they have this number system they made, number one or number seven or they include in the number or not include in number and all this you make, but then in, plus dewashung plus, there are two khempo shunglenpa [Tib. མཁན་པོ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ] two, Drepung khempo shunglenpa.   

**Q:**  What are they?   

**A:**  Two abbots of the Drepung will come out of the general abbot and called shunglenpa, taking the root text, sort of, taking and they will sit equally there, they'll be more responsible, they'll be sitting down next to the geshe, listening everything very carefully, the tsenshab will be sitting up there and even when they try to make decision of khempo shunglenpa will even argue, yea, you may think so but I was there all the time.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yeah, they do that.   

**Q:**  I mean they'd have a conversation afterwards saying   

**A:**  Yes, before they make the numbers and who should be one and who should be below, they meet meetings and then they the khempo shunglenpa will go there. And they will do.   

**Q:**  So there's a certain number and then they give a rank of all the numbers.   

**A:**  Yes, they give the rank.   

**Q:**  And if they don't like one person, they say send somebody else.   

**A:**  Send somebody else, yes.   

**Q:**  From Loseling.   

**A:**  Yes, send somebody else.   

**Q:**  That's very complicated.   

**A:**  It's been complicated, but as far as all partical points are concerned, as far as tratsang is concerned, he is geshe. And however the Tsongjö is concerned, he is not geshe, can not go in with geshe.   

**Q:**  The geshe, where are the geshe?   

**A:**  Geshe are sitting in the front, front row, two front rows, they right in front facing each other. Two, right in the middle row, so they cannot go in there. As far as tratsang is concerned you are geshe and as far as everywhere you are geshe, you can write your name as geshe, before and after you can write as geshe. And this is how it work.   

**Q:**  So the government interferes again? I mean, that's   

**A:**  Government interferes, but that is start with 13th Dalai Lama's. Not before.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  It start with 13th Dalai Lama, before that there was no number system.   

**Q:**  And the number system?   

**A:**  Number system was introduced by the 13th Dalai Lama and then they, that was the excuse and then they started, even dewashung takes the [debate exam] tsögyug even before Mönlam, there's tsögyug they go all the geshe lharampa and go for tsögyug.   

**Q:**  And?   

**A:**  And they have the debate thing, the debate exam again, so this exam is actually not for geshe lharampa exam, for the number's [Tib. ཨང་ཀི] exam, the number exam. Since the number started, the tsögyug started before that in Norbulinga and you have to go to Norbulinga and they call it Norbulinga tsögyug.   

**Q:**  So, the only people who come then are the lharampa?   

**A:**  Only lharampa.   

**Q:**  In Mönlam?   

**A:**  In Mönlam.   

**Q:**  So the other people are just automatically geshe?   

**A:**  Ummm, not automatic, no.   

**Q:**  Does the government test them or   

**A:**  No, no, government has nothing to do. Nothing to do.   

**Q:**  So, its just the geshe lharampa?   

**A:**  Just the lharampa and also that of the numbers the government try to interfere and because these are the people who'll be most eligible to be abbots of different monasteries later. So I think government try to put them more hand in there by this level.   

**Q:**  So then there isn't any geshe tsorampa, then?   

**A:**  There is geshe tsorampa. Tsorampa will come in Tsongjö or then Mönlam. Tsorampa are not considered as geshe with numbers.   

**Q:**  They get numbers too?   

**A:**  No, tsorampa doesn't have numbers. I think like old lharampa, just like that, tsorampa doesn't have numbers, tsorampa doesn't have tsögyug either.   

**Q:**  So these donggo then, that's not done in Mönlam, that's done in tratsang?   

**A:**  That's done in tratsang. In that year.   

**Q:**  When you're finished?   

**A:**  The year of your finishing. Some people can do earlier and have to get the permission from the khempo. My case, I did earlier.   

**Q:**  Oh yeah?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You did it in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, donggo in Lhasa. I'm not done geshe thamja yet. So, I'm not geshe, I am geshe but I'm not geshe. I've done the tsögyug, I've not done the thamja.   

**Q:**  chesoo? [maybe unclear Tibetan ?]   

**A:**  Where you go through the Mönlam business, I've not gone through that yet. So I'm inbetween. So that's what it is. So I'm trying to defend in practtical purpose ?? I am a geshe [unclear speaking too fast].   

**Q:**  That's really a strange system.   

**A:**  But that's how it works. So for outsiders, when they look at it, they probably think, "Oh you're not geshe because you've not gone through Mönlam yet" But that's not the right thing because that really what it is. And a lot of geshe doesn't even go through the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  You'd have to go through Mönlam or go through Tsongjö?   

**A:**  I have to go through the Mönlam because I've been named as lharampa. So that's why.   

**Q:**  But there's no more Mönlam.   

**A:**  There's no more, well, there's no place to go.   

**Q:**  They may do that in India?   

**A:**  They did in India, and I didn't join.   

**Q:**  We're talking about economics in the monastery now.   

**A:**  It's mixed [unclear] but, one day, I forgot a monastery takes a money out and looks for good business people for investment.   

**Q:**  Oh really.   

**A:**  Oh, yes, they do that a lot. Some will call that "please take the capital" [Tib. མ་རྩ་ལེན་རོགས་བྱེད]. So they go on back and take the capital.   

**Q:**  And then the business man has to give what? Percentage of profit?   

**A:**  Business man will give a percentage of profit and the capital back within two or three years, whatever. And then two or three years, they return it and say no, more but then they go back another for five more everything good. So since it's a monastery's even if its less, but always good business people try to give it more to the monastery.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  Even they lost, the monastery doesn't experience the loss. But then that they will do for the reliable people what they really can rely. So they will go. That goes for labrang, khamtsen, tratsang, even laji and riji both. All of them do it.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  They have a system. One they give loans to people to asking to come there and asking and another they go and take it and say please take it. It's not like forced selling [Tib. འབམ་ཚོང], where the dewashung kudrak would ask you, not like that, where they refuse and do all sorts of things.   

**Q:**  This is just like, Do me a favor, use this?   

**A:**  Yes, do me a favor, use this and try to get some benefit, that's exactly that way.   

**Q:**  And then they get the capital back and what, how much 25%, 20%?   

**A:**  I don't know whether they working percentage bases or not, I don't know, I don't really think they work on percentage bases. I mean they said, what they normally say is little better than interest. That's what they say. Hope to get little better than interest [Tib. སྐྱེད་ཁ་ལས་དྲག་ཙམ].   

**Q:**  Interest is how much, is 25% [Tib. བཞི་ལྔ་འདྲོ] is the interest.   

**A:**  I have no idea.   

**Q:**  See, we have to find somebody who knows this kind of stuff.   

**A:**  I think there is big interest, so personal like Kabshöpa [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] type of people, when they come will really give high interest. But they try to bargain it up and bargain it.   

**Q:**  So who would do that, who would give this out?   

**A:**  Bungdzö or chabu.   

**Q:**  But there's nobody left from those people are there.   

**A:**  I don't think, but there are people who know of this, yea. They do. The bungdzö and chabu they have junior staff working for them. They are higher people and they know.   

**Q:**  Well, that, we definately need that.   

**A:**  Even khamtsen do, khamtsen, mitsen, trasa [Tib. གྲྭ་ས] tratsang, that is the actual word they use. khamtsen, mitsen trasa tratsang.   

**Q:**  Trasa is?   

**A:**  Trasa is the tsogchen thing, it is called trasa tratsang.   

**Q:**  Trasa means the tsogchen and tratsang means the?   

**A:**  Tratsang means tratsang.   

**Q:**  Trasa tratsang is the monastery and the tratsang.   

**A:**  The monastery and tratsang, that's what normally they say trasa tratsang khamtsen mitsen, it is a way of saying. Trasa tratsang khamtsen mitsen. What trasa means, like they're reaching all out tratsang.   

**Q:**  And then there are these poor monks who come as just....who knows why they come, we've got to find out all the different kinds, I mean, some come because they're kid was sick, I know, and some come because its like monk's taxes, tratre [Tib. གྲྭ་ཁྲལ] and some come because they're, the parents are religious person [Tib. ཆོས་པ].   

**A:**  Oh, monastery doesn't get the first type, Drepung don't get tratre at all, no whatsoever.   

**Q:**  But the gönla may? No?   

**A:**  Uh-uh. The gönla build themselves up, there is no such as far as Loseling is concerned, I don't know, maybe, there is no such, even Drepung, all Drepung. There is no such each gönla has to supply monk, no way.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  No. No. It is the monks who'll come because they want to come, that's for sure.   

**Q:**  Those are the older monks but then the younger monks   

**A:**  The younger monks, the parents will bring them and they want to put them there, so and they sort of beg to get there, and they really have to go out of the way to beg them, you know, and as I said Drepung has been beyond capacity, like over ten thousand. And Loseling is going over 7,000. This is beyond capacity in that type.   

**Q:**  Doesn't seem like many officials, either.   

**A:**  Not very many, no.   

**Q:**  I mean, when you really count up, we'll have to make a list, but it doesn't seem like too.   

**A:**  Not that many.   

**Q:**  So there are no tratre then, so people are coming for whatever reasons.   

**A:**  Whatever reason.   

**Q:**  But we have to get different kinds of people.   

**A:**  Yes, some people will come with interest of becoming a way to get higher in society, like becoming an official and for some, the beginning in that category one and parents have their eye and relations have their own eye as to how they'll bring it in, totally and these are the people who are the kids they teach how to write and they emphasis their study more on grammars and writings and conversations and things like that.   

**Q:**  Then they must become chöndze?   

**A:**  If you are wealthy, yes. Even if you are not wealthy, then there are, you know, you may not be able to do chöndze but you are somewhere in there and umm...and then there are jedrung [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] too.   

**Q:**  What's the difference between chöndze and jedrung?   

**A:**  Jedrung, I think the well...the high families, the noble families, I think they call them jedrung - in the case of Drepung. But in other tratsang they are different, other monks, they have different system. But in the case of Drepung, there are higher family members like Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ] has a jedrung, Phünkhang [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང] has a jedrung, and Shölkhang [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] jedrung and like that type of jedrung, they have, they don't have so many jedrung that I know of, very few jedrung and there is Phala [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ] Drönyerchemmo was also a jedrung. So, there's only, I think they, they very well known noble family who has no, not incarnate lama, who doesn't get that sort of rank, whose a little more that chöndze, who just doesn't want to be ordinary chöndze, they get the jedrung position. So, jedrung position they get. So, that's one category they have. jedrung.   

**Q:**  But then there's some people who end up being, working in the kitchen and thabyog or then they're some who are, who sweeps the monastery, there must be sweeping monks, huh?   

**A:**  I mean the lama könyer is responsible for sweeping, könyer's responsible, so his gidru should sweep. Then mostly, generally speaking, mostly the gidru, whatever the gegen is in the category of going, the gidru will following the footstep, mostly, that's really a lot of influence so when you really look overall, I think, sort of, you know, most of them, 80% you can say, it is the gegen's influence.   

**Q:**  Like, for example, like what, do you mean?   

**A:**  For example, if the gegen is working for the government official, let's say lama könyer and his gidru have more interest on to become a lama könyer, and sort of, you know, work that they have, brought up in that job, that is gegen was lama könyer so he lives there in the lama könyer's house and all the time, clean the rooms of the Loseing dukgang up and collect their money and collect this, he's been doing this for twenty, thirty years. Maybe ten, fifteen years, whatever, and they, somehow their mind is set up and they're guide in that direction and he probably looking for next for his own position even without moving out of it, he can (get in) the highest office, something happens. Even without moving up that direction, jama does the same thing. jama's gidru for title become jama, the gegö's gidrus will go in that manner and chagdampa's gidru will go in chagdampa like Ugyen la's [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས] gegen called Thama Shimpo [Tib. ཐ་མ་ཞིམ་པོ]'s shagtsang there are two other guys already coming in the line to become chagdampa and from chagdampa they go to gegö and hope to be a shengo.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  And shengo and ex-shengo [Tib. ཞལ་ཟུར] and then the chandzö's shagtsang will probably try to become chandzö, that is general trend. And if a gegen is a real good pechawa and is doing, have no interest in gidru, will sort of intend to pick that up. That is the, I think the gegen's influence, very strong.   

**Q:**  So its really important who your gegen is?   

**A:**  Who your shagtsang gegen is, shagtsang or no shagtsang or the gegen of the shag. Shagtsang is such a name, it's came up and sort of bigger shag is called shagtsang, right? And so, I think, you know that's really intend to pick up, even they count that as a historical backup and say "our gegen also became gegö" something something, even if you ask for gegö position, and say" my gegen's gegen also became gegö during that period" too numerous for me to figure out, you know, during that period, teacher's period he become gegen and his teacher was also gegö and now you know they say "bla bla bla" and I will not let your abbot's [Tib. མཁན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] face in the water and this and that. That's how they are.   

**A:**  What's that mean?   

**Q:**  That means we're not going to let you down.   

**A:**  Oh, yea.   

