# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་དབྲེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Cleveland, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and English and translated completely into English  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་དབྲེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 50  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of the 10th Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview he discusses the recognition of incarnations within the monastic community, and describes how this process at times can be contested among the populace, and how it receives legitimacy from the government and other lamas.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_05/M_0009_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time you told me that you are the incarnation of Tashi Namgyel [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས] rnam rgyal], the abbot of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྟོད] The Upper Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüdö</span> monastery (the Upper Tantric Monastery in Lhasa). Are you the 1st Nyare Khentrü [Tib. ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How do you make a new incarnation in Tibet? Who decides that Tashi Namgyel is going to be an incarnation.   

**A:**  That's an interesting question. I can tell you what happened in my case. What I was told is that when Tashi Namgyel died, they sort of finished off all his belongings giving it away and sell it and totally they wanted to dismantle it.   

**Q:**  Who do you mean, his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</span>?   

**A:**  The few people who have been working for Tashi Namgyel. He's been the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྟོད] The Upper Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüdö</span> abbot, so already there is a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span>, manager and a few people round already. So these people decided they wanted to finish it off. And in plain Western language, no estate of Tashi Namgyel should be kept.   

**Q:**  These were people in his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</span>?   

**A:**  Not necessarily those what we call it <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</span>. Slightly different there. I think the shagtsang applies to certain amount of category of monks who try to build up their house. Not necessarily came as abbot or well known respected lama. And the bottom line here lies that the shagtsang people normally share their property together. Even if one dies the others have the right to inherit it. I think the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> they do not have that. So when Tashi Namgyel becomes <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</span>, and when he hired his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] A lama or abbot&#x27;s servant.">söpön</span> [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] and all these, I believe it is all volunteer service. It is looking after his property and his belongings. I do not think that they have a right to earn anything and do not share anything. Therefore I do not call them shagtsang.   

**Q:**  He died and people tried to have no estate left.   

**A:**  Yes. Then they went to Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] to give away the left over possessions. There are two ways actually the moment someone dies they send something else a few items to say quick prayer, gyogngo [Tib. མགྱོགས་བསྔོ] to like Dalai Lama and Regent, as a compulsory giving of some images and things like that is a compulsory.   

**Q:**  You give it to who? Other lamas?   

**A:**  Yes Dali Lama and Regent and all this, yes I think is a compulsory. - and if you don't, there would raise the question of why not? and you can possibly be subject to punishment. So therefore, I think its compulsory. As well as people wanted to do together, but the other lamas are not at all compulsory, but they do. Like the well known lamas, like Phabongka, and these kinds of people they send the gyogngo.   

**Q:**  They send it where?   

**A:**  To each lama individually.   

**Q:**  To each lama. But the Dali Lama   

**A:**  Yes, they sent it to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</span> where the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chemmo</span>, tsendrön and the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</span> are there.   

**Q:**  Yes some one who has the rank from the government when they die, they have to immediatly send some thing called gyogngo to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</span> and followed by real ngöten [Tib. བསྔོ་རྟེན] which is based on his detication whatever, based on dedication. So, I think these are two are compulsory. So I think they gave Phabongkha gyogngo and ngöten and finally I think they gave the left overs and when it was given to Phabongkha, he refused to accept and he insisted that we should look for incarnation/reincarnation-this is how I came into the picture. It was Phabongkha responsiblity.   

**Q:**  I see, so Phabongka said "this should go to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> and use this for the labrang.   

**A:**  Yes, don't waste, and then they keep on begging Phabongkha not to insist. There is a big history behind that and there is a long time argument about this sort of thing.   

**Q:**  Argument about what?   

**A:**  They don't want it.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  These people around?   

**Q:**  The people around, they didn't want to find incarnation?   

**A:**  Didn't want to find incarnation, didn't want to find reincarnation- and the (Phabongkka) insisted and this is how it happened. So, I think any incarnated lama can recognize any other incarnated lama-the bottom line comes down to this-it can. And even some well known persons can definately recognize their reincarnation by any other incarnate. That is why there are so many incarnate lamas.   

**Q:**  I see, so no one has to approve it? The government or <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</span>?   

**A:**  Unessesary- not at all nessesary But if you want a government rank or status, then the question of approval and all this will come, but otherwise one lama will recognize and um, he is followers will acknowledge and um... um thats what its goes. I don't think, you know the system is not like a... its funny, its not like the the the Catholic system where the Pope approves and there is a hierarchy-not hierarchy, but there is some kind of disipline and I think, we just don't have that.   

**Q:**  Yes, but I thought that the government has to approve like   

**A:**  For incarnate lamas, just for recognizing the Dalai Lama, but I don't believe the government has to approve at all.   

**Q:**  But isn't there like recognizing [Tib. ངོས་འཛིན] the candidates?   

**Q:**  Yes, but all the individuals can play everything. The whole pattern can duplicate down there. Few of the people go around, collect a few kids, and do everything and that Lama can recognize it .. Government will never recognize it.   

**Q:**  What about like the Dalai lama and the Pancehn Lama and all these things?   

**A:**  Yes, but then there are so many lamas are involved in it and they recognized. So the government has a final official okay business, for that type of thing. But they don't really recognize. I think that there is a thin little difference there- a subtle difference there. What do you call it-religions-clee.   

**Q:**  Yea, but lets take the last Panchen Lama for instance...it seemed to me that the government, the Ganden Phodrang [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང] wouldn't accept him until the very end.   

**A:**  I think that this is what is happening, the little bit of political power is edging over the religious power because of the Dali Lama-- and I think that the government will can refuse to acknowledge or recommend and they can even pass a law or rule saying that this can not be recognized. I think that they do that, there must be incidents-must be... But I think they can do that. But still--and that fellow will be called Rimpoche and people will respect and that will be there. The Government even de-recognize, you know that fellow Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས་བླ་མ] and Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ] all these are there. Yes they said reicarnation can not be recognized and the and they de-recognize Shamar [Tib. ཞྭ་དམར] after the Nepal war. .But still it is, so it is very strange.   

**Q:**  So, are there Gelugpa lamas who don't have government like recognition?   

**A:**  Oh yes- there are plenty, yes there are plenty-all the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] A lower ranked trüku (incarnate lamas) in the government&#x27;s ranking system.">tratsang trüku</span> do not have a government recognition- all of the tratsang trüku does not enjoy government recognition-they don't have any rank. They have a special status in the monastary, but in the eyes of the government they don't enjoy any status... they are not recognized.   

**Q:**  But in the eyes of the people they are <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</span>?   

**A:**  They do, yes they are trüku.... they have a labrang) and all this, but in the eyes of the government they don't.   

**Q:**  So it wouldn't be right to say that the Dalai Lama has to approve all the all the incarnations-because.   

**A:**  No...for sure.   

**Q:**  Now when they found you, did anyone have to approve that or did Phabongkha just say?   

**A:**  No my final recognition was not Phabongkha, it was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span> who happens to be the regent. I think from the point of view of Taktra, Taktra approved as being Taktra rather than being the regent and I had the advantage of government recognition automatically. But, there are some incarnated lamas who were approved by Taktra and who recognized but who do not enjoy government status and in the eyes of the government it is not recognized, but it had been approved by the regent, not as a regent but as an individual Rimpoche forever --I think that is also there.   

**Q:**  So only the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> trüku are approved by the government and higher? How many of them do you think there are?   

**A:**  There are quite alot of them.   

**Q:**  You think maybe a 100?   

**A:**  Yes or maybe more, I'm quite sure more... particulary by 1950... late 40's during the last period of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span>, a lot of new <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> trüku were made.   

**Q:**  But let's say that there is a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> trüku and then he dies and his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> people find that next to incarnation, do they find that later on have to go to the government?   

**A:**  No they don't. They can recognize the incarnate lama and then they can establish it-- At the time they are entering the any one of the three monastaries and claim the status, then they go to government through Yigtsang. And the government may or may not... I don't think that the government takes away the status, but the government may insist this individual might not have been the correct reincarnation and we have to withdraw the status, till you find another one.   

**A:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes, I think that is possible, might just have happened.   

**Q:**  These are very interesting in terms of history to get real examples.   

**A:**  Even in the case of Trijang Rimpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ], -they have two Trijang Rimpoche. I'm not very sure, wheter the other Trijang Rimpoche is recognized by the government or not. There is a problem with that, I think its not very clear.   

**Q:**  I know this happened to [Surkhang [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང] Khenjung's son <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཡོངས་འཛིན] A tutor of a high lama or the Dalai Lama.">Yongdzin</span> [Tib. ཡོངས་འཛིན] where they first recognized one and then decided it was not the right one and then they picked up the second one.   

**A:**  Yes, there are two. Both were picked by Karmapa [Tib. ཀར་མ་པ], right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  So the recognition can be done by anyone, so long as you are recognized, you can recognize someone. I don't think that anyone will question that, because you know, the moment you question that person, then indirectly you are questioning whoever recognized that person, so it's sort of going backwards.   

**Q:**  So there is <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] A lower ranked trüku (incarnate lamas) in the government&#x27;s ranking system.">tratsang trüku</span>, is there anything underneath that?   

**A:**  Yes, there are some <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> trüku who are not recognized in the eyes of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  So, its kind of interesting so it was Phabongkha's idea saying that this person has to get the reincarnated ?   

**A:**  Yes, that one has to get the reincarnation.   

**Q:**  So, then these people what they didn't want to do it?   

**A:**  They didn't want to do it.   

**Q:**  So how did he make them do it?   

**A:**  Phabongkha insisted. The thing is the religious relations. You cannot ignore these relations.   

**Q:**  Phabongkha is from what <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span>?   

**A:**  <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</span> [Tib. སྨད]. Phabongkha is very well known --but he does not have much high rank. The famous Phabongkha does not enjoy even <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> trüku rank.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  No. His reincarnation was specially given this rank. The famous Phabongkha was not even <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tshogchen</span> trüku. It is very funny that incarnation state.   

**Q:**  So then, this went on over a year or 6 months?   

**A:**  Might have gone over a year. Finally, Phabongkha left for south Tibet on religous and they haven't decided yet, so he asked <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</span> to carry on the work and thats how Talungdra came into this and was chasing them. Then Talungdra happened to be the regent, so it became compulsory. Otherwise, they were not doing it and they refused.   

**Q:**  Why did they refuse?   

**A:**  There were a lot of reasons. Number 1, the reason that the manager at that time had given to Phabongkha was that 'we do not have any money, we have no wealth or estate. We have neither the wealth nor the people. Second. If a one good reincarnation comes that is fine and great. If a bad reincarnation comes then all the non-virtue will be on my shoulder. So these are the two important reasons he have. But this fellow was a disciple of Phabongkha. He will probably jump in the river if Phabongkha says jump and jump in the fire too if he is told to jump.   

**Q:**  He was just a regular monk?   

**A:**  Yes, he was just a regular monk. From <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span>, Nyare Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  And the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མཁན་པོ] Abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khembo</span> was from Nyare?   

**A:**  Yes. [Pause]. So that is how it happened.   

**Q:**  And then he bacame the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you get a house and everything.   

**A:**  There was nothing (at first).   

**Q:**  So when you were first picked, what did the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> have?   

**A:**  Nothing. They showed me later that there was one rug left, which was presented by the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</span> Anggula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] who died in Musoorie, that was a very good rug. They took it to Phabongkha and he did not accept it. That's why it was left. Also one little box. Thats all that was left from the previous Tashi Namgyel. So it was reestablished.   

**Q:**  So when you were picked and accepted, you were how old?   

**A:**  Four years.   

**Q:**  So they took you right away?   

**A:**  Yes, first they took me to Gombasa [Tib. དགོན་པ་གསར]. It is a retreat area. And left me with one teacher. The beginng of training. I did not join the government yet means did not get government status at that time. My father [Demo Huthogthu] insisted you should have the rank of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> trüku. Otherwise he is not giving me.   

**Q:**  Gompasa is far from Lhasa.   

**A:**  No it is close. It is between Sera and Drepung. They have some kind of a hotel there now.   

**Q:**  You were given and went to Gompasa. In the meantime your father was trying to   

**A:**  He didnt try. He asked those people who came to him saying that you have to get it. They said it is out of the question etc. But they finally agreed to approach govenment. Then my father said he would help them. So he had asked this <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] A famous monk official who became an important Trunyichemmo.">Jogtang</span> [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] to help. And Jogtang said it is out of the question. So finally, i think, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</span> did it, automatically. Even to the surprise of Jogtang and everybody.   

**Q:**  This was after you were found?   

**A:**  It was after recognition and it was very difficult. The reconition came from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</span> who happened to be the regent. If it wasn't from the Regent, my father could say the recognition was wrong and derecognized, which he would like to do, however, it became very difficult to do because he was the regent. And if it was recognized by any other more junior lama my father could have easily said no. Yes, another well known lama could derecognize someone's recognition. I do not know how far they will accept that in Tibet, but they can derecognize.   

**Q:**  But still. When you were in Gombasa, were you already promoted to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> trüku or it was after a while?   

**A:**  No. It was pending. It was decided to petition, and then my father said okay [to give son as lama] and that is about the time it was.   

**Q:**  Then when you went there, you were not enetered into the register [Tib. མཚན་ཐོ] into Drepung.   

**A:**  No. I was there, Named and sort of learning. I do remember my parents came to visit me one evening on there way to Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ]. And they told me we have applied to the governemnt but this <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] A famous monk official who became an important Trunyichemmo.">Jogtang</span>'s answers are not really great and we have to wait and at a very appropriate time we will try to push it through, otherwise it is not possible. My parents said they qare going to Phembo--so they were not going to enter me in Drepung until the final decision from the government comes. It depends how I am going to enter into the monastery. Thats why they are waiting. So they went to Phembo, and said they will visit on the way back. They were sort of talking like it might take a year to get the approval from the government. But in about a week or ten days, they came back. Because to the surprise of everyone, they got a meesage that it was approved. Even it was a surprise to Jogtang. The application was in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</span> and Jogtang didnt dare to just send it up, since they were helping, they will do it in a very nice way. So I think <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</span> made a personal inquiry saying "didn't an application come? Then Jogtang said yes. And Talungdra said send it up. So easy it came. It took only 7 days or something. Then I started entering Drepung. It might have taken 6 months to make that.   

**Q:**  So you got a letter from the government?   

**A:**  There is a petition and in the beginning, they side "To so and so, to the feet of so and so", then a big gap inbetween, and then end. In that gap they write, these are the reasons why it has been approved. I do remember I have read that very often. They wrote, it had been approved in view of he is born as a blood relation of the 13th Dalai Lama etc. This was not in the petition, but the Regent put it up. He has used that as a strong reason.   

**Q:**  Then, when you went to the monastery. There are different categories they write it in. Is there a list of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</span> in the monastery?   

**A:**  Oh yes. they do. There is one general list of all the monks called tsentho [Tib. མཚན་ཐོ]. It is a list of all the monks. It goes according to seniority. But in the case of each incarnate lama, they will write, e.g., in my case, Nyare Khentrü and then my name. So it is automatically seen as an incarnate lama since other monks just have their name. If you don't have recognition from the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> or <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tshogchen</span>, then they will simply enter your 4 words name. So in the eyes of the tratsang and tshogcehn, the difference is there.   

**Q:**  So someone had to go through the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> and say this is incarnation?   

**A:**  Yes. This was approved by So So then the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> will approave and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tshogchen</span> will approve.   

**Q:**  So who would approve it?   

**A:**  The trastsang tshondu will approve it. At the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> level I think the laji does it.   

**Q:**  It is probably very expensive. You have to give gifts etc.   

**A:**  I dont think so because once the government apporves it will be automatically approved by the monastery. They will be more than happy to have it since it means more income.   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  If incarnate lama becomes a great one there is status of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span>. But even if not great one, then when they enter in they more <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</span> and more obligation, and every obligation will become income to the tratsang or tsogchen or the individual monks. So they all would be more than happy to have a new trüku.   

**Q:**  So when did you go into the monastery?   

**A:**  I think 4-5 years old.   

**Q:**  In the earlier years, you were at the other place?   

**A:**  Yes, but even after entering <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> I was too small. And went back to Gombasa.   

**Q:**  You had just one teacher?   

**A:**  Yes. One teacher, one great teacher.   

**Q:**  How did you get the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>? There isn't any house anything, right?   

**A:**  At first, there is no house, and no people. So what happened is that the Khamtsen where you belong to, they will take responsibility and select some few people. First they will select a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> and then some capable people. The chandzö will be responsiblefor establishing it, and then he will begin to pick up one or two more people. I think everyone begins to work on a volunteer basis. Then they have to do something [to earn money] such as indulge in business or whatever.   

**Q:**  Is it customary to go around to big families and say we are starting a new <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> for donation   

**A:**  They don't do that. For starting a new <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>, I don't think anybody would go to collect donations. For <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</span> that is slightly different. For the obligations they go and get some more help here and there, donations, but not to establish a labrang because they don't give anything.   

**Q:**  So what do you have to do? Get the endowment [Tib. མ་རྩ]?   

**A:**  Yeah, you do whatever. They will do something to find an economic establishment.   

**Q:**  You had no <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</span>?   

**A:**  At that time, I had no shiga. Later I had. Although I believe it didnt take much time.   

**Q:**  To do what?   

**A:**  To get a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</span>, etc.   

**Q:**  So how would you get a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</span>?   

**A:**  What happened was, I have one <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</span> in Lhoka. It was a very good shiga. It actually belonged to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང], when my father established his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>, I believe because of the Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] war my father lost eveything, so at that time Loseling was committed to Demo more than the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>, so Loseling used to pay for every expenses of Tengyeling Demo Rimpoche's Labrang. Every expenses, including servants etc. So it was inconveient for Loseling or Tengyeling everytime to have to go to collect something from the shiga when they needed something. So finally Loseling came to the conclusion-why dont we give that shiga to them (Demo). And thats what they did. Later Demo Labrang is again established quite big, so they said, this is an extra shiga lying here nad it is also Loseling's, and you are Loseling, so why don't you take that one [said to Gelek's labrang]. Thats how I got it.   

**Q:**  Did Demo Rimpoche ever get back the estates he lost?   

**A:**  Not all. Quite a lot. They got the half of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</span> in Kongpo and some others in Lhoka etc.   

**Q:**  If he gives it to you, is that his right? Did the government have to be asked?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> have to be asked?   

**A:**  I think <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> was involved a little bit. I don't think they asked. One reason is that some abbot said we are not really giving that estate to Demo Rimpoche, we are giving it on "lease" bawma. So Demo <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> would not give it back either. So in between that they sort of slipped into it. Demo Labrang doesn't want to give that <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</span> back to Loselihng and --it becomes difficult, so one easier way to solve that is to give it to me. I am also a Loseling lama whose obligation is not yet done. Loseling also doesn't want to go that far and say they want that estate back. And Demo doesn't want to give it back. It was not a big estate, it was a very small one, but very good one.   

**Q:**  How many <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</span>?   

**A:**  I have no idea. It was the Phashi [Tib. ཕ་གཞིས] of one <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</span> before.   

**Q:**  Then it was confiscated?   

**A:**  Some how, who knows.   

**Q:**  So when your father got that did he get a written thing from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span>?   

**A:**  I do not think there was any written thing at all. There is not written thing. And even when I got it there was no written thing at all.   

**Q:**  So you had to send people there to run the estate?   

**A:**  Yes. We made a lot of money on it. Really a lot of money.   

**Q:**  From the yield?   

**A:**  From the yield. Most of my obligation at the time of the Geshe degree came from there. I remember the distribution clearly. It was one <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</span> in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span>, and 2 dayang in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> tratsang. In addition to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</span>, tea and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</span> and so forth.   

**Q:**  What year was that (your geshe)?   

**A:**  1957. There were 10,000 monks and we ran out of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</span>. We borrowed it from Ngabö at the last minute. It was an unexpected number of monks. While we were distributing it, we were running out. Ngabö happened to be there, and he said he has some dayang. We sent a jeep to Lhasa to pick up the dayang boxes to continue with the distribution It was really amazing [laughter].   

**Q:**  So how could you make so much money off of the estate?   

**A:**  I don't know but they really made it. Its a normal filed but when I went to escape in 1959 I passed through Lhoka, I saw the whole house is filled up with grain. Every place is filled up with grain. And they sold tremendous amount the year before that and again it was filled up like that. Sold the grain to change into butter, rice etc.   

**Q:**  At that time there were Chinese so there was a lot of selling grain to the Chinese.   

**A:**  I don't know whom they have sold to. I think my <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> used to buy a lot of grain and hold it, and things like that. And then Lhoka, in the Yarlung area is the grain area of Tibet. So in addition to field, there was also trade.   

**Q:**  That was your only estate and you got more than that?   

**A:**  Then we also had to drukhang [Tib. འབྲུ་ཁང] grain storage houses. It is not really an estate you own, but you bring grain and filled up the house. We had one in Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] just near Drepung and one in Phembo. We built these.   

**Q:**  You built the house yourself?   

**A:**  No. I think we did some kind of joint business with some wealthy families. Bring grain, store it and sell and whatever that familiy does that. You also take what you need for consumption from there. So therre was constant grain movement from Lhoka. We had donkeys and mules and people came 2-3 times a month. They were moving the grain from Lhoka to central Tibet. They must be selling it there.   

**Q:**  That was when?   

**A:**  Early 50's. Then when the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span>, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khampa (Khamba) sub-cultural group.">Khampa</span>'s revolt started then there was no more movement. So I think the grain started piling up there. So when I went there in 1959 every house was filled.   

**Q:**  How long did it take? You were found in 1941-42?   

**A:**  I was found in 1943-44 as incarnation. Then the grain business started in 1947-48. Could even have been 50.   

**Q:**  When did you get the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</span>?   

**A:**  My guess is I got the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</span> in 49-50.   

**Q:**  So all these people were working in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>, you had no say in what they did. Is that correct?   

**A:**  No. None whatsoever. The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> appointed them, and they do what they like. They provide supplies to me. I have no choice. I get whatever they supply even food.   

**Q:**  But then later you were an adult?   

**A:**  Later then I have every control over it.   

**Q:**  So you were lucky you had capable people otherwise you would have had nothing.   

**A:**  Yes. It happens to be the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> was great.   

**Q:**  What kind of monk was he?   

**A:**  He was an old geshe. He was politically mined and economically very strong. Then he has several relations on business. And they started working for us.   

**A:**  They were khambas?   

**A:**  They were from Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ]. Then also we have business going on in India. Someone goes to India to do business there. It started by giving a little money as capital to go to India and then he did better and better. It was a kind of joint business we have. This was also very successful. The Chinese were there and they were importing everything the Chinese needed since it was very difficult to get things from Ch ina. Even carbon paper. We used to bring a lot of carbon paper.   

**Q:**  Are there <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> that do not succeed.   

**A:**  There are <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> that have nothing. The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> is not so capable. The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> will give them a little extra rooms. And they will sit in their rooms and that's it.   

**Q:**  Are any of the people from your <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> alive.   

**A:**  No. I think I do knew because I heard it a lot of times.   

**Q:**  So they are all working. How many people were in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>?   

**A:**  Not so many, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span>, one söpön. Thats all officially. Then the chandzö brought in a lot of his relations.   

**Q:**  They were not monks, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were laymen.   

**Q:**  The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> was a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</span>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And the söpon?   

**A:**  No he was not a Geshe. Then the old <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> retired. He picked up the new one.   

**Q:**  The new one is the one who is capable?   

**A:**  The old one was vey capable, more than the new one.   

**Q:**  Didn't you need servants to make food?   

**A:**  No I think the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] A lama or abbot&#x27;s servant.">söpön</span> does that. Then later a lot of people came in. Oh yes, there was also one gegen. There were 3 of them.   

**Q:**  And what did the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</span> do?   

**A:**  He tought me. And I think that they discuss and make decisions.   

**Q:**  In Ladhak when I was there the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</span> didnt necessarily teach--he was like your father.   

**A:**  There are two kinds of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</span>. One who is respsonsible in the list, and one real gegen. If you make some trouble then the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> or <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> will chase the gegen who is responsible (the one on the list) and tell him.   

**Q:**  So when you had to go to places, who went with you, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] A lama or abbot&#x27;s servant.">söpön</span>?   

**A:**  Yes the söpön. But it didnt take much time before we were adding people. I think that they made a policy to cut it out people. To not have many people. They said it will spoil this young Rimpoche. Then only later they gradually added it up.   

**Q:**  How did you add people?   

**A:**  Two ways. If the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> needs someone, you go and look among the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> monks and ask if they would like to come in and do somthing. A lot of people will come in. There is an advantage, number one they have no expenses. No pay but no expenses. Number 2, there are a lot of exemptions from the khamtsen, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> from taxes.   

**Q:**  What kinds?   

**A:**  Well, you don't have to go to every gathering. A lot of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</span> will come because the young monks because they will get exempted. Even they get able to sit in higher position. In <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</span> they don't have to go inside, they can sit outside, and in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</span> distributions they can get priorities to come late and leave early--can just come and take the money and run out. There are lots of exemptions and even they get extra seat advantages and sit in the higher positions. They go to mangja, but they don't need to sit inside and can get the shares of [gye] <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐལ་ལེན] A special right allowing certain monks to take their share of alms outside of the prayer assembly hall. This privilege meant they did not have to attend the prayer session to get their alms.">kelen</span> [Tib. སྐལ་ལེན]. There were lot of prestiges and the privilages. They enjoy that.   

**Q:**  Does the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> pay them?   

**A:**  No. But they give good clothes and food and horses. Then also, if you are capable, you can become chandzö. They get more decisions on money than I get.   

**Q:**  These are usually picked by the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> ?   

**A:**  Yes, or anybody can pick them up.   

**Q:**  In my case, I remember that the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> mostly stays in Lhoka rather than in Lhasa. And two of his relations were also on the estate in Lhoka. So they managed everything by themselves rather than relying on the shidü.   

**Q:**  I see, you don't know how many <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</span> you have?   

**A:**  I have no idea.   

**Q:**  So these monks then, that's one way they can earn a living, is to work for somebody, work for the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>, work for   

**A:**  Yeah, work for <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>, then they don't have to worry about it and they get privileges.   

**Q:**  Because in Drepung, like nobody gets <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</span>, right?.   

**A:**  There are lot of phog.   

**Q:**  I don't mean <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</span> if you go to prayer, I mean like regular salary like in the English sense, you know like monthly salary?   

**A:**  No, there's no salary.   

**Q:**  I mean like there isn't any kind of salary.   

**A:**  No, there's no salary.   

**Q:**  Like everyone gets ten dollars a month   

**A:**  No, they don't have that. but sometimes they have this grain thing and sometimes the money --endowments and then the distribution <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</span> will come, and then <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐུ་ཡོན] Money paid to monks for performing rituals.">kuyön</span>, [Tib. སྐུ་ཡོན] oh yeah thats another category.   

**Q:**  Kuyön? And that means?   

**A:**  That is very similar to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</span> but theres a different system there, gye, you have a lot of...its between gyey and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</span>, this is <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐུ་ཡོན] Money paid to monks for performing rituals.">kuyön</span> [Tib. སྐུ་ཡོན]. Gye is if you are not there, sombody can collect your thing for incarnate lamas and others who have more privileges, they can collect like 10, 15, 20 [shares]or this, for kuyön I think they get less. They get two or three; and phog they get only they don't get any extra.   

**Q:**  Who don't get, incarnate lamas?   

**A:**  Yeah, they don't get, they get only one each, they don't get double. Kuyön, they get a little bit more, one or two but not like gye. So it is inbetween. Phog, they get only one.   

**Q:**  So <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</span> is from the monasteries?   

**A:**  From the monastery itself, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</span> comes out of endowments they we receive.   

**Q:**  I thought you had to be there all the time, no? You could pick up <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</span> even if you aren't at the mangja.   

**A:**  NNN...Yes fortunately most of its not there, if you not there you can one extra.   

**Q:**  Like how many do you get, if I'm a regular monk, I get one?   

**A:**  Probably get four or five in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span>; six or seven at <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span>; eleven or twelve in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>   

**Q:**  Oh really I see, it varies.   

**A:**  It [varies] big.   

**Q:**  Big...and then you don't have to be there, but if I'm a regular monk, I have to be there or   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Thats for <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</span>?   

**A:**  Phog you have to be there.   

**Q:**  Kuyön?   

**A:**  Mostly you have to be there.   

**Q:**  You would have to be there for <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</span> also?   

**A:**  No. For me <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</span>, I do not think so. Phog I think you have to be there. I think even the phog has two different categories. [Thinking of it].   

**Q:**  Do you go to these prayer sessions.   

**A:**  Not much unless there is a big gye. Some how we know there is a big gye.   

**Q:**  You mean a private person gave <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</span>?   

**A:**  Yes. Why I remember is that sometimes there was dru<span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</span> [Tib. འབྲུ་ཕོགས], grain salary you have to go. So that is why I think that phog you have to go. Unless you are there.   

**Q:**  And then you have a certain seats.   

**A:**  In the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span>, we have a throne. In <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tshogchen</span>, we don't have throne but a seat.   

**Q:**  But there are so many long rows   

**A:**  Yeah. Beginning, certain rows are reserved.   

**Q:**  In the middle is the abbot and umdze at the back?   

**A:**  Abbot is not in the middle. In <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span>, he is slightly to the right side of it. In the middle is the Dalai Lama's throne. Big throne there. On the right side of that, is the addbot's throne. We are in the middle to we always have to look back at the abbot like this. Turn back.   

**Q:**  What do you have to look at him for.   

**A:**  Just to look at him.   

**Q:**  I thought that the umdze is at the door?   

**A:**  The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</span> is near the door at the dark.   

**Q:**  Yes, near the door on a platform.   

**A:**  Yes, extra platform. The umdze also has a platform but that is somewhere in the middle.   

**Q:**  So everyone has his own throne?   

**A:**  The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> trüku has.   

**Q:**  If you are not there no one sits on it?   

**A:**  No these share it up and down. But the non-tsogchen <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</span> will not sit on these.   

**Q:**  The rest of the monks have specific seats?   

**A:**  No. But they sort of know where to sit. And if someone is above them by line they shift down and let him (one with more seniority) will sit up there.   

**Q:**  If you do not have to go for <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</span>, do your <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] A lama or abbot&#x27;s servant.">söpön</span> and those have to go.   

**A:**  After the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> is over, then they will read a list saying, so and so is 3 shares, so and so is 4 shares etc. Somebody picks them up. Sometimes, some indivdual monks of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> goes there and collects for others. I don't know whatever the distribution they get on that day.   

**Q:**  Is that enough to be worthwhile for a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span>?   

**A:**  No. For <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> no. For just a poor monk it may be enough to survive.   

**Q:**  Then they get some food at the prayers, no?   

**A:**  Yes, they get tea and some kind of. [The end of tape]   

