# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khendrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་དབྲེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ])  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Cleveland, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 15 September 1985  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English and translated completely into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 46  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of the 10th Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview he discusses monk officials and shagtsang (households) within the monastery.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_02/M_0009_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Let's talk a little bit about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> (monk officials). I want to get this straight now. You can become a tsidrung through a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>. Can you explain what shagtsang means to you and give some examples, things like that?   

**A:**  A <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> is such a ... it sort of becomes an institute. A set up sort of system, institutionalized in Tibetan monastic tradition. By having almost an adoption of a junior monk to their own sort of ... a concept of family, after all, how to say?   

**Q:**  Its like a family then?   

**A:**  Yeah, in their social livelihood, whatever, the right sort of livelihood they share together. In other words, they adopt them. The senior people adopt some junior monk, many of them are their nephews, many of them are total strangers. Many of them related, many may not be related. Total strangers are adopted in their house. By adoption it means that the senior has taken total responsibility for their livelihood.   

**Q:**  They look after the young kids?   

**A:**  They look after the young ones, try to give them an education, and then they try to feed them and give them clothes.   

**Q:**  They call them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཕྲུག] 1. Student. 2. Disciple. 3. Commonly the name for monks living with a gegen or teacher. These are more like wards than real disciples.">gidru</a>, usually?   

**A:**  Shagtsang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཕྲུག] 1. Student. 2. Disciple. 3. Commonly the name for monks living with a gegen or teacher. These are more like wards than real disciples.">gidru</a> [Tib. ཤག་ཚང་དགེ་ཕྲུག]. Shagtsang gidru; the moment you add the gidru in addition you get a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> gidru, it indicates they are sharing their pockets (financially). But a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> gi gidru [Tib. ཤག་གི་དགེ་ཕྲུག], if it's a shag gi gidru, its not necessarily meaning a shagtsang gidru. First, many of them are kept as shag gi gidru.   

**Q:**  And what does that mean, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> gi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཕྲུག] 1. Student. 2. Disciple. 3. Commonly the name for monks living with a gegen or teacher. These are more like wards than real disciples.">gidru</a>?   

**A:**  They, sort of, live in that house, and they are fed by them, but you have no rights over their property or anything. And when you prove that you are good, then they may make you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> gidru without any official declaration, automatically.   

**Q:**  There is no letter or anything? No written contract?   

**A:**  No letter or anything. No written contract or anything. Sort of automatically picked out.   

**Q:**  Now these <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> have names, or do they not have names?   

**A:**  No, no. Or the senior monks, they take it.   

**Q:**  Its their names of senior monks?   

**A:**  Their names.   

**Q:**  Like what would be an example?   

**A:**  For example, Ugyen La [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལ], we have interviewed Ugyen La. Ugyen La had a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> called Thamak Shimpo [Tib. ཐ་མ་ཞིམ་པོ]. Thamag Shimpo is not a related to Ugyen La. That was his nickname, Thamak Shimpo was kept by Ugyen La. And so people nicknamed him, he had a good taste in tobacco. Thamak Shimpo this name is also called in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> too. Neither Ugyen La nor Thamag Shimpo became shengo.   

**Q:**  Now how did he find that boy? Do you have any idea?   

**A:**  Well, then in the monastery there were a lot of young boys. Sometimes you meet them and they just stay.   

**Q:**  But Ugyen La was not like a regular monk, or was he?   

**A:**  He is a regular monk.   

**Q:**  That's right, Ugyen La is in the monastery, he's not?   

**A:**  No, in the monastery. Regular monk, and so he meets.   

**Q:**  Now how about these families like?   

**A:**  Now, for instance, Ngawang Thöndup [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ], he is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> of Yeshe Lhündup [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ].   

**Q:**  Yeshe Lhündup?   

**A:**  Yeshe Lhündup. They lived just behind our house in Lhasa, you know. They used to run a school in Lhasa. Yeshe Lhündup ran a school, my brothers went there to learn calligraphy.   

**Q:**  Now Yeshe Lhündup is what, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  Yeshe Lhündup is a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and he was a tsendrön in Lhasa. Yeshe Lhündup had two tsidrung, shabdöpa [Tib. ཞབས་སྡོད་པ] and the other is Dragten La [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན་ལགས] in the shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Now, he's not a shabdöpa, would you say? Because Yeshe Lhündup is also an official. And then, when you said two people from a family are also   

**A:**  Dragten la is in Dharamsala and he worked for the Information Office, Dridrag [Tib. དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས] and he interviewed Phala and those people. Another one is Ngawang Thöndrup. But I do not know whether Ngawang Thöndrup is related to Yeshe Lhündup. I don't think they are related. I don't think they are related at all. So he had become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, but   

**Q:**  So this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, he may not have started it, Yeshe Lhündup. He may have been the shagtsang's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཕྲུག] 1. Student. 2. Disciple. 3. Commonly the name for monks living with a gegen or teacher. These are more like wards than real disciples.">gidru</a> from somebody else.   

**A:**  I don't know. He might have been, I don't know.   

**Q:**  But it continues? The property continues?   

**A:**  Continues, yes.   

**Q:**  So you would say that most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  Many. Most of them, most of them. And then, when you have a capable <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, then you get some, sort of stayed here and there. Like Jokteng <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> Jokteng Talama [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང་ཏ་བླ་མ], he was an ordinary monk, totally ordinary. And he had been working with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> Absog [Tib. ཨབ་སོག].   

**Q:**  He had been working for him, you mean?   

**A:**  For him. Like a semi-servant type of thing. Later, he became Rong Namse, [Tib. རོང་རྣམ་སྲས] and he got a big estate called Rong Namse. So officially known as Namse, rather than Jogteng.   

**Q:**  So what happens when somebody says he wants to become his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཕྲུག] 1. Student. 2. Disciple. 3. Commonly the name for monks living with a gegen or teacher. These are more like wards than real disciples.">gidru</a>, they start to give him an education so he can go in and become gidru?   

**A:**  Yes, that's it. That is exactly how it happens.   

**Q:**  So what happens, then, is that what? They hire a private teacher first?   

**A:**  No, no. They send him to the school, normal regular school.   

**Q:**  But this is a private school?   

**A:**  Private school. But like Yeshe Lhündub, he's running his own school. So, like that. And it's a funny way to say, you know, a lot of senior monks pick up, many of them pick up some junior.   

**Q:**  A boyfriend?   

**A:**  Sort of boyfriend, semi-boyfriend. A lot of people think its homosexual, but its not really homosexual.   

**Q:**  Then what is it?   

**A:**  It's a different system. Totally different.   

**Q:**  How can it be totally different?   

**A:**  Its totally different.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  They don't use any of those things that normal people use.   

**Q:**  What do they use, then?   

**A:**  They only use   

**Q:**  Sort of like in-between the legs?   

**A:**  In-between, yes.   

**Q:**  But that's the same thing?   

**A:**  You call it the same, okay, but that's different. Anyway, so they sort of invite them.   

**Q:**  What is that called? What's the term to make love to somebody like that?   

**A:**  Normally refer to it as boy-boy [Tib. སྤུ་གུ་སྤུ་གུ], you know.   

**Q:**  No, but the doing of that   

**A:**  They don't really, you know, they don't have a big name for it. Sort of, you know, . In fact, many of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> are like that. Another thing is senior officials, you know, like big officials, I do not know what sort of Jogteng relation to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> Absog. But definitely helped Jogteng to work in the Dalai Lama's private secretary during the 13th Dalai Lama's period. There was also Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས] who is in Dharamsala working under Jogteng in Lhasa. Jogteng also has the shabdöpa and there were three of them; Nyima La, [Tib. ཉི་མ་ལགས] and Genla, [Tib. རྒན་ལགས] both in America and Kelsang La [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ལགས].   

**Q:**  Now why would he have three?   

**A:**  They're his nephews, they're related, he picked his relatives. So he made it three because he's not rich. I don't think the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> really needed any sort of estate. But then maybe he hoped he would get an estate later, I don't know. But I don't think they really needed an estate like do.   

**Q:**  Then how do they live?   

**A:**  Well, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> are rich.   

**Q:**  Yeah, but what are they rich from? What do they use for income?   

**A:**  Like you talk about estates, he goes to Namse, that's very big, a big estate. And then he's powerful, very powerful. So, you know, a little bit of visitors. So they all generate income through many ways. And whenever anybody had any problems in any office, the officials concerned are bound to give a lot of financial benefits, on both sides.   

**Q:**  But that only helps the big officers?   

**A:**  They have several means.   

**Q:**  But that's the big ones. How about the small ones? How do they make a living?   

**A:**  The small ones I think they have a little problem. Because I do remember and even heard that ... not even heard, but even I have seen it, some junior shabdöpa they find it very difficult to manage. Many of them.   

**Q:**  Like, give some examples of that.   

**A:**  Like take for example. There's one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> called Thubten Rigchog [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རིག་མཆོག] who later became the father of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> reincarnation. He was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> [Tib. བཞི་སྡེ], Reting Rimpoche's monastery. And he did one official post called Jimi [Tib. སྤྱི་མི] in Shide [Tib. བཞི་སྡེ] [monastery]. And after that I don't know what happened. He used to live in one of the outdoor houses on the outside of our house. He was a moyen [Tib. མོ་ཡན] (tenant), he doesn't even have a house. He had a little apartment bordered on house.   

**Q:**  Moyen is what?   

**A:**  Moyen is a tenant. It's not really a tenant in the western sense, because in the western sense the tenants will occupy the better and bigger and more important houses because they pay the rent. But in the Tibetan tradition, the moyen will not occupy the good and better houses. The better houses and everything will be kept for the families and they use it. They don't want anybody inside your own courtyard. So the outside courtyard, outside the walls, they rent it out to small families. Those are called moyen. And they have to pay minimum rent, very nominal rent, and they have a duty to clean the area out. And sometimes the family will ask them to help here, help there, so the moyen come and help.   

**Q:**  Now how did this guy get into become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  I do not know how he became a tsidrung. But he is a tsidrung. And he is poor. Not very poor, there are more that are poorer than him, though he is poor. He used to borrow clothes and horses and things from us all the time because he didn't really have enough. And he and his family, wife, they are living together.   

**Q:**  He had a wife even though he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  Even though he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, he had a wife. But later he became the father, so he was demoted. He was thrown out because it became open.   

**Q:**  What about ... can you think of any cases when ... let's say there are like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> traders and they want to make their kid, like better, so   

**A:**  Well, there are <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> traders like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> Rinchen [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཚང་རིན་ཆེན] and there was a Sumdo Gyentsen Yönten [Tib. སུམ་མདོ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཡོན་ཏན] and even <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Gyurmey la [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་ལགས] and all these, they have the rank.   

**Q:**  They were all <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  No, they are all lay official, drungkhor [Tib. དྲུང་འཁོར].   

**Q:**  No, I'm talking about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> traders. I mean, like, you know, middle-class people who have some money but no status. So they want their kids to have status.   

**A:**  Then they can contact any one of those big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> or something. Under the protection of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> they can get the tsidrung.   

**Q:**  They would then say ... they would probably have to give the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> something, I don't know?   

**A:**  I don't think they do. It depends on their relations. Some close friends, they give ... I think they ... What really happens is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, or whoever, I think he has to guarantee the character and the obedience has to be guaranteed. And I believe tsidrung have more commitment than the drungkhor to the government. They have to guarantee, wherever they send them they will go, wherever they put them they will stay [Tib. བཏང་འགྲོ་བཞག་སྡོད་འཕེར་བ].   

**Q:**  Can you spell that again?   

**A:**  [Tib. བཏང་འགྲོ་བཞག་སྡོད་འཕེར་བ]. I don't think the drungkhor have that. How do I know this? Because when Phünkhang Jedrung La [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང་ལགས] was demoted, one of the excuses, or the reason why, they used is he's a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>. the tsidrung, they ask for, you know, they have the more things because they are not supposed to be a family. So they are supposed be isolated, and wherever they are sent they will go and stay. And the lay officials, drungkhor [Tib. དྲུང་འཁོར] have a little excuse because they are from family and all this. The tsidrung don't have that.   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> has to guarantee this person?   

**A:**  Guarantee this person. I think that's why the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> has to guarantee. As long as they have good officials who have guaranteed you, and I think anybody can become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> if you know how to read and write.   

**Q:**  If you know how to read and write?   

**A:**  If you know how to read and write. But there are examples of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> who don't know how to write and read.   

**Q:**  In modern times?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན].   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes. He can barely write. I was really shocked. Because, you know why, when I was first working in the Tibet House, that was in 65, we had a meeting and I was acting secretary, and Maya [Tib. རྨ་བྱ] was there and three other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> were there. So I thought Lobsang Gyentsen was the senior-most because he was the Khenjung, so I brought writing paper and a pen to him and said "please take notes down". And he kept on saying, "how can I do it" [Tib. ལ་དཔེ་སྲིད་པས]. So I didn't know about it, and then Maya volunteered instead and took all the notes. So I was not aware of it. And later they told me that he does not write. It was true. But he had become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a>. But his case is different. Because he was a servant of Jigyab Khempo, who went down to collect this Dalai Lama. And he had served very gratefully to His Holiness and brought him to Lhasa. And as a reward he was given the status of a shungshab. And then he had been promoted to become a khenjung, and then became the Shigatse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] Refers to Shigatse dzong as well as the 2 heads of the Shigatse dzong while the Panchen Lama was in exile. After he returned in 1952, the 2 heads of Shigatse dzong were just called Dzongpön.">Jidzong</a> [Tib. གཞིས་ཀ་རྩེ་སྤྱི་རྫོང] and then became the Head of the Trade Mission [Tib. ཚོང་སྤྱི] in India. Up to that much he went.   

**Q:**  Now these guys, they don't have to go in through the tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a>?   

**A:**  Not necessary. I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> come in through three different ways: one through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, one through the tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a>, and the third one is when the officials are short, then they have the collection, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a> [Tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས]   

**Q:**  Trachag's spelling is?   

**A:**  [Tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] When they did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a>, I think the trachag are normally put through the tselabdra, unless there is an exceptional thing.   

**Q:**  But that must be ... in your lifetime you don't remember any time that happened?   

**A:**  I do.   

**Q:**  You do?   

**A:**  Yes. When the Reform Office, Legjö [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས] was established in Lhasa ...   

**Q:**  Legjö was 1954, right?   

**A:**  1954. At that time there was a shortage of government staff and they did that, they collected. But when they collected them, they didn't put people into the tse labdra. They collected a senior official, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, a few of them, semi-government officials, semi-monastery representatives sort of combined with the they give the tsidrung rank. That I do remember.   

**Q:**  But other than that, what happens in the old society?   

**A:**  Other than that, what happens is they collect <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a> as young monks and put them in the tse labdra.   

**Q:**  No, but in your experience?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  I think what happened is that in modern times <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> became totally separate from the monastery. In other words, not mainly monks from the monastery, but a separate group of people.   

**A:**  A separate group. But what happened is from the monastery point of view, they really feel that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> are part and parcel of the monastery because they have to join either one of the monasteries before they become tsidrung.   

**Q:**  Yeah, but they don't have to stay in the monastery?   

**A:**  They don't have to stay, but they have to join in. So after that, whether they became a monk or not, it doesn't matter, they don't really bother to put their name or take up their name or anything. They don't even ... they totally ignore the monastery. But from the monastery point of view they still keep. They say "he's ours". They even give share of alms [Tib. སྐལ་བ]. So, you know, not all the alms, but some important they give, even during the Mönlam they the give them the tea to taste, tshabsi [Tib. ཚྭ་གཟིགས], because they even set their teas and all this sort of thing. Yeah, they do it, monks they do it. But from the officials side they ignore. They sort of already moved.   

**Q:**  Even the poorer <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  It depends mostly on the individual. Some very high officials, like Jogteng sort of thing, they will really sort of bind themselves with the monastery very strongly, because they get the support. But then, you know, in-between people, they will ignore the monastery. They will sort of over-look them and laugh and, you know, sort of funny things they will do.   

**Q:**  So that's the tse labra, the second one is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, and the third one is   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་འཕྱགས] 1. Monks conscripted by the government to undergo training to become monk officials in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. Boys conscripted to becomes monks in a monastery.">trachag</a>, the trachag was too.   

**Q:**  But the tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> was, just like   

**A:**  Tselabdra was also established at about the 13th Dalai Lama's period, I think, not before that.   

**Q:**  Oh really?   

**A:**  I think so. Because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> are not really good at the language and writing. Writing and all this are not so good as drungkhor, so in order to improve that, I think he established the tse labdra. If I'm not mistaken, I think he did.   

**Q:**  The tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> is just a school to teach people?   

**A:**  A school.   

**Q:**  Then you have to go to the mibab janshu [Tib. མི་བབ་སྤྱན་ཞུ] [to show how you look]?   

**A:**  Then you have to go to the mibab janshu.   

**Q:**  But if you are <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, you can go to the mibab janshu, or if you go through the tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> you can do?   

**A:**  I think mibab janshu both can be done. Both can be done, yes.   

**Q:**  I mean, basically everybody has go to mibab janshu?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But then, the avenues to get in, if you're in tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a>, people in the government know you?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And how do you get to the tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a>? Is that easy or is that hard? Ngawang Thöndrup was in tse labdra.   

**A:**  To get into tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a> may not be so hard. But to get from tse labdra into to become the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> is hard, because there are many very old tse labdra. They all want that, you know, you couldn't even get to tsidrung at all, and all most their lives to remain at tse labdra.   

**Q:**  So what do they do when they get old?   

**A:**  Well they just sit there and remain students at the tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a>, you know.   

**Q:**  They must do some kind of work or something, no?   

**A:**  I don't think so. They just attend regular classes, keep on attending all the time. They have an exam, an exam that I think they keep on taking all the time. I don't think they have a limit, like if you take it three times you throw it out or something like that, you don't have that. And many of them remain a long, long time.   

**Q:**  So the   

**A:**  Even the tse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་གྲྭ] School.">labdra</a>, to become a shabdögpa you have to have a lot of exercise too.   

**Q:**  But what's the origin of, like Lhalungpa [Tib. ལྷ་ལུང་པ], what does he come from?   

**A:**  Yes, Lhalungpa, I think he is related to Drumpa Chösur [Tib. bhrum pa chos zur].   

**Q:**  Not the one from the 14th Dalai Lama, not that, the 13th Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  No, the 13th Dalai Lama died.   

**Q:**  That one?   

**A:**  No, Gowo Chösur [Tib. གོ་བོ་ཆོས་ཟུར] was the one who had trouble with the 13th Dalai Lama's death, and then I think thereafter is the Drumpa Chösur. He has also become the chösur. I don't know why, but Lhalungpa is related to the Drumpa Chösur.   

**Q:**  Chösur is?   

**A:**  Chösur is the ex-oracle [Tib. chö rje zur pa]. So, Lhalungpa is, I think, from Drumpa Chösur's shagtsang.   

**Q:**  I see. So, did they make money from their jobs? They get some money, some kind of rate or something? From the officers, they get something?   

**A:**  I think only later, I don't think they had much. I don't think they have much. Anything from the government, I don't think they get much. You know, originally, they get the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཇ] The daily meeting of Tibetan government monk officials (tsedrung) at which tea was provided. However, unlike the collective meetings of monks in monasteries, there was no collective chanting of prayers at the Drungja. The event started at around 9 a.m. and lasted for about an hour. When the Tse ga (the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat) was in the Potala, it was held there, and when it was in the Norbulinga Summer Palace, it was held there. All monk officials in Lhasa were expected to attend.">drungja</a> all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> they attend drungja. They are supposed to eat there, you know. They are supposed to be monks, and they don't have much to worry about, they have drungja, they will give the tea, and they give the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> there, so you eat there.   

**Q:**  But that's only once a day?   

**A:**  That's only once a day, but the monks are supposed to eat only once a day. According to the Vinaya rules. Not only once a day, but before that they are supposed to. They are not supposed to eat after that.   

**Q:**  During the 13th Dalai Lama's time it was when, in the morning or in the afternoon?   

**A:**  He changed it in the afternoon, rather late afternoon, after the office hours because of the Künphela. [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས] They have to wait until the Künphela, from Trapchi.   

**Q:**  So he made it in the afternoon?   

**A:**  He made it in the later afternoon. It became symbolic in any case by that time.   

**Q:**  And then later?   

**A:**  Later in the morning. What I remember it was always in the morning. Always in the morning.   

**Q:**  That makes sense because during the time of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> [Tib. ལུང་ཤར] it must have been in the afternoon because then they would go home. Because in the morning then they would go to the office, right?   

**A:**  In case it was in order of anything, then they would hold the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཇ] The daily meeting of Tibetan government monk officials (tsedrung) at which tea was provided. However, unlike the collective meetings of monks in monasteries, there was no collective chanting of prayers at the Drungja. The event started at around 9 a.m. and lasted for about an hour. When the Tse ga (the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat) was in the Potala, it was held there, and when it was in the Norbulinga Summer Palace, it was held there. All monk officials in Lhasa were expected to attend.">drungja</a> for a longer period.   

**Q:**  If there was any   

**A:**  Any special ceremonies, or some promotion, demotion, all these things announcing anything. Then they would hold it for a little bit longer than usual. Otherwise, they would come in and sit down and have some tea first, and would eat the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤགས] A staple Tibetan dish of tsampa mixed with tea and kneaded into balls of dough-like consistency.">pag</a>, and then go. That's what the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཇ] The daily meeting of Tibetan government monk officials (tsedrung) at which tea was provided. However, unlike the collective meetings of monks in monasteries, there was no collective chanting of prayers at the Drungja. The event started at around 9 a.m. and lasted for about an hour. When the Tse ga (the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat) was in the Potala, it was held there, and when it was in the Norbulinga Summer Palace, it was held there. All monk officials in Lhasa were expected to attend.">drungja</a> is. So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, they don't have to stay as long as the drungkhor do, because they are supposed to be monks, and the monks are not supposed to have so many things, so they are supposed to eat there, and back in the office. They don't have to go into town. The original idea I think goes back to .   

**Q:**  Then it seems that there is another group of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> who are from the monasteries, like Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] or Reting and those, who become shabdöpa?   

**A:**  Reting, we don't count that.   

**Q:**  So those are not really <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>?   

**A:**  Not really <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, but then they're sort of   

**Q:**  I assume they would be helped by people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> [Tib. བཞི་སྡེ] or   

**A:**  Like, you mean those two examples, like, for instance, Thupten Tsering La [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་རིང་ལགས] and Panden La [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལགས], they are the Ling Labrang [Tib. གླིང་བླ་བྲང] people.   

**Q:**  Ling Labrang is ... what do you mean?   

**A:**  This is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> of the tutor to the Dalai Lama, Yongdzin. So it was called Ling Labrang and Thubten Tsering is from Ling Labrang and Panden la is from Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Labrang.   

**Q:**  So, assuming in a case like that these people would learn how to read and write and then they would try do this mibab janshu.   

**A:**  Yeah.   

**Q:**  So they would go straight through?   

**A:**  They would go straight through. Yes, these people would go straight through.   

**Q:**  So, its like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, in a sense?   

**A:**  Yes, almost a shagtsang.   

**Q:**  And their loyalty is probably always with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>?   

**A:**  More so. It is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>'s responsibility. For instance, Panden La live there.   

**Q:**  They live in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>?   

**A:**  They live in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>. And then in the labrang also they have a very important position. Almost next to the chandzö.   

**Q:**  And sometimes when you become a high post like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, you get thapten [Tib. ཐབ་རྟེན]. thapten means, like a salary estate or position?   

**A:**  Method.   

**Q:**  Method?   

**A:**  Method on which you can live on.   

**Q:**  So the example was?   

**A:**  The example is Lhündup Dzong [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང]. When we had the trouble with Lhündup Dzong it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>'s thapten.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, which one?   

**A:**  Bumdang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང].   

**Q:**  Bumdang?   

**A:**  Yes, Bumdang. That was his thabten.   

**Q:**  O.K., that means   

**A:**  Maybe <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, they don't leave it. I think they take them with them. I don't think they return them. Although they are supposed to, I don't think they return them.   

**Q:**  Because then there is also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> had the estate called dashi [Tib. མདའ་གཞིས], right?   

**A:**  They don't return. And the kalön also had the same called kashi [Tib. བཀའ་གཞིས].   

**Q:**  They always bring them? Are you sure?   

**A:**  I remember <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> [Tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] had so much debt at the end, and one of the children's big estate which was the kalön's thabten. Later Trimön gave it to Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] to settle his debt.   

**Q:**  So it's not quite sure whether they actually give back these thapten, so like   

**A:**  On the other hand, whenever they became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> like that, and then later the it became the dzongshi shungzdin [Tib. རྫོང་གཞིས་གཞུང་འཛིན]   

**Q:**  Dzongshi Shungdzin?   

**A:**  Yes, you know, later, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates didn't belong to the individual and it was under the Legjö and run by the government.   

**Q:**  Yeah, under the Legjö.   

**A:**  Yes, not given to an individual, but all the income goes to the government.   

**Q:**  Not given to who?   

**A:**  To the individual. Whatever income they have goes to the government. They call it bumpa siblu [Tib. བུམ་པ་སིབ་བླུག] . Whatever the income comes and goes into the government, whatever expenditures and also spent the same way, and the person who is responsible, they get part of it. So that was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་གཞིས] A government estate; an estate that belonged to a dzong (district).">dzongshi</a> shungdzin. And I think   

**Q:**  So earlier they probably just kept it?   

**A:**  Kept it.   

**Q:**  O.k., let's go through some of the ... another way of coming into   

**A:**  Coming into the government official is through the Dalai Lama's kitchen, tse sölthab [Tib. རྩེ་གསོལ་ཐབ] and they become Dalai Lama's cook, söthabpa [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ], they enjoy certain rank. Some young people, they come there. Then, from the sölthabpa, they get promoted. Sometimes they promote someone else.   

**Q:**  How do you spell söthabpa?   

**A:**  [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ]. So, normally, from the sölthab, they are promoted to the position of two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pönpo</a>; pönpo drepa [Tib. དཔོན་པོ་བགྲེས་པ] [the senior in charge of preparing the food for the Dalai Lama] and pönpo shönpa [Tib. དཔོན་པོ་གཞོན་པ] [the junior in charge of preparing the food for the Dalai Lama]. Those normally should have been promoted. But in case of certain sölthabpa, they came out of the söltabpa life and then goes into the official rank.   

**Q:**  Becomes a government official?   

**A:**  Government official. They, many of them become. And then another one is certain who have a lot of rewards, they have been powerful, something doing during the trouble period, becomes sort of powerful and then given a government rank. An example is Chamdo Khenjung Dawala [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་མཁན་ཆུང་ཟླ་བ་ལགས]]. He was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>, he was living always Chamdo. He has become ... he is for the Tibetan.   

**Q:**  In 1980?   

**A:**  In 1980. Chamdo Khenjung Dawala. He was there even later on.   

**Q:**  In 1950 he was in Kham?   

**A:**  He was in Kham. That was Chamdo Khenjung Dawala. These are the examples.   

**Q:**  Now, is it your ... what my recollection is that in the government, all requests and that first go to the Kashag? So the Kashag sends it to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>, or to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Office?   

**A:**  Even the cases?   

**Q:**  Cases or requests from its own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates, amd the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> want some exemptions, chagyang [Tib. ཆག་ཡང] because there's bad rain this year ... is it that that these are first sent to the Kashag and then sent back?   

**A:**  I don't think so. They can send to Kashag, they can send to Tsikhang.   

**Q:**  You think so?   

**A:**  Yes, for sure. And then if it is something to do with the monastery then they will definitely send to Yigtshang. I mean, in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, in the dzong they had monastery troubles. Then that goes to the Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  No, I mean, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>, I know its that, but I'm talking about in the government things. Requests about this or that, about information requests. I think it have to go to Kashag.   

**A:**  I doubt it. I really doubt it, because Tsikhang comes first. Some may even go to the Laja.   

**Q:**  I'll have to find out. Talking about now Drepung, that, so we're talking then about in Drepung which monks are in which khamtsen. Kongpo Khamtsen has monks from Konpo and has monks from nearby Lhasa, and has some of the people from some different regions, some people from Shotar Lhosum [Tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] also, but not everybody.   

**A:**  Not everybody.   

**Q:**  I'm not sure how it goes.   

**A:**  Well, nearby Lhasa also not everybody.   

**Q:**  And it has the status of a big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, but not necessarily that many people?   

**A:**  Not very many people, yes.   

**Q:**  Then what about Tsa Khamtsen [Tib. ཚ་བ]?   

**A:**  Tsha is mostly monks from Jü [Tib. འཇུ] area in Kham.   

**Q:**  Kham Jü? I've never even heard of Jü.   

**A:**  This is place from where Juchen Thubten [Tib. འཇུ་ཆེན་ཐུབ་བསྟན] came.   

**Q:**  He is from Dege [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ], right?   

**A:**  Yes, it is Jü in Dege and Samdong Rimpoche [Tib. ཟམ་གདོང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] is also from there.   

**Q:**  So Jü is an area near Dege?   

**A:**  Near Dege some where. And there is a mountain called Tsha Karpo [Tib. ཚ་བ་དཀར་པོ].   

**Q:**  And Jü is spelled what?   

**A:**  [Tib. འཇུ]   

**Q:**  So mostly from there?   

**A:**  There, and also from Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད] I think.   

**Q:**  And Phukhang?   

**A:**  Phukhang and Jü is near and all the Kongtse Rawa [Tib. ཀོང་རྩེ་ར་བ] were also in Phukhang.   

**Q:**  I heard also that Ba Lithang [Tib. འབའ་ལི་ཐང] in there?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  No?   

**A:**  Litang goes to Pompora [Tib. སྤོམ་པོ་ར] and Kongtserawa goes to Phukhang.   

**Q:**  O.K. Kongtserawa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Ba Lithang goes to where?   

**A:**  Lithang goes to Pombora.   

**Q:**  And the Baba [Tib. འབའ་པ]?   

**A:**  Baba goes to Phara [Tib. ཕ་ར] and Gowo [Tib. གོ་བོ].   

**Q:**  And Chamdo?   

**A:**  Chamdo goes to Lhopa [Tib. ལྷོ་པ].   

**Q:**  Like, what other is there like Khyungpo [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ]?   

**A:**  I am not sure.   

**Q:**  Let's see, what other regions are there in Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས]?   

**A:**  Some of them goes to Phara and some of them goes to Phukhang also. Now, the teacher on the Dialectics School, Tsenyi Lobdra [Tib. མཚན་ཉིད་སློབ་གྲྭ] probably is from Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས].   

**Q:**  What about Gyethang [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཐང]?   

**A:**  Gyethang is Pombora.   

**Q:**  So where do the Mongolians, sogpo go?   

**A:**  They go to Gomang.   

**Q:**  And Amdos?   

**A:**  There are all different kinds of Amdo. Most of them are <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> and few of them are Loseling.   

**Q:**  So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> then is what, mostly   

**A:**  And then there are also some other belonged to Tsha. There are two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a> in Tsha; Ütö [Tib. དབུ་སྟོད] and Tsomai [Tib. མཚོ་སྨད་ཨོར་འཚོ་སྨད྄] both located in the Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]   

**Q:**  O.K. then. Let me get this now. So Tsa has two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, the near by, nyekora and long distance, thagringa.   

**Q:**  How do you spell?   

**A:**  The near by, nyekora [Tib. ཉེ་འཁོར་བ] and long distance, thagringa [Tib. ཐག་རིང་བ] They were Khambas.   

**Q:**  So when you say that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚ་བ་ཁང་ཚན] One of the main residential units (khamtsen) in Drepung Monastery.">Tsha Khamtsen</a> has two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a>, that means that of all of the monks, a lot of the monks are just in Tsha Khamtsen, but then there were also two mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes. But all the Tsha are not included in the mitsen.   

**Q:**  Just some of them are?   

**A:**  Just Ütö and Tshomai.   

**Q:**  So what difference does it make if you're in a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a>?   

**A:**  No difference.   

**Q:**  No difference?   

**A:**  Sometimes the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a> has separate meetings, separate distributions that you can benefit from. But then these two mitsen; Ütö and Tshomai, they are eligible to be shengo. And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚ་བ་ཁང་ཚན] One of the main residential units (khamtsen) in Drepung Monastery.">Tsha Khamtsen</a> is not eligible to be shengo.   

**Q:**  Oh really?   

**A:**  Yes, only two of them are eligible to be shengo.   

**Q:**  So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] One of the colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Deyang</a> [Tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] and Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ].   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] One of the colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Deyang</a> and Ngagpa are very small. But their monks are now mostly from nearby. So they don't really have anybody come from a distance.   

**Q:**  And Treu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་ཁམས་པ], where are they from?   

**A:**  They are from Ganzi [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས] and Drango [Tib. བྲག་འགོ] and Dargye [Tib. དར་རྒྱས] are all goes to Treu Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  And Golog [Tib. མགུ་ལོག]?   

**A:**  Some of them goes to Rongpo [Tib. རོང་པོ].   

**Q:**  Rongbo is another one?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  That's a small one?   

**A:**  Small one, but there were also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> in there and also Gulog. I heard that some Amdo comes to Loseling.   

**Q:**  O.K, now this is all automatic? If you come and you want to join <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, which <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a> they put you in, that's like automatic?   

**A:**  Automatic.   

**Q:**  You have no authority?   

**A:**  In my case a lot of trouble came up.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Because I, being the son of Demo [Tib. དེ་མོ] Rimpoche, the Kongpo Khamtsen demanded that I go in their khamtsen. And my previous reincarnation was Nyare.   

**Q:**  Nyare is spelled what?   

**A:**  Nyare [Tib. ཉག་རེ]. So it was obvious that I should go to Nyare. So they had trouble, and I think then they chose to call me Nyare Khentrü [Tib. ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ] by Nyare Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  I see. That was a new thing?   

**A:**  It was a new thing.   

**Q:**  So you were actually in Nyare?   

**A:**  In Nyare, and I don't want to shift.   

**Q:**  So you were physically where?   

**A:**  Nyare.   

**Q:**  In Nyare?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So would you say you joined Kongpo Khamtsen, what does that mean?   

**A:**  That means you can also list your name in Kongpo too.   

**Q:**  So you can do that, or was that special?   

**A:**  You can't do that.   

**Q:**  They just made a special case?   

**A:**  Special case. Although Demo Rimpoche came to join Drepung, and he joined Sera. And in then in Ganden. He joined all the three monasteries. Big Lamas are like that. Like Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ] Rimpoche, he had to join in Drepung as a Nyare, he had to join Ratö [Tib. ར་སྟོད] as a Nyare, he had to joined Ganden as a Nyare. And I think he doesn't join Sera. Mostly come from Traya. All the Traya monks go to Nyare.   

**Q:**  Nyare goes to Traya.   

**A:**  Traya goes to Nyare. And the Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ] too. Not much, I don't think there is much from Markham comes in Nyare.   

**Q:**  So what would the percent be, do you think, of the monks in Drepung, what would the percent be of Khambas versus Ütsangpa [Tib. དབུས་གཙང་པ]? Say 80 percent?   

**A:**  In the case of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, I really think it is about, if not 70, then 60 percent is Khambas.   

**Q:**  60 to 70 percent?   

**A:**  60 to 70 percent.   

**Q:**  And the rest would be Ütsangpa, or Amdos   

**A:**  Um, Amdos are not the rest. Mostly <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>pas, because Amdos are very small in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, so they always, sort of become a part of, like, you know, sort of goes under <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> division. Because the division is not made of Khamba and Ütsang, the division is made of Thagring and Nyekhor. So they go as distance, Thagring.   

**Q:**  O.K., now in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>   

**A:**  They are known as tragyün.   

**Q:**  Who is? Who is known?   

**A:**  Those coming known as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་རྒྱུན] Monks who came to Drepung, Ganden and Sera from far distances such as Kham and Amdo.">tragyün</a> and Nyekhor Tragyün. Tragyün is the continuation of the monk.   

**Q:**  And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་རྒྱུན] Monks who came to Drepung, Ganden and Sera from far distances such as Kham and Amdo.">tragyün</a> means?   

**A:**  Continuation of a monk.   

**Q:**  What does that mean?   

**A:**  To remain monks continuously.   

**Q:**  So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> has these 23 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, and then it has some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a>?   

**A:**  Mitsen.   

**Q:**  Mitsen, as well.   

**A:**  There are not many mitsen.   

**Q:**  Now the structure of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> is that   

**A:**  Managed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> Khenpo.   

**Q:**  O.K.   

**A:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, the Loseling Khenpo is the highest. The abbot is highest. No matter how many you have Gyetrü Huthogthu [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྤྲུལ་ཧུ་ཐོག་ཐུ] , they all have to sit under Loseling Khenpo.   

**Q:**  O.k., even the Huthogthu.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  O.K., he is appointed by the government for what, seven years or four years?   

**A:**  Six years.   

**Q:**  Six years. And the monks put up names? Now, how are the names picked?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> Tratsang will select the outstanding, important people.   

**Q:**  Who? Who in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> [Tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] they are the tratsang.   

**Q:**  And the ex-khempo?   

**A:**  Ex-khempo maybe has some say, yes.   

**Q:**  But these are only the people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>?   

**A:**  Only in Loseling. And normally, in the traditional system. I think they are mixtures, but in between the 13th Dalai Lama even if the person has been abbot of any tantric college, their names are not put in.   

**Q:**  If the person has been what?   

**A:**  Abbot, abbot of a tantric college.   

**Q:**  Earlier in their life?   

**A:**  In their lifetime, they will not select their name to be able to be the abbot.   

**Q:**  Why is that?   

**A:**  I do not know. That is just the rule. And that is the tantric abbot, not the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> abbot.   

**Q:**  So you have the abbot then, and under the abbot is who?   

**A:**  The abbot is the head of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, and then   

**Q:**  And he is picked by the names are by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a>?   

**A:**  The names are selected by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> Tratsang, which means the tshondu, the assembly consisted of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>, bungdzö.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> is the same as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>?   

**A:**  No, no. They are separate. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> they are separate.   

**Q:**  O.K.   

**A:**  Chabu, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>, uchö. That means, umdze, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> and the lama shunglenba [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ].   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a>, and lama shunglenba. What does the shunglenba do?   

**A:**  The lama shunglenba is responsible for studies.   

**Q:**  Shunglenba is responsible?   

**A:**  Officially he is supposed to be responsible for studies.   

**Q:**  For studies. And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> does the what?   

**A:**  Chabu, there are four, comprising of the representatives of three big khamtsen.   

**Q:**  The Kongpo?   

**A:**  The Tsha, Kongbo, and Phukhang. And in addition to that, the abbot's manager. That's called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> chanzö. [Tib. བླ་བྲང་ཕྱག་མཛོད]   

**Q:**  So what is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>, then?   

**A:**  Bungdzö, there are four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>. Sometimes there are six bungdzö and they are selected by I think by the abbot from any other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> besides those big ones.   

**Q:**  And what do they do?   

**A:**  They have ... they function parallel to the chabu.   

**Q:**  In what sense?   

**A:**  They have their meetings separately, they have separate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>, they have their separate way of functioning everything. Because they live ... certain distribution, salary come from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>, certain salary come from chabu.   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>, basically, they are in charge of the estates?   

**A:**  They are in charge of estates and the loans.   

**Q:**  What, loans?   

**A:**  The estates, loans, every economic affair and the political affairs, they are totally in charge. And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> stay above the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>, and they show more power over bungdzö. But they cannot overrule the bungdzö's decisions.   

**Q:**  They cannot overrule it?   

**A:**  Chabu cannot overrule <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>'s decisions. I think what had happened was, during the Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] troubles, the 13th Dalai Lama made the point that all <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> have to be appointed by the government. So then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> started appointing bungdzö. Then the government appointed chabu and Loseling had bungdzö. This is how the bungdzö had come later, not before. Since the government appointed chabu, then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> started appointing them.   

**Q:**  Like, so what kind of decisions ... I just really don't have any idea what these people do? How the uchö is spelled?   

**A:**  [Tib. དབུ་ཆོས]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་ཆོས] Abbr.: The Umdze (chant/prayer leader) and the Gegö (disciplinary head of a tratsang) in monasteries.">Uchö</a> will have not much to say in the case of Loseling. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a> is responsible for saying the prayers and chanting, etc. and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> is responsible for discipline, and lama shunglenba is responsible for studies. O.k., that is their major responsibilities. They are invited into the meetings, but there is nothing they can really say because they are not really much involved in that. It depends on the individual. Once you're invited, if you are capable you can say, if you are not capable they have to observe somehow. But the major responsibility is economics and political, and even fighting, cases, everything is between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> and the bungdzö.   

**Q:**  What about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a>? I mean, he is at the meetings, isn't he?   

**A:**  Khempo is at the meeting, he has the final vote.   

**Q:**  He has the final vote?   

**A:**  He has the final vote.   

**Q:**  Meaning he can override them?   

**A:**  He cannot override, but if they are all divided, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> can swing here and there.   

**Q:**  I see. So give some examples of ... either real examples of what they would talk about, or just make up some. Because I really don't have an idea of what happens.   

**A:**  Well, I mean, whenever a case comes   

**Q:**  Well, give an example of something.   

**A:**  Say there is trouble in one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>, o.k., say if a household, there is trouble, so when there is trouble in the household, of course first what they try to do is they try to deal with it by the Estate Manager, deba [Tib. སྡེ་པ], the deba of the shiga itself, when he cannot handle it within reason, naturally he will refer to either <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>. In the case of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> [Tib. གཉེར་པ] I think it is under the chabu, so they refer to the chabu. The chabu will try to solve their needs and they discuss there and they send their representatives, persons like Urgyen La and then there is a person named Mirab Dünpa [Tib. མི་རབ་བདུན་པ]. There are two of them, both famous in Loseling. Urgyen La two of them. They go to Lhasa. Chabu do not go personally, they will send a representative to talk to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</a>, or wherever <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</a> or Yigtsang. Even sometimes in the tsikhang. It depends on the case, like sometimes in the Kashag. So they go on behalf. And then they discuss with the chabu and they do it. And when the chabu have even more difficulty, and then the chabu themselves personally go down. Go down to meet with kudrak, consult with them in their houses, and before they go into their meeting. So then they go into the meeting. And when they can't handle it, then they come back and call the bungdzö, and also call, talk to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> first and see if anything can be done. If not, then bungdzö will be informed and uchö will be informed, and then the representatives of the 23 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> will be informed.   

**Q:**  I see. And then what happens?   

**A:**  And then they have the meeting. They discuss whatever. And the big decisions are made there: whether you are going to revolt or whether you are going to go against the government's ruling or whatever you are going to do. They decide it in that setting. And the representatives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> are normally the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a> system. Khamtsen will have again officials. The senior-most official is jigen.   

**Q:**  How do you spell that?   

**A:**  [Tib. སྤྱི་རྒན]. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a> is the ... normally senior.   

**Q:**  Now a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> has what, one, two?   

**A:**  Oh, more than that. Under <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a>, then you have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> gegen. And the khamtsen gegen generally looks more powerful than jigen because he is responsible for the discipline. And the jigen has a more official position during the prayer meetings in the khamtsen. He is one of the senior monks. But when the decision making things come, then the jigen has a lot of things. The jigen is responsible to call the meeting of khamtsen tsondu, O.k., under the khamtsen gegen then you have the nyerpa. In the case of Nyare Khamtsen, we have two nyerba.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> are there in Nyare Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Two nyerba.   

**Q:**  So, in Nyare Khamtsen, how many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a> do you have?   

**A:**  One.   

**Q:**  One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a>, say, in Nyare, in Nyare Khamtsen?   

**A:**  One jigen.   

**Q:**  For example, has one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a>, one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a>, two nyerba.   

**A:**  O.K.? Two nyerba.   

**Q:**  Nyerba's function is what?   

**A:**  Nyerba's function is to manage the daily <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོམས་ཇ] A prayer assembly meeting of a Khamtsen at which tea is served to the participating monks.">tshomja</a> and all this.   

**Q:**  Daily prayer tea?   

**A:**  Daily tea, and food distribution of all, whatever they have to do in the kitchen, they are responsible for it. And also he is responsible if anybody died. Any monk who dies has no ... what do you call it ... no, nobody to, sort of ... nobody inheritance ...   

**Q:**  No heirs?   

**A:**  No heirs. And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a>, in addition to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a> of the individual monk is responsible for disposing of his belongings and ... belongings, yeah, that's it.   

**Q:**  His own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a>?   

**A:**  His own gegen.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Now ... there is a very interesting case now. Below <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a>, junior ... every year four monks will go, in the case of Nyare Khamtsen, every year four monks will be transferred from the shöndre.   

**Q:**  Shöndre is what?   

**A:**  Shöndre is the junior monks who are not exempt from the monastery tax. So they are not exempted. Every year four monks will be, seniority-wise, exempted from the work obligation as a junior monk. Out of four, by lottery, two will become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a>, and two will be exempted.   

**Q:**  I see. They are just exempted.   

**A:**  Yes, four names they will roll it.   

**Q:**  So.   

**A:**  Now these four - whoever is going to be exempted for - the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> have a lot of expenditures also. Personally they have a lot of expenditures. So in order to meet that, in the case of Nyare Khamtsen we have the chapel called Drölma Lhakhang [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> in Lhasa. So every income of Drölma Lhakhang comes to Nyare Khamtsen. So Nyare Khamtsen doesn't collect in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, they make these four monks ... they allow these four monks to collect.   

**Q:**  So like   

**A:**  They allow these four monks to go.   

**Q:**  To use that income?   

**A:**  To use that income.   

**Q:**  From Drölma Lhakhang?   

**A:**  Yes, from Drölma Lhakhang. They go there and sit four months for each.   

**Q:**  Three months?   

**A:**  Yeah, three months each. So three months each, and during the three months whatever income you got is your personal income. Whichever, anybody who offers anything to Drölma, you know, the Lhasa seniors they give money, they throw money and offerings, all this will go to the monks there. It's yours to keep.   

**Q:**  I see. And that's just the way it is?   

**A:**  That's ... every year they go and change. Every three months they go and change.   

**Q:**  And these are under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a>?   

**A:**  These ... these four monks who are keeping the Drölma Lhakhang this year will be rolled their names. And two will become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> and two will be free.   

**Q:**  But they still go and get their money?   

**A:**  They still go and get their income. That's good luck for them.   

**Q:**  So who appoints the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a>?   

**A:**  They roll their names, four names.   

**Q:**  No, but this is after the fact. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> himself? There are two nyerba, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So how does the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> get picked?   

**A:**  You see, that's what I mean. Every year four monks exempted from the junior work obligations.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  When they are examining that year, they get the Drölma Lhakhang, they roll their names, and two become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a>. Now between the nyerba and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a>, every year there is one monk who becomes a khamtsen gegen, in between that period there is a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> gemba [Tib. རྒན་པ] which is the senior shöndre or junior tsondu. The khamtsen gegen and above are the members of the tshondu. Now it becomes the decision-making.   

**Q:**  I see. Khamtsen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a>?   

**A:**  And above.   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a> and the only ones above khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  Are the tshondu members.   

**Q:**  Are the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> members.   

**Q:**  No, I'm saying, but ... the only one in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> who is higher than the khamtsen gegen is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a>?   

**A:**  Is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a> and the incarnate lama, but that's a different case.   

**Q:**  I see. Do they go too? The incarnate lama?   

**A:**  They do go through him, yes.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>?   

**A:**  No, they don't go through him at all. No, no, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, they don't go through him. They will call the tsondu in. So all the tsondu members will come in your room and talk to you. It also depends. If it's a big lama or small lama or a gegen. The bigger lamas, all the tsondu will come to you, the junior lamas, tsondu will send a representative, I think two, three, four, seven, like that.   

**Q:**  Now that's the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>?   

**A:**  Tsondu of the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> is very small, its just two people, in Nyare Khamtsen?   

**A:**  No, no, there are a lot of people.   

**Q:**  Like Nyare Khamtsen? There's two, right?   

**A:**  No. Khamtsen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a>, every year there is one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> gegen. When you become ex-khamtsen gegen you become a member of the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Oh. See, you didn't say that. I see. The tshondu was all the ex-ones?   

**A:**  Ex-<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a> are all and three monks will become without becoming the khamtsen gegen. Every year four would come in, right? And two become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a>, and two are exempted. Although sometimes these four will go into ... every year four will be moved up. So every year move up. So when you move up from the senior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> into the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, you become khamtsen gegen. Out of four, there is only one khamtsen gegen.   

**Q:**  And the other three?   

**A:**  Three just move in.   

**Q:**  Move in where?   

**A:**  In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>. During when he is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a> ... I have three other colleagues, and I become khamtsen gegen, out of them, I become khamtsen gegen. And during that period my three colleagues will be the senior-most junior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a>, and when I join the tsondu, all three will join the tsondu. When I'm finished with my khamtsen gegen, then all four of us will be going to join the tsondu.   

**Q:**  After you've finished your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. One year they will be just waiting. They go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a> but they don't have power, no power. No official position.   

**Q:**  So during that year they will not sit with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>?   

**A:**  They do not sit with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, but they are the senior-most of the shöndre.   

**Q:**  Of the senior, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> gemba?   

**A:**  Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> gemba.   

**Q:**  And then after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> gemba you become?   

**A:**  The tsondu.   

**Q:**  Tsondu.   

**A:**  Then you remain in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> until you become the senior-most of the seven. There is seven beginning from the first down to the seventh, who is the senior-most.   

**Q:**  In terms of seniority?   

**A:**  Seniority. And out of one of the seven, one is the jigen. If one of the seven is not healthy enough, then they will appoint somebody.   

**Q:**  Who appoints the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a>?   

**A:**  I think the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> does. They don't really ... sort of they ask you, "what are you doing?", sort of ... you know, with us that way. There's no official.   

**Q:**  They don't do it like   

**A:**  No, no. No condition [Tib. མཐུན་རྐྱེན], no term, nothing. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a>, they do that.   

**Q:**  Oh, do they?   

**A:**  Again. Yes, again.   

**Q:**  Khamtsen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a> is done by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a>?   

**A:**  All the four will go again together.   

**Q:**  All these four. Those four are picked by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a>?   

**A:**  By senriy. Because the senior four will go back down, two of them rolled to be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a>, and four of them would be rolled and one comes out as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> gegen.   

**Q:**  So that there is that fact that there are two monks?   

**A:**  Khamtsen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a> is just one. The discipline is always <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a>, nobody else.   

**Q:**  And he is just one year?   

**A:**  He's just one. The discipline is totally <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> gegen. Even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> shengo, anything to do with the khamtsen, they will contact khamtsen gegen. And the khamtsen gegen will contact the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>, and tsondu will go. And when they become big cases, now, for example, then the lamey [Tib. བླ་མེད]came. Then the traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ] lamey came. The traya lamey has all these different .   

**Q:**  The traya lamey is a person, or what?   

**A:**  A person, that's his name. And he died, and then his brother died, and he had a nephew that had come, and then they became . And then there was a lot of division in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, all of this division I remember. So when these cases, big cases come, then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> will discuss, and the tsondu will call the seniors between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> and khamtsen gegen, whatever the amount of monks there were. They were called in the tsongdu.   

**Q:**  And what do they do?   

**A:**  They end it among discussion. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> body becomes enlargened. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> will meet separately now. So the shöndre gemba ... the shöndre will meet down somewhere separately, and the shöndre gemba still can go into the tsondu as well as down there. They are sort of double-sided, half here, half there.   

**Q:**  What about the ones who are not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a>, the ... what do you call them ... the ones who are not shöndre, what about them?   

**A:**  They don't go into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> also. They are not really important. One is a senior and one is a junior. They cannot be individually .   

**Q:**  So if there are two-thousand monks in a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, lets say, so then all the monks who are <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a>, and some time they need to move up.   

**A:**  They need.   

**Q:**  And then, when do you become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> gemba, I mean, after a couple of years, or how does it work?   

**A:**  Several years. Every year four monks go on, so then you have to wait your turn.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  So, in the case of Nyare Khamtsen, you have these big monks, probably Nyare was one of the biggest number of monks in Loseling. Nyare was the biggest of them.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes. Number one. Trehor also had a lot. So they will have, Nyare I think they take about thirteen to fifteen years to become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> gemba. And then tsondu.   

**Q:**  Every year four people become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> gemba, and from the shöndre gemba every year four people become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> and four people go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>?   

**A:**  That's right. In-between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerba was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerba</a> ... coming out of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> is the nyerba, and giving into the tsondu is the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  I see. So all the ... in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> it's the same as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> too?   

**A:**  I think so, almost the same as in Loseling.   

**Q:**  So all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> are structured this way?   

**A:**  All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> are.   

**Q:**  And then ... that's the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> structure. So are there any other officials in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Umm ... there are not other officials, I don't know. Among a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, some will become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> officials.   

**Q:**  No, no, lets leave that. Of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> ... lets say, during the Tengyeling [Tib. bstan ryas gling] trouble, I'm sure all the khamtsen met to discuss should they fight or not fight, what they should do, right? So on one level, the lowest level, is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a> or khamtsen as to what to do.   

**A:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> will meet, they make their decision, they let <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> know, they discuss together. Then the shöndre gemba will go up to the tsondu, express the views of the shöndre, and the shöndre gemba will come down to the shöndre, express the views of the tsondu. They meet like that. I don't know why. Because it takes a lot of ... its long. They go up and down, do these things. And then the khamtsen will express their views into the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> tsondu. It depends, sometimes they go one representative, sometimes they go two representatives, sometimes they go even seven or eight or twenty representatives.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>?   

**A:**  Sometimes the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> will call the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> of all the khamtsens to meet in the tratsang.   

**Q:**  So then, as you said, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> then there are the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>, and in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>, uchö, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a>, plus the ex-   

**A:**  And then in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> there is a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་ཚང] 1. Storehouse. 2. Steward, person in charge of a storehouse. 3. A monastic official in charge of storerooms.">nyertsang</a>. Two nyertsang in Loseling.   

**Q:**  This is in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>?   

**A:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, there is one called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་མ] The monk(s) in charge of a monastery&#x27;s kitchen.">jama</a> [Tib. ཇ་མ] and there was also Lama Könyer [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་གཉེར].   

**Q:**  He does what?   

**A:**  He is responsible for looking after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>'s images and things inside the chapel. But their official position also had some income. And there was the tratsang chabril and the uchö under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> .   

**Q:**  Under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> is what?   

**A:**  It is chabril.   

**Q:**  What do they do?   

**A:**  Chabril is responsible for the discipline. In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> gathering, when there are tea etc served, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a> will come. But, when there are not tea served, instead of chabril, the chösungwa [Tib. ཆོས་སྲུང་བ] will come. He has not much power, but he can beat people.   

**Q:**  Now if the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> has its own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>, does the khamtsen have its own shiga?   

**A:**  Yes, there were many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> having shiga.   

**Q:**  Then who is in charge of those?   

**A:**  In some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> will do the depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ]. In Nyare Khamtsen's case there is a lot of business involved.   

**Q:**  What do you mean business?   

**A:**  There is a lot of business.   

**Q:**  Like what?   

**A:**  Nyare Khamtsen has a lot of money. And they give money to the business people in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Loans, like?   

**A:**  Not loans. They give investments, matsa [Tib. མ་རྩ] to the businessmen, and then they accept   

**Q:**  Some profit?   

**A:**  Profit. More than the interest.   

**Q:**  I see. Then who is in charge of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>? But there must be somebody who looks after it. It can't be   

**A:**  No, not a , no. Everything is decided by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>. tsondu may accept from some important people some ... you know ... that is totally unofficially. All of the most efficient men will be the sort of hired, and he adds, and he goes down to do calculations. You know, he decides .   

**Q:**  I see. So really   

**A:**  Or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] A senior khamtsen official who ranks above the khamtsen gegen.">jigen</a>. jigen can contribute their independent .   

**Q:**  So really its like exactly the same. What goes on in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> level, you have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a>, you have the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a>, prayers, they save money, then its exactly the same at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> level, its just that there are different estates. Some estates belong to tratsang, some estates belong to khamtsen.   

**A:**  Yes, some of them belonged to the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  That means the monastery, gompa [Tib. དགོན་པ]   

**A:**  Yes, tsogchen.   

**Q:**  Tsogchen means the gompa?   

**A:**  Yes, below the gompa, then there are a lot of divisions. Some belong to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་བསོ] The head managers/stewards of monasteries as a whole, especially the large Gelugpa monasteries like Sera and Drepung.">jiso</a>, some belong to laji.   

**Q:**  Ok, let's then hold up a second. [What about the] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>?   

**A:**  Tratsang ... the highest of the positions, the top, is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a>, the abbot of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> is the top. And he is assisted by the four chabu.   

**Q:**  Who assisted him, they would be under him?   

**A:**  Under him. Four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>, four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>, and three uchö.   

**Q:**  Four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>, that's right. That's where we started off.   

**A:**  I think. It should be.   

**Q:**  I'm assuming they are under him. We didn't go into it entirely. Then there is the three uchö?   

**A:**  Officially I think the uchö are above the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> and bungdzö. Consisting of the umdze, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a>, and lama shunglenba [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ]. And they each have responsibilities. Of the chabu, they are generally responsible for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>'s economic affairs. Both chabu. Chabu and bungdzö. Then there are the nyertsang.   

**Q:**  Bungdzö is spelled how?   

**A:**  [Tib. སྦུག་མཛོད].   

**Q:**  And this is a new post?   

**A:**  A new post. I think it was created only after when the Dalai Lama started appointing the bungdzö.   

**Q:**  Right, right. 1920-1921.   

**A:**  After that then the Tibetan government started appointing <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> so that the governments interests would be safe. So then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> started appointing <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> I think.   

**Q:**  But they had to give them space, to look after them.   

**A:**  Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> have a lot of space.   

**Q:**  So the monastery had to give them   

**A:**  The monastery didn't give out of chabu. Whatever they could give was new thereafter. I think they did it instead of giving to the chabu. And the top level remained Phara Khempo period.   

**Q:**  Where does he come from?   

**A:**  He came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</a>, I don't know where he comes from.   

**Q:**  So who is in charge of discipline in ...   

**A:**  Gegö.   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> ... that's in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>?   

**A:**  That's in tratsang.   

**Q:**  And who appoints those?   

**A:**  Khempo.   

**Q:**  Gegö is spelled?   

**A:**  [Tib. དགེ་བསྐོས]   

**Q:**  How many of those are there?   

**A:**  Only one or one year.   

**Q:**  Appointed by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> for one year.   

**A:**  You know, what happened ... let me tell you what happened. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> started appointing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> for six years. So it was six years. So what happened is as soon as the khempo appointed a gegö, they would come and the new khempo would start appointing, and other than for about two or three years they all would have been appointed by the khempo before.   

**Q:**  And then ... then there are you said, and lama könyer.   

**A:**  Lama Könyer, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་མ] The monk(s) in charge of a monastery&#x27;s kitchen.">jama</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a>. There is only one chabril and two jama.   

**Q:**  Then ... yeah ... and you said the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> are not from the four big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>?   

**A:**  No. Four big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>. Three big khamtsen ...   

**Q:**  Three big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>?   

**A:**  Three big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, they are kind of a lifetime appointment. Unless they are demoted, otherwise they remain for a lifetime.   

**Q:**  And this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> chandzö does   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> chandzö will change every <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> time.   

**Q:**  What's the distribution of authority? What does the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> do?   

**A:**  Khempo has over all in charge. Over all in charge on , examinations, demotions, promotions, and seeing that ... keeping everything at optimum. You know, the monks, from junior to senior, there are a lot of things. Like tshoglang [Tib. ཚོགས་ལང]. Tshoglang means eliminated sort of examinations. There are different tshoglang every on every subject. So, like, for instance, pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན] takes 3 years, düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ] takes 4 years and uma [Tib. དབུ་མ] takes 2 years. Pharchin has 6 divisions and uma has 3 divisions and düwa has one. These are the tshoglang. The final examination is given by the . And then there is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> umdze and lama shunglenpa. All of those were appointed by the abbot.   

**Q:**  Bungdzö are appointed for how long?   

**A:**  I think six years. Yes, that's it. One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> appointed one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>. So that would be six years. I think bungdzö are by different khamtsen.   

**Q:**  So then, when there are big issues, then they have   

**A:**  When the bigger issues come, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> will contact individually the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a>, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a> will contact individually the khempo. They both start to contact him. And then chabu will consult each other when the bigger issues come, or when chabu will discuss the matter with the khempo and the khempo cannot decide alone, the chabu ... khempo will come , and then they become . bungdzö will discuss the matter with the khempo, khempo cannot decide alone. Then, even then if they cannot decide, then go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> tsondu. That is aided by the uchö. When that is not decided, then they are aided by the representatives of the khamtsen. In addition to that, the representatives of the khamtsens, were specially invited. Specially invited like an expert. Like Urgyen La and. They will become like the people under the khempo. And then, in addition to the very openly invited .   

**Q:**  So that's how the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> functions?   

**A:**  That's how the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> functions.   

**Q:**  So, basically then, the people from the big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> ... like your loyalty as a monk is primarily to your khamtsen first?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And they are the people you work with, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And you interact with them?   

**A:**  Yes. And you defend your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> in any tratsang.   

**Q:**  So the big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> therefore have the most influence?   

**A:**  Khamtsen have more influence. And then there are 23 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, there are 23 different influences there .   

**Q:**  So if you think of it in terms of power, since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> are mostly like   

**A:**  Equal.   

**Q:**  People from far away, the wages, subsistence, are in the hands of the of the thagringa And they are the real power-houses, they have the money.   

**A:**  But when government matters come up, then the representatives choose one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>, and chabu will go. And whatever happened, I don't think the monks bothered. Unless it was objecting to his own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> or khamtsen. Until then, they don't even bother with what happened. When issues like the Reting case, it is a different matter. When it's Tengyeling case. When it is affecting to you, then they will go all-out. Exercise their influence, power, and monks living there ... And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> has to act almost like a defender. Otherwise the khempo will get in trouble. Like in Sera Je. And if the khempo refuses to act according to the tratsang he could be killed.   

**Q:**  Now what about the trüpaiku [Tib. སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ] [the reincarnated lamas]? Like the trüpaiku in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>. Are there trulpaiku in khamtsen?   

**A:**  Trüpaiku are everybody lives in khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Khamtsen, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> ... so, like, do trüpaiku's representatives ... do they try to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> or anything?   

**A:**  No. None. They can't. The trüpaiku's interests are in ... very strongly protected by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and the tsogchen. Tsogchen not much, but the tratsang very strongly protected. And trüpaiku will also see to it that they get strong support from khamtsen and tratsang, and khamtsen and tratsang will see to it ... according to the level of the trüpaiku, he really will be protected very strongly. I forgot to mention one thing about khamtsen. I mentioned to you that khamtsen has business. Not only does khamtsen have business, there is something more than that. They also protect your almost sponsor, Jindag [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] dependent lay people who belong to your, sort of, side, or an ex-monk who tries to do business, or a big family who is part of the khamtsen ... part of the khamtsen in the sense of wherever the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་རྒྱུན] Monks who came to Drepung, Ganden and Sera from far distances such as Kham and Amdo.">tragyün</a> comes from, and wherever that area is the khamtsen will look to them as their own.   

**Q:**  That's why they give them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they will. Originally, that's why. Like that.   

**Q:**  They have their own ?   

**A:**  They have their own sort of interests. So Tengyeling, and Demo, and Reting, goes beyond the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>'s interests. They become ... never get involved. If it becomes too big and all that, khamtsen has no way to cover. And interested in keeping peace at home. For example, Nyare Khamtsen. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> would see to it anybody that ... of ex-monk, or any of the khamtsen's Jindag, if they are not doing, khamtsen will help.   

**Q:**  Not doing what?   

**A:**  When they are not doing, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> will see to it.   

**Q:**  Well, what do you mean by they are not doing?   

**A:**  If that his business is falling down, not doing good, not doing well. Khamtsen will come out with an interest-free loan and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> will ask the business man of the khamtsen to help with a small loan. And they do this. They protect that very strongly. They watch over it in a very strong way. And then with agreement, they will see that they recovered their loan and all this. And that was what they do. And according to the monks these business people will also remain indebted to you. They make a lot of offerings and distribution. That's how the relation is built in-between.   

**Q:**  If a monk have a trouble of the monastery, then he becomes the monastery's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> or what?   

**A:**  No, no. He remains as a monk.   

**Q:**  I mean if they were expelled.   

**A:**  I don't think they become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> anybody. Maybe some of them goes to Soman Lekhung [Tib. སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུངས] [Agriculture Office], I really don't know. But most of these monks who lost their celibacy are more or less belonged to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> Traders [Tib. ཚོང་པ] and they become like Khamba Tshongpa. And they even send them ... you know, if there is a minor child   

**Q:**  There's a what?   

**A:**  If there is a minor child and the old people died and there's some children. And then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> sends somebody there to sit in the family. To look after the child, to bring them up, until the man is old enough to look after himself.   

**Q:**  They do that to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱིན་བདག] A patron or sponsor, usually of a monastery, ritual ceremony or religious teaching. This term is also used as a title for famous patrons. For example, Andrutsang Gombo Tashi, the head of Chushigandru, was commonly referred to as Andru Jindag because he had sponsored major religious ceremonies.">jindag</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. Nyare Khamtsen did that very much.   

**Q:**  So that makes close relations?   

**A:**  That makes a lot of close relations.   

**Q:**  Now, that's within <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> Tratsang. Now what about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> doesn't seem like that.   

**Q:**  The big ones are what?   

**A:**  Now, I don't know much about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> really. Hamdong and Samlo are big and there are Gungru. I wonder how many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> the Gomang have. The khamtsen gegen of Hamdong and Samlo have the title of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> shengo, but they don't have the power. The power rest with only Drepung tsogchen shengo. And there was also one called the Kyomolung [Tib. སྐོར་མོ་ལུང] shengo and the Drepung shengo and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧར་གདོང་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) found in both Drepung and Sera Monasteries.">Hamdong Khamtsen</a> gegen and the Samlo khamtsen gegen. [unclear] and whoever comes to the goverment ceremony [unclear], but the power rest with only Drepung tsogchen shengo. Another question is what are the ex-abbots of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and other abbots of the tratsang like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, Shagor and Gyepa and what happens. So traditionally, in Loseling, they are not involved and in functions of Loseling, they don't exist there. The ex-abbots are not counted and no power and nothing. They don't even attend the tratsang. If they do so, they cannot function. Similarly, Gyepa Khempo and the Shagor Khempo are part of Loseling and they enjoy the title of the Loseling abbot and they may become Loseling Khempo. It is possible. [unclear] Loseling has only <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> that is the Loseling Khempo.   

**Q:**  And then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> level has the shengo, right?   

**A:**  Yeah, shengo is responsible of the discipline and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> is controlled by laji. Drepung is headed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ་ཁྲི་པ] The most senior abbot in a committee of abbots such as the Laji.">khempo tripa</a>, the senior most abbot who is mostly an ex-abbot. The ex-abbots enjoy the title in the tsogchen and they don't enjoyed in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> at all.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ་ཁྲི་པ] The most senior abbot in a committee of abbots such as the Laji.">khempo tripa</a> is part of laji or no?   

**A:**  Khempo tripa has the main responsibility in the laji and he calls the laji he has to do everything.   

**Q:**  How many people in the laji are there?   

**A:**  All the ex-abbots and the present abbots and offial rank called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོ་བྲང] Abbreviation of Ganden Phodrang, the residence of the Dalai Lama in Drepung, and later, the residence of the Tibetan government&#x27;s representative in Drepung (the Phodrang depa).">phodrang</a> depa.   

**Q:**  Is he appointed as the government representative?   

**A:**  Yes, he has the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> title. [unclear] and there are also two shengo, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> umdze and these were probably the big laji [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག]. There are three laji, big, middle and small laji. Among the middle laji, there are two chökhang depa [Tib. མཆོད་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] in charge the chapels of Drepung one from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> ans one from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> and Parkhang Depa, [Tib. པར་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] the in charge of the Printing House.   

**Q:**  What is the function of these depa?   

**A:**  The two chökhang depa are for over seeing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> dukhang and taking care of the statues, scriptures and stups [Tib. སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་རྟེན] of Drepung. Parkhang Depa takes care of the Printing House.   

**Q:**  Was it a blue printing or block?   

**A:**  They only have the block. It was like a library.   

**Q:**  Who appoints the chökhang depa?   

**A:**  Probably, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> would submit the name list and the government would approve it and they have a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> titile. Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> umdze is also appointed by the government. Probably, chökhang depa and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. པར་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] The person in charge of the printing house in Drepung Monastery">parkhang depa</a> were also appointed by the government. Phodrang depa is appointed by the government and anything the government comminicate with Drepung, they comminicate with the laji and they comminicate with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོ་བྲང] Abbreviation of Ganden Phodrang, the residence of the Dalai Lama in Drepung, and later, the residence of the Tibetan government&#x27;s representative in Drepung (the Phodrang depa).">phodrang</a> Depa. Phodrang depa informs the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ་ཁྲི་པ] The most senior abbot in a committee of abbots such as the Laji.">khempo tripa</a> and he [unclear]. It is always phodrang Depa involved. [unclear]   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ] The monastic official in charge of the Ganden Photrang building in Drepung monastery.">phodrang depa</a> intervened alot, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they do alot and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ] The monastic official in charge of the Ganden Photrang building in Drepung monastery.">phodrang depa</a> is the depa of Ganden Phodrang which acts like the representative of the government. In the small laji [Tib. ཆུང་ཁག], there are the two shengo and the two nangma.   

**Q:**  What <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ] A minor monk assistant to the Shengo at the Mönlam Chemmo Prayer Festival. These nangma ranked below the Chagdampa.">nangma</a> does?   

**A:**  Under the shengo there are two called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ] A minor monk assistant to the Shengo at the Mönlam Chemmo Prayer Festival. These nangma ranked below the Chagdampa.">nangma</a> and there are two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་རིལ] The Chabril&#x27;s main work was overseeing serving the traja. He was also the servant of the gegö and khempo. It had a middle status of the types of lene. The chabril was also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril got an extra share of gye in the tratsang.">chabril</a>. Each shengo has a chabril and the there are two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་མ] The monk(s) in charge of a monastery&#x27;s kitchen.">jama</a>. Probably, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> has only on jama and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> had two.   

**Q:**  Who handles the estates and like that? Was it <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>?   

**A:**  There is no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> in the laji and all is done by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> like giving loans and collectin interests of the loans. When they had a trouble with cases, they send the representative of the laji like the people like Ugyen la would go to see the government officials and Ugyen la would tell me that when he goes to see the Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Chemo, he would tell him, "Oh chagdampa la have come [Tib. ཕྱག་ཕེབས་གནང་བྱུང]. Today, who are you going to represent for?" Ugyen la would represent the laji, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and sometimes the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> also.   

**Q:**  Chagdampa is a post, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they are sent from Drepung for the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  Let's finish the small laji.   

**Q:**  What about the ex-nangma and ex-shengo?   

**A:**  There was no ex-nangma and ex-shengo. The only one who has the ex is the khempo. Some shengo are given the title to enjoy the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> rank and invited into like Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང]. In the case of the 13th Dalai Lama, he has given two shengo the tsidrung rank offcially and then also there are ex-jindag [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] [sponsor] and who ever enjoy the governmental tsidrung post was also invited into the laji.   

**Q:**  If they come back to the monastery, right?   

**A:**  If they are living in the monastery with the rank.   

**Q:**  So it is quite confusing because the abbots were also representing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> abbot will represent the tratsang while he is in office, but the ex-khempo is not put in the tratsang. And there are also the rigji.   

**A:**  Rigji have 6 abbots, right?   

**Q:**  What they come from?   

**A:**  They also have a certain land and they have certain business to do. They will give loans and they collect money. Sometimes they hire people.   

**Q:**  What about the [unclear]?   

**A:**  Every six years, as I told you during the long break, chöntsam [Tib. ཆོས་མཚམས], one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> is responsible for the tonggo. That period, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> has nothing to do. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> there is an additional mangja. And everyday, the monks are given one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྲེ] A unit of traditional volume measurement [a container] in Tibet, 20 of which typically equaled one khe or bo [also a container], although in some areas there were only 16 dre in one khe.">dre</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> will also give a big tonggo. That is the rigtra and each khempo every 6 years.... and there are 6 khempo excluding Ngagpa.   

**Q:**  Is there <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> every year?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  That is at the break, chöntsam [Tib. ཆོས་མཚམས]?   

**A:**  Yes, at the chöntsam <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chenmo</a> [Tib. ཆེན་མོ] which is one and half month.   

**Q:**  When is that?   

**A:**  This is the time of the summer retreat from the 17th of 6th lunar month till the 17th of 8th lunar month. I think they give the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> for 16 days not during all the time.   

**Q:**  Do the individual <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> make profit of these things?   

**A:**  I think the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> will spend more money on that rather than doing that.   

**Q:**  How do they spend more money?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> has a tremendous income of money. If you are appointed as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> khempo, you will become multi-millioniar over a time.   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> khempo has a shiga. Number two, Whenever Loseling has a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a>, the Loseling khempo gets half skin/bag load of butter and half box of tea. It is called, "day tea and day butter", nyinja nyinmar [Tib. ཉིན་ཇ་ཉིན་མར]. During the chöntsam, there is no traja.   

**Q:**  Traja means <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a>?   

**A:**  Mangja is in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> is in the tratsang. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> tea is called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོམ་ཇ] The name of the khamtsen&#x27;s prayer assembly meetings at which tea was served.">tsomja</a> [Tib. ཚོམས་ཇ]. Except during the chöntsam almost everyday, there is traja like 80% of the year. Now addition to that, every distribution of the monks, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> has 11 shares. In addition to that, the Dalai Lama's throne has 41 shares which goes to the khempo.   

**Q:**  If everyone gets 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a>, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> gets 11 dayang for oneself and 41 dayang from the Dalai Lama's throne.   

**A:**  This is the amount at least the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> gets and similarly whenever there is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> [unclear] the abbot gets in line where others get mix ed.   

**Q:**  But not the ex-abbot, right?   

**A:**  The ex-abbots gets nothing. I am not sure whether the ex-abbots get any other shares other than the tratsang.   

**Q:**  They only get the shares from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> and the Mönlam?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Is it possible that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོམ་ཇ] The name of the khamtsen&#x27;s prayer assembly meetings at which tea was served.">tsomja</a> comes on the same day?   

**A:**  No. Maybe the same day but not the same time. Mangja is always early in the morning like 6-7 am. And there is another dry <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> [without tea] in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> is served at about 9.30 till 11.30. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོམ་ཇ] The name of the khamtsen&#x27;s prayer assembly meetings at which tea was served.">tsomja</a> only starts only at 3 o'clock in the afternoon.   

**Q:**  The monks don't get the tea if they don't go?   

**A:**  Yes, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] The abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khempo</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</a> would get the share and I am a new trüku and don't go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> in the tsogchen I get three shares and if I go, I get four shares. [laughter] In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>, if I go, I get 6 shares and if I don't, I get 5 shares.   

**Q:**  How do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> make the money like the phucha [Tib. ཕུ་ཕྱག] and the kongchag [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྱག]?   

**A:**  They had many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> and all the depa were appointed by them and they were also in charge of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་ཚང] 1. Storehouse. 2. Steward, person in charge of a storehouse. 3. A monastic official in charge of storerooms.">nyertsang</a> they send people to some big monasteries like Urgyenla was sent to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> of big monastery called Ganden Chönkhor Ling [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར་གླིང]. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> Tratsang appoints the Tawang Nyerpa [Tib. རྟ་དབང་གཉེར་པ].   

**Q:**  Was this the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> or the abbot?   

**A:**  They have separate abbot. They send both the abbot and the nyerpa.   

