# Drepung Monestary Collection  
# Interview M.0009.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Cleveland, United States  
**Date of Interview:** 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:**  Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་དབྲེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 50  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of the 10th Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview, he talks about the institution of the shagtsang (household) within the monastery and the endowments that are given to the Chabu. He also discusses the borrowing of money from the chabu, the Labrang, and the appointment of the sheyngo. He then describes what happens to a monk's property when he dies, and the famous incident that occurred regarding the distribution of Gen Lamey's wealth after he died.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_08/M_0009_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I'm talking about the shagtsang, and then one thing, I just remembered, many, quite a big shagtsang, sometimes become the manager of the big labrangs too.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes, there are two benefits, benefits on both sides, labrang get benefits because you can get very efficient person and get things done easily and shagtsang kungö get benefit from there because there are certain things that labrang has big things which may have benefit them in their business.   

**Q:**  Like what?   

**A:**  Anything, what I had in mind in jiso, Phara jiso became the chandzö of the Losemba [Tib. ལོ་སེམས་དཔའ], I think the junior or the senior, or one of them became chandzö of the Losemba.   

**Q:**  Losemba is what?   

**A:**  Losemba is a one big labrang. Losemba has a tremendous amount of land in Tibet and Phara jiso has a lot of money but no land. So Phara jiso, he is one of the kungö who became Losemba's chandzö. So he got access to the land.   

**Q:**  He has access to the land.   

**A:**  He become access to the land and miser and everything just because of the labrang chandzö and the labrang has a lot of land but not much money so they get an access to a lot of money from the Phara jiso. But it is not really joined together. However they have easy access of the money and the land and the people both sides. So that is another interesting factor in an economic way.   

**Q:**  So how would that have happened, would the labrang people   

**A:**  The labrang people will ask, "Who do you think would make a good chandzö" and this and that, and then also you know they manipulate here and there, and then they ask, "well you think Phara jiso is good for this?" Yeah maybe. And at the same time Phara jiso may already have an eye on that for some time and be working toward that direction. That way, it bnenefits both. As well as the big labrang are sometimes...you know, the lamas are young or small or even not there and it is one big house where everybody eats or does a lot of things and some will get a big way too.   

**Q:**  I don't understand that.   

**A:**  Sometimes labrang, it has a big name and a big house and big land but there's nothing left inside, because everybody started stealing, taking it away around. They do a lot. Very often. Staff are all not really labrang people, they maybe labrang people but they don't have a lot of loyalty to the labrang and interest of, what do you call it, the interest of loyalty, a conflict of interests, the personal interests overtake the labrang interest, that happens also sometimes.   

**Q:**  And if the lama is young, he doesn't know what's happening?   

**A:**  He has no idea what's happening, he's been told so and so is your new manager. That's it.   

**Q:**  And when he's older, he can say I don't   

**A:**  Yes, he can I don't want so and so.   

**Q:**  So when he's younger, that's when he's vulnerable.   

**A:**  Very vulnerable, very vulnerable, unless you have a good chandzö.   

**Q:**  So would you say that most of the people who move up in the hierarchy, the officials, what do they call them the lene [Tib. ལས་སྣེ ], is that what they call them in the monasteries?   

**A:**  Lene, means [Tib. ལས་ཀྱི་སྣེ་མོ] "end of work", means, officials, whoever from one point of something.   

**Q:**  And they are mostly from shagtsang, do you think?   

**A:**  Mostly.   

**Q:**  Why do you think that is?   

**A:**  It is a old set up and then the government influence.   

**Q:**  What's the government got to do with it?   

**A:**  Oh, the sheyngo are appointed by the government.   

**Q:**  By the government?   

**A:**  Yes, sheyngo, the list of the sheyngo is provided by the monastery, however, the final authority of appointment is the government. And so they build up their good relations with the Lhasa kudrak, and the monastery that's their job, the monks who are really studying or even the [ones who have good voice and are good in chanting] dönsang kesang [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་སྐད་བཟང] or geshe - they don't bother, they are not harmed, they don't know how to talk to kudrak, they have no idea what to do. So it is sort of left up to them, so that's their job. Among themselves they decide everything they do. And the monks go along with their decision. That's really what it is. The khempo is supposed to be intervening, sometimes they do khempo doesn't know anything about it. Some khempo don't know anything about it.   

**Q:**  Is the khempo usually from the shagtsang or from the monks?   

**A:**  Oh, the khempo, it depends, khempo normally become a good geshe, like it is impossible to have a funny geshe as a Loseling khempo, but it is possible to have Düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ] khembo or Gyeba [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] khempo or Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] khempo with some shagtsang people, but in Loseling, or Gomang, it is impossible because khempo is responsible for lots of studies where they do a lot of things, so its not possible. So at least it stands for something.   

**Q:**  So shagtsang people normally have the reputation of being not scholars?   

**A:**  Not scholars, they don't produce scholars, they produce somebody who can mix with the society...and somebody who can write letters, somebody who can do..who is capable in politics--they are some sort of monastery politicians.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Yeah, they are the monastery politicians.   

**Q:**  And so people who want to be upwardly noble, they either have to join the shagtsang or start their own?   

**A:**  Start their own, yes.   

**Q:**  Basically.   

**A:**  Basically, yes.   

**Q:**  And if you start your own, you have to have some income?   

**A:**  You build up some income, you may become a gegö, chabril without being shagtsang. Without being shagtsang you may become tratsang lama könyer [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་གཉེར].   

**Q:**  What's that?   

**A:**  Tratsang lama könye is actually [the care taker], könyer [Tib. དཀོན་གཉེར], called lama könyer, that is the one beginning post to become official, setting up shagtsang or tratsang jama, its a beginning post. Lama könye has a lot of income from people who come to make offerings to the images, all the scarfs and money, butter is taken by lama könyer there's hundreds of people who come, hundreds of.   

**Q:**  I see, he doesn't have to turn over any of that money?   

**A:**  Oh no, that's his.   

**Q:**  That can be very lucrative. No kidding.   

**A:**  That's his, totally his.   

**Q:**  Oh, so he can make a lot of money. For all of them or just for   

**A:**  For all of them.   

**Q:**  In like Loseling?   

**A:**  Yes, I mean lama könyer anything comes to Loseling dukhang, anything come where the protector is its gombo's .   

**Q:**  What do you mean?   

**A:**  There's another person called gombo [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བ] and that is his.   

**Q:**  So in Loseling. I've been to Loseling, in the back there's like you walk through?   

**A:**  You mean underneath? Not underneath where the tsom [Tib. ཚོམས] the big hall is.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  They're all lama könyer's, totally anything, the scarfs and all.   

**Q:**  That's quite a big place.   

**A:**  There is a whole lot of money come, a lot more butter will come because of the butter lamp offerings.   

**Q:**  What do they take it out of the butter lamp?   

**A:**  Take it out.   

**Q:**  You are kidding.   

**A:**  Yes, sure they take it. There are hundreds of people who want to fill it up so they take it out, yes, that's what they do. That's lama könye's job.   

**Q:**  So that's very lucrative, how do you get that?   

**A:**  Oh, that is sometimes difficult. There's a lot of competition. Normally khempo appoints, sometimes if it becomes too difficult for khempo to appoint, too difficult.... Say khempo took a lot of money from somebody and promises and someone else give more money, it become very difficult. I promise you, I promise you, I promise you, so I'm turning it over to the deity, or some protector who will come in trance or the political pressure for him, or I'm turning over to the deity or senriy something.   

**Q:**  What kind of political pressure could come?   

**A:**  Political pressure some kudrak will support somebody, and keep on insisting, "khempo, please do this and do that" and some incarnate lamas, important incarnate lamas, some shagtsang where khempo has to depend for his support in the monastery, I mean, it's like here. Some shagtsang, you know khempo has to depend on big shagtsang too.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  Well, beginning khempo or some khempo, Loseling khempo has a very big income so doesn't have to. Some khempo have to depend on a lot of shagtsang to have his labrang supported. And because he needs a certain number of horses and a number of clothes and a number of people, some of them don't have anything, so they depend on the shagtsang to support and a Rigdra [Tib. རིགས་གྲྭ]. Every six years they get a Rigdra there.   

**Q:**  What do you mean?   

**A:**  The khempos have to give the Rigdra offering. For one month they have to feed the Drepung monks with their one dre of tsampa every day. That is a lot. That's a lot so they need the support for that.   

**Q:**  Support means like help?   

**A:**  Help, financial help, the grain help.   

**Q:**  But if they take from both sides, then how do they do it, do they have to give the money back?   

**A:**  I don't think anybody gives back. Showing the difficulties and umm... some call both, some call each individual and some difficult call both together and then there are some they don't even call anybody they just say I'm turning to the deities; Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] or Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] or something. So they put the names of whoever they see to stand for the post.   

**Q:**  So if they call both, won't the guys be angry?   

**A:**  Angry, but what to do?   

**Q:**  It's just for one year, this lama könye?   

**A:**  No, I think it's more, for six years or something, yea, its about that.   

**Q:**  That would be worth it.   

**A:**  It is worth it, yea. And then jama. So these are the beginning   

**Q:**  Jama's appointed also by the khempo?   

**A:**  Yes, khempo, tratsang case is khempo, tsogchen's case is laji I think.   

**Q:**  If you get a post like that, then you make some money?   

**A:**  Then you make some money.   

**Q:**  Now, who are the people who are out on the shiga and doing trade and all that?   

**A:**  Oh, these, these are the chabu and bungdzö. It is under one or the other of these... If the shiga is under the chabu's control then he will find a shidü. If bungdzö's control, he will find a sitable person.   

**Q:**  But those are like the tratsang or at the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Mostly tratsang, many, sometimes a few khamtsen also have shiga., but mostly tratsang. And there are a number of people who are looking for that job too. A number of people, but mostly a sort of a semi-official category.   

**Q:**  Semi-official, meaning?   

**A:**  People who would like to become an official but not yet.   

**Q:**  When you say official, like, what are the posts you mean, like the   

**A:**  Like the chabu, sheyngo, gegö, things like that.   

**Q:**  Jiso and those are officials?   

**A:**  jiso --yeah definitely. jiso is a big official, tremendous amount of money, I think jiso gets.   

**Q:**  Thats for the mangja every day.   

**A:**  Yea, but shiga... they control tremendous shiga. And they have so many nangsen, really, I believe the earlier that all the Drepung shiga are in jiso. So that jis sort of, and the Phara jiso, this Phara jiso about whom I've been talking about, I think he became the Chandzö of Losempa after he stopped becoming jiso. After he's jiso post is over, then they had family so big and they have no excess land and people they become Losembey Chandzö. Automatically. Sort of set up thing.   

**Q:**  But he was just a monk.   

**A:**  Yeah, there are two of them, and there are like four or eight nephews.   

**Q:**  And the two of them are relatives or no?   

**A:**  I don't know what they are. I don't think so because they nephews, the younger ones are not related, they're not related. There were the senior, kungö gempa's [Tib. རྒན་པ] nephews and the junior, kungö shönpa's [Tib. གཞོན་པ] nephews, they're not related.   

**Q:**  You don't know how they came about, whether its?   

**A:**  How this particular case, I don't know how it came about? Many of them, you know from sexual relations they set up to.   

**Q:**  Oh yeah?   

**A:**  Yes, I mean some monks, after keeping somebody around and after some time, he becomes part of it and becomes a junior kungö.   

**Q:**  I see, do monks have like lifelong...errr   

**A:**  It's not a life long that way, it goes through up to certain extant, and then there's no restrictions.   

**Q:**  I mean for the feelings and that.   

**A:**  Well, I think sort of you know they become friends afterwards. After sometimes, they're really friends. Close friends and share everything together, but that's about it.   

**Q:**  So its not like here where there's more love and   

**A:**  No, no, no... I don't think that way. And then they go for a little bit of short period or so. One-sided also.   

**Q:**  One-sided?   

**A:**  Yea.   

**Q:**  The younger one is just   

**A:**  The younger one is there just for opportunity and everything and happens to be there. And then soon he becomes somebody and he will pick up another younger one or whatever. That type of thing.   

**Q:**  But there's no, but do people talk like and say, "love"[Tib. བརྩེ་གདུང] and this kind of stuff?   

**A:**  I don't think that's not much anymore, it is just, sort of ... its basically sexual.   

**Q:**  So the shagtsang are very important then. The shagtsang are really, most of the power is going between the shagtsang, is in competition for the shagtsang.   

**A:**  Not that much either. They can play alot but not that much. Sometimes, shagtsang have nothing to do. I mean the shagtsang are totally, big shagtsang sometimes have no power at all because khempo is not dependent on any of the shagtsang and ummm, the chabu will have somehow, each of the chabu have their own shagtsang, chabu are lifelong appointments, they have their own shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Yeah, how do you get those? I mean that has to be like... by the government   

**A:**  Chabu are by government, but who gets a chabu -- Loseling has 23 khamtsen, out of 23 or 4 are called big, khamtsen chekhag [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག], each one of the khamtsen chekhag is entitled to have one chabu.   

**Q:**  Like which big ones?   

**A:**  Three big ones. Tsa [Tib. ཚ་བ], Kongbo [Tib. ཀོང་པོ] and Phukhang [Tib. ཕུ་ཁང] are the three big ones, they're entitled to have each chabu.   

**Q:**  Those three?   

**A:**  Those three and plus khempo's manager called labrang chandzö, so become four.   

**Q:**  See, that's why I thought it was khamtsen but its really tratsang's, but each khamtsen has a right to have one. That's what I had confused.   

**A:**  Yes, each khamtsen has a right to have one, yes. Each khamtsen has right, each khamtsen chekhag but not the middle, drinkhag [Tib. འབྲིང་ཁག] or the small, chungkhag [Tib. ཆུང་ཁག], then the bungdzö was established because of the dissatisfaction with the chabu's position, so the bungdzö, I think is shared by ... by the khamtsen dringkhag. I think there are six, I forgot how it works. But anyway there are four bungdzö, I think every six years they change. And the khamtsen get turn by turn, sort of the drinkhag share, I think chungkhag have nothing.   

**Q:**  So when say, like the, uh, the chabu from Pu?   

**A:**  Phukhang.   

**Q:**  When that person dies, that's a terrific opportunity for somebody?   

**A:**  Opportunity for somebody, out of Phukhang only.   

**Q:**  Not the government who picks what it is or is it the monastery?   

**A:**  The monastery will pick four or five names, and then the government gets choice to pick out of that one. I think its actually Phukhang Khamtsen has mostly right. Phukhang sends it to Loseling, Loseling sends it to ..Loseling may try to find one to add to it, I think Loseling tsondu will intervene a little bit, they may have to add and then they sent it to government.   

**Q:**  So at that point, some big shagtsang would try to influence the government...with money and that...that could be a millionaire.   

**A:**  Yes. yes, a millionaire. Lifelong millionaire.   

**Q:**  Now, when people become rich like that, does the monastery try to hit them off for endowments to shagtsang and that, I mean, is the monastery always going to them and saying give us this, give us that? These big shagtsang?   

**A:**  I don't think so, monastery asks such in general, I don't think they do it. But then they expect it, everyone would expect that the shagtsang would make offerings, big ones, big offering during each period, like one in autumn, one in summer, one in the winter. And, yes, they do expect and they do it.   

**Q:**  They expect what kind of offerings, like?   

**A:**  Some special mangja, some special gye and things, everytime whenever they have mangja, they give endowments, so many of the old big shagtsang will have a phog and put endowment in every semester period, so   

**Q:**  They'll have an endowment of their own?   

**A:**  Endowment they present to the tratsang or tsogchen.   

**Q:**  You mean they give money?   

**A:**  They give money or whatever to the tratsang and said this is for having, from now on, every monk should get this much money during this semester period.   

**Q:**  Oh really?   

**A:**  Yes. That's how it comes. That's how endowments   

**Q:**  Four times a year?   

**A:**  Oh, yeah, some will have twice in one period and then somebody dies and then there's a again, some gye mangja pluss endowment for that period, some shagtsang will have a 4 or 5 times in one semester sometimes. But then they don't have to do anything every year, it was given already to tratsang and tratsang is responsible.   

**Q:**  And when they give an endowment, do you mean like, here, when we say, an endowment, all you get is the interest off it?   

**A:**  They will give the total money to the tratsang, in order to get each monk say, about half sang, one sang, one or half sho, endowment to sho level so in order to get one sho, how much you need to, only to count interest. So they give enough money to be able to build up that interest for every year.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see. So they're very useful to the monasteries then.   

**A:**  Oh, yes, they are very useful, that's why they have all these privileges. Very useful.   

**Q:**  Do you think more of the endowments come from them than from just lay people?   

**A:**  I think more of the endowment come from the incarnate lamas.   

**Q:**  They give also?   

**A:**  Oh, they give a lot, they are sort of obligated to give it.   

**Q:**  Oh, yes.   

**A:**  Yes, not only distribution but the endowments.   

**Q:**  Like how, every year?   

**A:**  No, no, no. Like in compulsory, like in my case, when I join in, join in the offering to tratsang and tsogchen, the distribution and the endowment together. And then   

**Q:**  Wait, wait, wait, now when you join in, you're giving the distribution and endowment just to Loseling, or to everyone?   

**A:**  As well as tsogchen.   

**Q:**  Tsogchen, both. You have to give two?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes, sure.   

**Q:**  So are all three of the tsog, you have to give gye, same monks?   

**A:**  Same monks, it doesn't matter, the khamtsen monks go to Loseling and tsogchen both. Tsogchen monks will not come to Loseling, Loseling monks will not to khamtsen but, it is individualized but you do it, and you have the endowment for tsogchen and tratsang and khamtsen too.   

**Q:**  So how much would that have cost?   

**A:**  A lot, quite a lot. I don't have exact figure but they do.   

**Q:**  They have to cost a great deal?   

**A:**  A great deal, yes. And then when I pass through the geshe examination, again, each endowment, so in my case, I have two in a year coming, right?   

**Q:**  Why two in a year?   

**A:**  Because on the day when I joined in and for every year after that on that day - the monks get one, and the one when I pass geshe day - and that day every year you get one. So then the next Nyare Khentrü comes, right, so he will have two, so by that time they'll go four -   

**Q:**  Four days a year.   

**A:**  Yes. four days, and like that, they'll go and you'll see how much you get. So it's a lot.   

**Q:**  Monks, actually, think that way too, monks know that all this is Nyare.   

**A:**  I don't think so, but officials who do the work in chabu business, they have to think or they have to see it and khempo will know. And then monks, if they listen, they write the prayer requesting list, kyabtho [Tib. སྐྱབས་ཐོ] that day. Chabu will give kyabtho.   

**Q:**  Kyabtho means?   

**A:**  The note to read in public but nobody really listens to it, sort of the gegö sometimes read properly, sometimes don't read properly. Nobody listens. While they're drinking tea and eating pag something, the gegö keeps on reading. Yes, that's what the normal rule is. People are supposed to listen, but who listens?   

**Q:**  And he's supposed to say, "Today   

**A:**  It is written there, because today there's a so-and-so and so-and-so endowment is this much. Mumbling chabu will write little note, saying total endowment will be today's something something.   

**Q:**  Why would the chabu do it?   

**A:**  Because the endowment is going to chabu. They are taking the money from there.   

**Q:**  But if you gave to the tsogchen, it would be the jiso?   

**A:**  Laji or jiso?   

**Q:**  And they would   

**A:**  They're responsible to prepare this and the khempo are the watchdogs whether they have giving it or not giving it. So it is not necessarily fall on same day, but within that semester period they have to.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, not necessarily the same day.   

**A:**  Not necessarily the same day. In that semester...period.   

**Q:**  Now, let me ask you something else, while we're talking about money, the monasteries are like bankers in Tibet, they do a lot.   

**A:**  Quite a lot.   

**Q:**  Loans and savings banks?   

**A:**  They do.   

**Q:**  But who decides? I mean you're giving an endowment to the chabu for something but now do you say you want this money to be lent out or can't be lent out?   

**A:**  No, no. That's none of your business.   

**Q:**  That's none of your business?   

**A:**  That's none of your business.   

**Q:**  I see, you're just give it.   

**A:**  You just give it and that's entirely up to the chabu or bungdzö or whoever.   

**Q:**  So they could lose money for you?   

**A:**  They can lose it but they're responsible to give it, even they lose it, that's there responsible. They cannot lose it.   

**Q:**  Oh, they can not lose it, all they can do is make more.   

**A:**  Always they can make more, but they can lose it in the one side but from the other side they make more, that have covered it up, they're responsible.   

**Q:**  So they have a complicated business?   

**A:**  They have a complicated business.   

**Q:**  There must be hundreds of these, thousands of these little accounts.   

**A:**  Thousands and thousands of these. Thousands of these things and they have to come up.   

**Q:**  So they would actually say we have ten thousand dayang, not dayang, dotse, this year, but actually this is one dotse from this endowment   

**A:**  No, yes, it is listed, registered somewhere, but they do generally. And then they say, in this semester, we all have distribute this much, they cut it that out, and then the rest of them in case of loan, or grain what we have to do will combine together.   

**Q:**  I don't understand.   

**A:**  I think the way it work is, you   

**Q:**  HOLD IT.   

**Q:**  You were up to, you were going to tell me now, explain how this works. How the chabu and the endowments work.   

**A:**  Oh yes, what happens, I can remember, I don't believe the chabu keep separate accounts for separate endowments. I think the system is very funny in Tibet. What they do is today I add one endowment say for fifty cents per monk, okay, they take that money and the most important thing they put it in the next year's calender and have to add up fifty cents on that, on that period, the money goes in general fund, I don't think they keep anything separate account. That's how it works. If somebody puts up the money for the endowment or distribution of half cent, there is no half cent, right. So they take the money in and someone else put up half cent and put them together and write up in the calender that they have to add up one more cent in that period.   

**Q:**  And the period is summer debate, yarchö [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས] and   

**A:**  Yarchö and winter debate, günchö [Tib. དུན་ཆོས].   

**Q:**  That's the way they calculate it?   

**A:**  But they don't calculate anything, they put it there and that they have to do it but the money goes in the general fund. So whatever general thing you do, so out of the profit and interest they will make sure they fill it up on these liabilities for this. So there's no such individual account, this account is losing and that account is gaining, nothing.   

**Q:**  I see, so there's just obligations and capital.   

**A:**  Obligations.   

**Q:**  Obligations to say so and so is   

**A:**  Yes, so and so endowment is this much and has to go in this period and then there's a capital accepted and they utilize the capital and get it, so if your tratsang get collapsed or something, you get collapsed everywhere but not one individual account collapsed. They may invest in anything, woods or oil or India or wool or salt or tea or China.   

**Q:**  So they basically have to have enough coming in every month to pay these?   

**A:**  Yes, they basically have enough coming in every year to meet the yearly endowment. It doesn't work even monthly.   

**Q:**  No?   

**A:**  I don't believe so. Every year, there is enough coming in and enough capital to use it and you know, that's what they do. Account is yearly maintained, yearly account maintained and this year   

**Q:**  So let's say they have a hundred thousand dollars and they bring in a hundred and ten thousad dollars so they have two hundred and ten thousand dollars. Now they need a hundred thousand for the endowments to pay the gye and those...so that leaves ten thousand, that goes into the capital?   

**A:**  That goes into capital again.   

**Q:**  So now the capital is a hundred and ten thousand. But   

**A:**  For the capital becomes bigger and bigger and bigger or it shrinks, or whatever, that happens there, individual account has no effect.   

**Q:**  But if it shrinks, he has to make it up?   

**A:**  Then they chabu have to make up.   

**Q:**  But he has to make up capital or he just has to pay the endowments?   

**A:**  The chabu has to make sure that they get this endowments get it done, that's what it is. They may not have enough capital this year but they can hope to get next year. But they have to meet the obligation of this year.   

**Q:**  So really, the total that they have to do if they wanted to quit or if they die is to have capital enough to pay for the tea, the thukpa, if they have to do that and the gye and phog.   

**A:**  Yes, that's right.   

**Q:**  So, if they make a lot of money, they can keep it, basically.   

**A:**  They don't keep it individually. They chabu keep it but chabu is belong to tratsang .   

**Q:**  But if a guy wanted to, who checks on him?   

**A:**  Nobody.   

**Q:**  So he could say   

**A:**  There are four of them, right?   

**Q:**  There's four, not for each one?   

**A:**  The four of them meet together, phuja [Tib. ཕུ་ཕྱག], Tshaja and uh... They meet together, they sit together, it's like Kashag type of thing.   

**Q:**  Oh, I didn't know that, so they can't just take it.   

**A:**  They can't take it in the home but they can take it home but with a responsibility.   

**Q:**  Do they have to account for....but say, the phuja has his own money?   

**A:**  No, no. It is chabu money and phuja maybe saying I'm taking, phuja may take like a hundred thousand out of it but then he has to bring it back, a hundred thousand, taking it out and bringing it back.   

**Q:**  I see, so theoretically, they all make joint decisions?   

**A:**  They make joint decisions.   

**Q:**  Let's go and buy the carbon paper in India?   

**A:**  Theoretically, it's a joint responsibility, nobody is individiually responsible.   

**Q:**  So they can't just take it home and put it in their pocket?   

**A:**  They can't put it in their pocket.   

**Q:**  So how do they make money from that then?   

**A:**  Oh, I'm sure they find ways. Or, the gifts and businesses out and in. And then they make a lot of gifts too, you know, they have a lot of gifts, they say "Mr. so and so will go and represent our case in Lhasa" and then so and so goes and then chabu will say, "Well, so and so needs this much money" and give a little money and everything and this fellow comes back and gives each chabu, you know, all this business.   

**Q:**  And people want to borrow money, I'm sure.   

**A:**  People borrow a lot of money, and then, if I want to borrow a hundred thousand from chabu, I probably, before I go to the chabu I probably go and talk to each individual chabu first, and with the gifts and interest and whatever it is, and then they will agree and finally I may get the loan.   

**Q:**  I see, is there a fixed interest rate to the monastery?   

**A:**  I don't believe so. I don't think they will go beyond whatever outside there is, but they are not . A lot of kudrak borrow money.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  A lot, because there's a lot of money in there. And also the chabu will be very difficult to say no to powerful kudrak because they're obligated again.   

**Q:**  Why are they obligated?   

**A:**  They are appointed by them, number one. And number two, you know every case or anything that happens they will go there and every kudrak will say ..... Sort of interlinking society obligations. And, um, each kudrak make a lot of offerings too. Whether there is money or non-money, that way they are another obligated too. And also kudrak get benefit from the monastery's support, they say "Our jinda [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] Our sponsor". So that personal relation is whenever they're needed help, they're there. That's why they really borrow money alot. And because monastery have interest in them too. Alot of money there invested already too. So they take this both in account; one you give alot of gifts because the monks like it and beside that you are building a good luck or merit and all this, whatever, but also monks like it. Two, you borrow money from them a lot because their investment is there with you, so your wealth is their interest. You see to social obligations. So that's what they do.   

**Q:**  Now in the case, do you remember the case, Lhündrup [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ] Dzong dispute now that would be - this was set up, but that would be under the chabu? I mean that would be people the chabu are sending? Is that what it would be like?   

**A:**  Well, it could be chabu's, but I think in Sera's cases, it's not chabu; it's someone else is sending them, right?   

**Q:**  Well, they said the abbot, but...I don't remember who said.   

**A:**  Abbot would be involved because you know if the chabu have probem, he will immediately call for the abbot. And abbot will join the chabu and he's the head so he will be responsible. If the abbot go from chabu, abbot will be head of chabu thing. To abbot, he has his representative there all the time.--that is the 4th person, the labrang Chandzö. The labrang chandzö goes on change when the abbot changes. But other chabu will remain...so the abbot have a say definitely.   

**Q:**  So, but the only people who would be doing this now are the chabu at the tratsang level; that's the tratsang's money, then the khamtsen has just the tsondu in charge of that. So the tsondu has its own money?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And then the tsogchen has?   

**A:**  The tsogchen has two, three divisions, the laji has its own money, Riji [Tib. རི་སྤྱི] has his own money and jiso.   

**Q:**  And they each have, again, to   

**A:**  They each have everything.   

**Q:**  No, but they have obligations to do such and such.   

**A:**  Obligations and income both. All of them have.   

**Q:**  And then labrang have their own, labrang is separate, it's their own.   

**A:**  Labrang is labrang.   

**Q:**  shagtsang may or may not have?   

**A:**  Shagtsang may or may not, it is sort of, a lot of independence things are together there, and then in general, the most important is the Labrang Chandzö [Tib. བླ་བྲང་ཕྱག་མཛོད].   

**Q:**  Where, in the labrang?   

**A:**  No, no, no. The Labrang Chandzö, the Laja Treasury Office, the Mönlam's commitment.   

**Q:**  What's that? The government?   

**A:**  That's made by the Labrang Chandzö.   

**Q:**  Oh, the government. Laja.   

**A:**  Laja, they have this endowment and obligations of Mönlam and Tsongjö. The government not put a single penny in that.   

**Q:**  Oh really?   

**A:**  Sorry I mean the monastery is not putting a single penny in that. And neither the government, any other office put any a penny in it. It is only the Labrang Chandzö [laja]. They accept endowments and obligations.   

**Q:**  I see, so they are similar to the chabu. But, the gye in that is given at the Mönlam.   

**A:**  At the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  People say I want to give once every month and   

**A:**  Yes, they'll tell you that, once every month we will come up with this much and then they'll say which day do you want them.   

**Q:**  But they hand it out?   

**A:**  They hand it out. You only go in there with the incense around once, showing that you are the benefactor.   

**Q:**  With a khata?   

**A:**  You sit at that too and they give you khata each and then you go round. That's showing that you are the benefactor that day. But out down there, all the money's pooled together, so you are maybe giving five and somebody may be giving five and somebody maybe given ten...so the Labrang Chandzö have to get together twenty, then they get twenty to eat down there. So the individual doesn't have to carry money and give it --so it's kind of organized that way. So if you give endowment, the Labrang Chandzö will take the endowment and then from next year it becomes their obligation. I don't, definitely don't keep separate, that's for sure.   

**Q:**  It's the same thing again?   

**A:**  Same set up. Whole thing.   

**Q:**  But do they like read every year and say that so and so [have given the gye] you know?   

**A:**  Yes, they have to.   

**Q:**  It must be a long list?   

**A:**  They have long list (to) read, 50% of it is read and 50% is not read. sheyngo say "palapala palapala". If you have to read whole thing, then you read it. They have to write it and give it to the sheyngo who brings it to tsog, they are supposed to do that. So, this, I mean it's an easy way to keep accounts.   

**Q:**  Yeah, it simplifies it a lot.   

**A:**  Yes. And so, the only thing you have to make sure on the list, so and so's endowment falls in this period, you have to make sure that, if you may not make sure the khempo will watch. And the one time there is an incident, one Gyerong [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] Khempo wants to keep Tshaja out because the Tshaja forgot to give five karma (half sho) so he forgot in one period and he really wanted to kick him out.   

**Q:**  Was he able to?   

**A:**  No, but you know, government appoints but the khempo can kick it out. The way khempo can kick it out is not from chabu, from list of monk, he is no longer a monk, if he's not a monk. Then, automatically you go out.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  No, he wanted to prove that he has stolen. Because he says according to the vinaya the monks own these and he has not given it, he's responsible, so he's stolen something.   

**Q:**  So what happened?   

**A:**  He won't go but a lot of people went in between and lots of negotiations and by then the khempo's period is over.   

**Q:**  But, did he have to pay a fine or something? The chabu?   

**A:**  Yes, the khempo can punish and do whatever he want to, I mean he's not interested in punishing in except getting rid of him totally.   

**Q:**  Where was that?   

**A:**  That was probably in 19 early 50's.   

**Q:**  That's the kind of thing that's an interesting case to see how monastery politics works and that.   

**A:**  This khempo has no politics at all. He just simply doesn't like chandzö he is so powerful and so long   

**Q:**  It was with Tshaja of Tsha Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Tshaja is the most powerful in Loseling, as far as I remember, in our period. One Kongja [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྱག] had a trouble and he got kicked out.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Because he was involved in what -- for Traya Lamey's [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ་བླ་མེད] incident.   

**Q:**  What's that?   

**A:**  One wealthy fellow from Traya called Lamey died and umm...his brother, he died too. So then three khamtsen; Drepung Nyare, Ratö [Tib. ར་སྟོད] Nyare, and Ganden Nyare decided to take their property totally. Their nephew who had come from Traya, they ignore totally and tried to swallow property and then they say   

**Q:**  This is monk's property?   

**A:**  No, this is business man's property. And so he was a monk I think. So Nya khampa [Tib. ཉ་ཁམ་པ] supported him and then the case went out and then the khamtsen, three khamtsen could not swallow the money and called the tratsang and all the tratsang was involved and they sort of overtook, temporarily, and divided and did all sort of things. Lamey has a lot of gold, a lot, each one of them started giving to each other all the gold and finally the government interfered so much so they throw all everybody out. So then, Loseling Kongja was involved and was sent out.   

**Q:**  Oh really, and this was in the early times, 19?   

**A:**  I remember it.   

**Q:**  This is later then, this is your lifetime?   

**A:**  Yes, I was not so kid, almost teenager. Maybe little bit, maybe thirteen, fourteen.   

**Q:**  In the fifties, then?   

**A:**  In the fifties, yes. So there's a new Kongja and a new Phuja because the old Phuja died or something. So Tshaja is the one who remained for long time, so become very powerful. Actually, not so many people can raise their hands up in front of Tshaja in Drepung. Nobody can watch the Tshaja above this line here.   

**Q:**  What do you mean?   

**A:**  Everyone was scared of him.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  So the Gyerong Khempo challenged him. He isn't just any monk.   

**Q:**  He is a monk?   

**A:**  He is a monk became khempo, and he doesn't want to be khempo at all... he's running around and finally [unclear] and normally khempo remain, like six years and he only remained like two and one half years. Because one khempo died and was substitute so he substitute for that period doesn't want any to continue anymore. So during that period, he had a fight with Tshaja and he wanted to throw Tshaja out. He couldn't. And the government is strongly support Tshaja too and he told government take my jacket, [the yellow robe] chögö [Tib. ཆོས་གོས] out, please take chögö out. The government can't take chögö, it has no reason. So the year passed [the remainder of his term as abbot passed] passed and the year gone.   

**Q:**  His last year?   

**A:**  His last year.   

**Q:**  So there are a lot of those kind of problems then...more of a personality problem?   

**A:**  Personality problem becomes monastery problem.   

**Q:**  What happens in cases like that, when somebody dies, when a monk dies or something and there's no will?   

**A:**  Well, the khamtsen monks normally money go to the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Relative can't come and say   

**A:**  If there is any relative, they may.   

**Q:**  You mean non-monk relative?   

**A:**  No, no, no. Outside, no.   

**Q:**  But if the monk leaves a will?   

**A:**  Well, if he is giving it out and ...I think it is theirs, but otherwise it will remain.   

**Q:**  And then where does that money go to, does that go into the endowment or what? Things will be sold?   

**A:**  It goes to the endowment. Things will (be) sold. Things will sell very cheap actually. In the khamtsen, I remember that, all the time. Somebody dies and then they put all their clothes and every personal belongings in the khamtsen's courtyard and the other monks...they don't sell it outside, they sell within the khamtsen. So when the monks come in for tsomja, sort of somebody will say, I will give, if it worth say like 50 dollars, someone will say, "I give you 50 cents."   

**Q:**  Really.   

**A:**  Yes. So then they pick up this 50 cents and say 50 cents, 50 cents, 50 cents, you know 10-15-20 times and then somebody raise a little bit, and then if nobody raises anything that person gets it for 50 cents.   

**Q:**  I see, and those things like rugs and stuff?   

**A:**  Rugs and thankas and cups and tables and clothings, anything...dresses and anything.   

**Q:**  That's just within khamtsen though?   

**A:**  Just within khamtsen, and outsider cannot buy. There will be bargaining, it only khamtsen monks and they say I give 50 cents and they say 50 cents a couple of times and for a while and if nobody raises he gets it for 50 cents. If somebody raises, they get it. It's not likely, it's like auction system, but they start very, very low. Purposely, I mean it not   

**Q:**  What about sometimes when lay people die and give headdress patrug [Tib. སྤ་ཕྲུག] and stuff to the monastery, I mean what happens to that?   

**A:**  They keep it. Khamtsen or tratsang , whoever get it, keep it.   

**Q:**  I mean who is it given to though, how does it work, the family comes to the khamtsen and says, "My mother died" so or something?   

**A:**  And then you come to the khamtsen and say my mother died, and khamtsen gets. And every work whatever they do, they do by khamtsen and whatever gift comes, khamtsen comes and takes.   

**Q:**  And if it goes to tratsang ?   

**A:**  Tratsang does.   

**Q:**  Some people will go to tratsang or will they always go to khamtsen?   

**A:**  Not so many of them, mostly go to khamtsen, not so many go to tratsang... unless you are really big ones. The bigs ones doesn't really give...needed that help. Small ones sort of deal with at the khamtsen level.   

**Q:**  And then those things are sold to laymen.   

**A:**  Those are never sold around here, no, those are sold outside or maybe in the Nyabri kept it. In Nyare khamtsen are sold 200 patrug [woman's headdresses] in there.   

**Q:**  No kidding.   

**A:**  Yeah, they keep it.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  That's a value.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, just as value.   

**A:**  Yes, it becomes wealth.   

**Q:**  I see, no but if they sell it, is there a special fund for like death things or just go to   

**A:**  Just goes in general fund, I don't think that they (put) anything in special funds.   

**Q:**  Under that person's name?   

**A:**  No, no, no. Just general, it's listed somewhere, from so and so received these things, somewhere they maintain a list, otherwise it is all put together. It becomes khamtsen property.   

**Q:**  Speaking of that, what happens when a monk gets old and he can't look after himself and he has no gidru and he can't cook or get fire like that? Does the khamtsen step in and assign somebody?   

**A:**  Not really much. In very rare cases that happens and when really difficulty happens, khamtsen comes in and sends somebody, but not very much that happens. Back then, you know you have some friends and relative, and somehow it come and gets done, and also it's not necessary to have to have... khamtsen, what they do, first thing they do, they send sick people that always don't have to come-- the tea comes to their house. Oh yes, tea and everything comes to their house. Number one, that's taken care of right away.   

**Q:**  That's in tshomja?.   

**A:**  Yes, tsomja. Not traja. Tsomja sometimes we have three times a day, sometimes. And sometimes we have thing called long tsog, ringtsog [Tib. རིང་ཚོགས], when you have ringtsog, you have excuse from the tratsang , if tratsang has gathering, nobody bothers with tsogchen so you start early morning and go throughout the day. Continues, so if you have hundred thousand Drölma [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ] [Tara Prayers] or something, or you could read whole Kanjur and then there is ringtsog for three days, four days and five days.   

**Q:**  Rintsog means what?   

**A:**  Continuous, "long tsog" From morning til evening. And you go in and go to the bathroom only. It doesn't stop, individual going in and coming out.   

**Q:**  And there would be again, some endowment?   

**A:**  Yes, again, there are gye, endowments, enough food to eat and everything. Thukpa and everything, so depends on the khamtsen. Like Nyare Khamtsen rgere was so much, probably practically people manage without cooking.   

**Q:**  A whole year, you mean?   

**A:**  A whole year, yes. Some khamtsen have nothing. Once or twice a year they gather.   

**Q:**  So there're useless.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do abbots set out as their goal or we should have a new prayer or you know, we should do, during my abbotship we should do, you know a hundred thousand Bum [Tib. འབུམ] [the Buddha's teaching on the Pangya Paramita] or?   

**A:**  No, they don't, but abbots set, some abbots set a new chöra, a whole semester set up, they do that.   

**Q:**  A new one, meaning, they change the present one?   

**A:**  No, some completely new in the case of the Gen Pema Gyentsen's [Tib. རྒན་པད་མ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] period what did he do, I think both I mentioned to you. Loseling Khempo has so much income, a thing called "daily tea and butter" nyinja nyinmar [Tib. ཉིན་ཇ་ཉིན་མར]. Everyday butter and tea.   

**Q:**  Which means?   

**A:**  Which means they collect everyday when there is traja, so they collect one skin/bag load of butter for two days and one brick of tea [Tib. སྦག་ཆུང] everyday.. So instead of collecting everyday for every two days they collect one huge skin/bag load of butter. And, ummm, tea, sort of instead of taking everyday, they'll take one tea box. [Tib. ཇ་སྒམ] So that's what they do. So Gen is not very happy to take him back, you know what he did, is during the günchö period, whatever he had is, he put in separately. He didn't take it. He kept them separately. And when the monks   

**Q:**  He was abbot? He was khempo?   

**A:**  He was khempo, so he put them separately and when the monks came back, those who were going to Jang günjö to have the logic series, they come back-- it was before the new year. He set a completely new chöra there, completely new chöra. Those who have come back from there in debate, those who are sitting here, the geshe will answer, sort of you know debate new system of debate, new period, he started.   

**Q:**  For how many days?   

**A:**  I think about, not very long, ten days, I think. And that also, he served the teas and everything in that.   

**Q:**  So he provided all that?   

**A:**  He provide all this, but this is sort of new set up, sort of. That was one thing.   

**Q:**  That was when?   

**A:**  Fifties. So after this, Gyerong khempo's gone and he made Pema Gyentsen became Loseling Khempo from Gyeba Khempo. He was already a khempo then.   

**Q:**  And then after that, it has to keep on after that? or no? that chöra...or was that just during his time?   

**A:**  During his time, and then he continued as a new abbot came in, 59th khempo, I think then they will continue, if that happened.   

**Q:**  Now, I was told that the pechawa gets special phog, is that true?   

**A:**  That was at this one. There's nothing else.   

**Q:**  There's nothing else. So if you are pechawa or not pechawa, same?   

**A:**  Same thing. As far as phog   

**Q:**  As far as Loseling, maybe other monasteries are different?   

**A:**  I do not know. But, Gomang had some fight on that, big fight and the chap who is in New York ? he is reponsible for that fight.   

**Q:**  Who is that?   

**A:**  Karam gyorpön [Tib. བཀའ་རམས་སྐྱོར་དཔོན] he is responsible for that, Gomang had a big fight over that.   

**Q:**  For what?   

**A:**  Pechawa gets some kind of extra thing. They had big fight in, a case for a couple of years.   

**Q:**  They had a fight to stop it or to start it or what?   

**A:**  Start it, I think.   

**Q:**  Start it?   

**A:**  Start it, I don't think they get it much.   

**Q:**  In this, recently, you mean?   

**A:**  Yes, in the fifties, I think.   

**Q:**  And what did the guy in New York have to say?   

**A:**  New York, yes, he was responsible.   

**Q:**  For trying to get them?   

**A:**  For trying to get them extra.   

**Q:**  Extra?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And what happened, did the rest of the monks did not like it?   

**A:**  No, the tratsang will stand against it.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  It is everybody's property and why should the pechawa get extra. That's their point.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Everybody get equal whether you are pechawa or not. Because you know, "the liberation" [Tib. ཐར་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ] is the personal interest.   

**Q:**  Meaning?   

**A:**  If you're doing your reading and doing and learning more to liberate yourself to become a Buddha that's your own interest. Why should monastery pay for it?   

**Q:**  Oh, I see...I see.   

**A:**  Well, it doesn't good sound in English, but it makes sense in Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Say it again in Tibetan.   

**A:**  Now, I've forgot it. So everybody's seeking liberation not seeking financial benefit.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Whatever's offered to them is offered to all monks. Why should they get paid special, I think that's why.   

**Q:**  And he was a pechawa, this guy?   

**A:**  He was pechawa, he was karam gyorpön, gomang has an extra position called karam gyorpön. Loseling doesn't have that. Loseling has lama shunglenba [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ], that is geshe level. And the Karam Kyorpön is pre geshe level. Sort of each grade has a gyorpön and a karam grade has gyorpön and it's called sort of a gyorpön of all, the most important gyorpön. Gyorpön means every group classes has a class leader, these are called gyorpön.   

**Q:**  Yes, I think tomorrow we'll talk about education systems, I don't understand even anything ... so that will give me some better idea. I see, well, it would be good to talk to him them.   

**A:**  Yes, we have to talk.   

**Q:**  That would be interesting.   

**A:**  He had a   

**Q:**  He lost?   

**A:**  Yes, he lost.   

**Q:**  See, that's not like a western way   

**A:**  He not only lost, he was lashed out and thrown out of the monastery.   

**Q:**  Really. Oh, my goodness.   

**A:**  Now, which he may not say it he was.   

**Q:**  But, now you are sitting in Loseling and he's in Gomang. Did you people know a lot about what was happening?   

**A:**  We know what's happening, we definitely know what is happening.   

**Q:**  But it's none of your business.   

**A:**  None of my business. Who bothers.   

**Q:**  I mean, but would you people, would the geshe and the other officials be saying "Oh, we think this is bad", or "we think it's good"?   

**A:**  No, no, they will not interfere, if there is a fire in the Gomang Tratsang, Loseling monks may arrive or may not arrive. It's up to that level they will interfere.   

**Q:**  Otherwise they are really separate?   

**A:**  Oh, totally.   

**Q:**  Is there much loyalty to Drepung at all? Or is it mostly just to your tratsang ?   

**A:**  Tratsang or khamtsen. Much more individualized.   

**Q:**  Like if Loseling said we want to be a separate monastery, do you think anybody'd care? I mean, that, oh, we are the Drepung.   

**A:**  Then some people may care, yes. Even Loseling monk, some people may care. I don't think Loseling will ever say that.   

**Q:**  No, I mean, but theoretically.   

**A:**  But they may care, some, but not all.   

**Q:**  Which were the four biggest khamtsen again?   

**A:**  Three!   

**Q:**  Three, Nyare.   

**A:**  No, no, no. Tsha, Konggo and Phukhang.   

**Q:**  Those were the big three?   

**A:**  I do not know why they were called big, they are not number-wise, they're less. Wealth-wise, they're less.   

**Q:**  Oh really, I see, some history.   

**A:**  Yes, might be some historical reason.   

**Q:**  But in terms of wealth and number, which are the biggest ones?   

**A:**  Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] probably.   

**Q:**  Triu Khamtsen.   

**A:**  Triu probably the most monks.   

**Q:**  So, how many would be the most?   

**A:**  Two..three thousand.   

**Q:**  Loseling has how many monks?   

**A:**  Oh, about seven thousand something.   

**Q:**  No, can't be.   

**A:**  Oh, yes!   

**Q:**  Seven thousand monks?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many has Gomang?   

**A:**  Gomang doesn't have much.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Gomang has very little, especially Monglians are not there, and Amdos are very little, so used to be Gomang very big, sort of you know 75% of Drepung is Loseling number-wise.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Triu has a lot, Triu is largest.   

**Q:**  And they are all from Triu?   

**A:**  All of them, Triu. Probably then Nyare will be number two, more probably.   

**Q:**  Now is there much feeling of regional solidarity, the Khambas?   

**A:**  They do. Sometime they fight, and then they fight and Triu will together and Phara will join together. They have the fight, yes, they do. Regional feelings are there too. Even among the Triu, there are Trango [Tib. བྲག་འགོ] and Tau [Tib. རྟའུ] are there and they fight among themselves. They do.   

**Q:**  Okay, well why don't we stop there.   

**A:**  Lamey incident, that was a big incident, and then they   

**Q:**  I don't understand though, even in that case, for example, why would they throw him out of the monastery, and all that, must have been awfully complicated.   

**A:**  They stole a lot of gold. All of them stolen lot of gold. And they covered it by sort of, umm...Lamey has some kind of list of the gold that he has and when they distributed it among themselves, they sort of scratched the numbers and rewrote the numbers, sort of in a very silly way they did so, when they finally check up and they go and look (in full light) and they can see the earlier figure. And then they come out and they really going to distributed it among themselves.   

**Q:**  He was what, again? Lamey?   

**A:**  Gen Lamey. Gen Lamey was very wealthy Traya, business man, who had been dealing with Reting [Tib. རྭ་སྦྲེང] and Sandu [Tib. ས་འདུ] and thing like that. Actually, an incident of man who had just come over by himself, just a beggar from Traya.   

**Q:**  What do you call those those beggars who come?   

**A:**  Apjor [Tib. ཨབ་ཅོར] who has just come up and made a millionaire himself in Lhasa at my time. So and later it is said that he almost had equal status with the Reting as far as economic things like that, and so what they stole was gold was not a small amount. Each one of them has stolen, like Tolas and Tolas of gold. Each one of them distributed, brick after brick. They distributed among themselves.   

**Q:**  And whose gold was that?   

**A:**  Lamey's gold.   

**Q:**  Lamey's gold. I see after he died.   

**A:**  After he died, his brother died, they didn't let his nephew to control, and then the monasteries wanted to control and they sent a representative and starting taking it, they started taking it. Literally taking it. And so when that come and naturally you know ... the monks were thrown out.   

**Q:**  Now thats more like just crime or abusing but the ones that are more probably   

**A:**  No, but what happened is, that shows that the idea of how monastery functions. How tratsang comes back behind khamtsen and all these sorts of things.   

**Q:**  I see, you're right.   

**A:**  Incident, and this is big incident.   

**Q:**  So how did they, who eventually intervened? The tratsang?   

**A:**  The tratsang joined in.   

**Q:**  Joined in with the ...   

**A:**  The Nyare khamtsen. That's my khamtsen, the Nyare khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Oh, yeah.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I see, so how did your khamtang get involved?   

**A:**  Because he is from Traya.   

**Q:**  Ohhh...and that's a Nyare.   

**A:**  That's a Nyare. And that's how, they had a big meeting and I remember the shöndre are meeting down there and the tsondu is meeting up there and that's what I told you. When the shöndre doesn't agree with the tsondu. Tsondu thought that you should not go there and support the nephew and shöndre doesn't agree.   

**Q:**  Why don't we start again, because I don't....the nephew came   

**A:**  The nephew came...from Traya.   

**Q:**  This guy was a monk in?   

**A:**  Who?   

**Q:**  This Lamey.   

**A:**  Lamey doesn't seem to be really monk but he's not married either. And his brother is also not married. Sort of you know, the type of fellow who'd be neither monk nor   

**Q:**  But is he in the robe.   

**A:**  He's not in the robe, he wears chupa and stays in Lhasa. I don't think he's in the robe. But Lamey is one of the big benefitters of Nyare Khamtsen, big benefitters. So, when Lamey died and his brother died it was during Mönlam or Tsongjö and it was in Lhasa, they had the meetings, and all the shöndre are meeting down there in the courtyard and tsondu is meeting in the tsondu room and tsondu doesn't agree with the shöndre doesn't agree with tsondu.   

**Q:**  So when they died you are meeting about what? What was the meeting about?   

**A:**  The meeting is how.....the shöndre thinks it is. I think the idea was, the nephew was married, I think, nephew was married, either married to the Lamey's niece and nephew from external [magba] the two are happened to be semi-monk, Lamey himself and his brother are semi-monk. And, so now this becomes a lay family, its a clear-cut lay family.   

**Q:**  Because of the magba?   

**A:**  Because of the magpa or the bride or whatever it is...and so they have become, so I think the shöndre think they have no right to take over ...because so, it is--- a monk died and I think so the khamtsen should take over the whole thing.   

**Q:**  The other people, the tsongdu says   

**A:**  The tsondu, the senior ones say, "No, so it is a whether it is monk dies or not monk dies, they have a nephew who has come all the way from Traya they brought and they brought with purpose to continue with the Lamey business and all this." And they says even the khamtsen will benefit much better by supporting the nephew rather than...swallowing it. And it is not a way to do.   

**Q:**  What did they do?   

**A:**  Shöndre doesn't agree.   

**Q:**  Oh this is what the tsondu says, "You should support the nephew."   

**A:**  Nephew.   

**Q:**  The shöndre say?   

**A:**  Shöndre says "No, take over."   

**Q:**  That we should take over, oh, I see.   

**A:**  Take over, so the strongest man in tsongdu happens to be my manager. I remember that. Then, finally he walked out and then they thought, oh, he is having an interest, a personal interest. It came in Nyare Khamtsen, I remember it very clearly. Oh it's personal interest that they going to merge with us; Lamey and we're going to merges and that's why he supported and this and that. Normally, my manager would started me, for me is one of the strongest person in Nyare Khamsten. Very strong person.   

**Q:**  This is when, in the fifties?   

**A:**  This is in the fifties and whatever he says it is sort of go yes. He's that type of person. But this time, all tsondu agree with him and still   

**Q:**  Now, why were they actually meeting though, because everything was taken first?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  It was all in the house?   

**A:**  All in the Lamey's house.   

**Q:**  And then this guy from Traya   

**A:**  This guy from Traya already there, before the brother died.   

**Q:**  Oh, before the brother died. Lamey died, but before the brother died.   

**A:**  The guy was already there. Between when the two brothers died, it didn't take much time. Very short period, maybe a year or so. So, maybe less than year, you know...sort of thing. So, they really want to take over and then after my manager, this geshe walked away from tsondu and then somehow, tsondu also swinged by the decision of the shöndre and agreed to take over and then they send a representative. And they went to Loseling to support because they're not manage. So did Ratö, so did the Ganden Nyare. It is a shöndre of Drepung Nyare that contacted Ganden Nyare and Ratö both and they all joined together for the Ganden, Drepung and Ratö. I think they stayed like for over two or three years in Lamey's house; the representatives for one chabu from Loseling, one chabu from Ganden Shartse, one chandzö of Ratö tratsang, and one representative of tsondu of Drepung Nyare, one representative of shöndre of Drepung Nyare, one representative of Ratö Nyare's too -- tsondu and shöndre. Like six or seven or eight, nine, ten people, sort of a a commission, living in that house for over two or three years, paid all their expenses and living and eating and   

**Q:**  What was the nephew doing?   

**A:**  Well, he was barred, coming into taking, putting his hand into the property.   

**Q:**  Well, how could they do that?   

**A:**  Well, they did it.   

**Q:**  Was it the government that said to do that?   

**A:**  No, they say no you can't, they sort of forced them out, and then so one of the Lamey's old friends called chandzö Nya khampa, was very well know, he's a funny person, who was the manager of the Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] regent, which the regent in the Younghusband period, you know, he was manager then.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Tsomönling's manager that and he's very old about that time, and he supported and he draw the attention of the government.   

**Q:**  Oh, he supported the nephew?   

**A:**  He supported the nephew, that's an old friend of family. He supported the nephew and my manager already warned them in the tsondu, he said "It's not that easy. He looks stupid but the Lamey has a lot of friends and he said noticeably their close family with Nya khamba, and he will probably will not keep quiet if you do that".   

**Q:**  And so then what happened?   

**A:**  Then Nya khampa appealed to the government and the government started setting up a commission of inquiry. Two tsendrön and ah I think they put up two khenjung and 6-7 kudrak. A commission was set up and this commission found that these monks had stolen gold in between.   

**Q:**  The people who were living in the house?   

**A:**  Yes, sort of looking after the property were stealing things...that including one chabu of Loseling and the Ganden Shartse and the Ratö Nyare. A disgrace. This chabu happens to be shagtsang of Simpön khempo [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] [the Dalai Lama's attendant in charge of clothes] The Shöl Simpön Khempo, the powerful Simpön Khempo who was controlling almost the government, just before that, so its disgrace.   

**Q:**  So what happened? They were whipped or something?   

**A:**  They're not really whipped but they are sort of,... now the decision of the government and the final decision they announced in the Mönlam. In the Mönlam general assembly gathering, they announced, the government announced, another incident, government announce a case like that...decision, because it involved all the three monasteries the decision was announced in the Mönlam in the tsog, and so through sheyngo, so all these chabu, one of the Loseling chabu lost his role in the monastery.   

**Q:**  When that happens, when its a kudrak they make them take off their dress and all that, take off their boots and put their hair down, do they do that with monks too? I know with the abbot they have to give back   

**A:**  Yes, for the monks, I think they put on some kind of white clothe on the top but I don't know exactly what they did it whether they have done physically... I really don't know because they did it, the reason why they did it my manager came all the way from Lhoka. He was already shift to Lhoka then. That's been great help, because you know, otherwise he was holding Nyare Khamtsen responsible too. Since then he walked out, totally from Nyare Khamtsen too.   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  Then totally worked for us. And in Lhoka made a lot of money and things like that.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, he was an official also in the Nyare Khamtsen.   

**A:**  He was one of, not official, he is one of the strong men in Nyare tsondu. And whatever Nyare Khamtsen thing, he also there. Very strong. So I think he is very sort of balance inbetween.   

**Q:**  So he left then?   

**A:**  He left totally left Nyare Khamtsen and totally worked for us. So then this, two years later, I remember he was called by the commissioner inquired several times, and the commissioner, one of these commissioner was Tsidrung Tembala [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ལགས] who is now in Delhi, I think.   

**Q:**  That would be somebody interesting to interview.   

**A:**  I think so... Tembala was there and ... Tembala was there too. He was tsendrön at that time. And then finally, what happened? The final decision was the khempo and everybody came to Mönlam, and at that he came specially from Lhoka and went to the Mönlam tsog showing that I am alive. And he dressed up and went, they are all going to be disgraced that day. That's why it stuck in my head.   

**Q:**  And they actually had to stand up and then, put something white on him, is that the way they did it?   

**A:**  Whether they did it or not, I'm not sure. But, that...or that white thing business, they might have done in the sheyngo khang [office] or, but the pronouncement was made in the tsog.   

**Q:**  Now, but normally the government can't discipline monks, right?   

**A:**  Probably, that's why they did it through the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  Maybe that's one of the reason. Or to have lesser trouble-- because there are three monasteries involved, Loseling, plus Ganden Shartse, plus Ratö. So all tratsang are there totally involved, but by that time tratsang are also--- if they had not stolen the gold, the tratsangs would have stood by,-- probably, but since the gold was stolen and they couldn't repay back and had spent all it all long, so many, so many, they took bar to bar.   

**Q:**  How did they spend it all?   

**A:**  God knows what. It all came, the leakage, in Nyare Khamtsen, somehow, one of them had said, one of the monk, whether his niece or, who really knows, girlfriend, we're not really sure, somebody, she's supposed to have said, "I will make you a lot of gold ornaments and you can show your gold right and left shoulder", something like that. That was overheard by a few other people, some are also saying that, "Where does he get gold from" and that was the beginning of the suspicion and then it was moving and moving and then some anonymous letters came up in the commissioner inquiry there and then they begin to start to look into, to their property and then they found gold first and then they look for the gold. And so they found real writing in the book in order and all sorts of things.   

**Q:**  So it was really a girl who started it?   

**A:**  A girl who had started this whole thing. And when they found, it is not joke, I mean it is not small, I believe twenty - thirty gold bars they distributed among themselves, twenty, thirty .   

**Q:**  It's a fortune.   

**A:**  The Kongja, they said twenty-seven gold bar he took, something like that. And Lamey has that much gold, but still theres a lot, theres a lot.   

**Q:**  So basically then, see, that would be interesting to know whether the govenment then had a talk with the monasteries and agree on a punishment or whether they just did it on their own, they had to talk with somebody because the sheyngo announced it, right? But see, that's a good case of the government relationship with the monastery.   

**A:**  I don't think they, about that time, the government has much more power over monastery, I think they really made a decision and tell the sheyngo to announce. However, with a, with what sort of precaution they were taking, not to have counter-reaction from the monastery, I'm sure they had to (take) some precaution otherwise it is not easy to throw out some chabu of the three monastery, mainly two, Ratö, is very small but it is also small monastery nearby, so Loseling and shartse two chabu were thrown out.   

**Q:**  That's a big, big thing.   

**A:**  I think this one of this later case very big incident in the fifties.   

**Q:**  But it really started because these people had a close relationship.   

**A:**  With Nyare Khamtsen, that's all.   

**Q:**  With Nyare Khamtsen and then Nyare Khamtsen thought they'll just take his stuff.   

**A:**  It's not really Nyare Khamtsen, it's the shöndre. A few young monks in the shöndre thought, well, there is a huge wealth and is khamtsen's, and why we don't take all, and that's exactly what happened.   

**Q:**  Oh, they thought it was khamtsen because these people has a close relationship with the khamtsen.   

**A:**  Oh, maybe they think that he's a monk, and now the nephew with a wife comes in and is losing from the monk to the lay, I think that was their idea, originally everybody had some kind of funny ideas anyway. So the tsondu has a wise idea not to handle it, not to swallow it, and but protect it and don't let anybody else, and protect it from anyone else and they says the Nyare Khamtsen will be much more benefited. Because you know, they give lot and they were able to give lot for protecting, instead of getting protection they got a, I think later the government, I think have probably all the property confiscated and maybe didn't get it back either. Either the nephew nor the khamtsen any of that, I think mostly government got it.   

**Q:**  That's the government's style.   

**A:**  That's government's style.   

**Q:**  Confiscates, everybody's equal and everybody loses.   

**A:**  Everybody loses, I think that is what happened.   

**Q:**  I see, well, that's an interesting one but in that case, now that was all Nyare's decision and these other monasteries or did Loseling agree to back Nyare's?   

**A:**  Yes, otherwise there's no reason why one chabu comes in. Nyare goes to Loseling and Loseling agrees to back Nyare.   

**Q:**  Now, who do they talk to?   

**A:**  Chabu.   

**Q:**  They would talk to chabu. You don't have to talk to the abbots or somebody else?   

**A:**  They talk to chabu and chabu can make decision, chabu meet in consultation with abbot. May or may not. They, Loseling chabu decision is Loselings decision, and if they, if they wanted to, if Loseling wanted to rebuke the chabu decision, rebuke chabu decision or they sort of have to have bigger meeting than chabu and umm...   

**Q:**  So who would they have to have that meeting?   

**A:**  Then, probably, I think they have two systems -- chabu, bungdzö, khempo joint meeting, which probably can do nothing against chabu, for chabu are much more powerful, bungdzö are not that wise, and so they have to have bigger meeting of khamtsen representatives. And in that, they, that tsondu can rubuke chabu or bungdzö or abbot.   

**Q:**  Oh, it can?   

**A:**  Oh, yeah, it can, it can.   

**Q:**  Like, have there been any cases of that kind of?   

**A:**  I believe there had been before, there had been incident. Now what do you call that, some example...some   

**Q:**  Precedents?   

**A:**  Yes, precedents, probably during the Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང], there have been lot. And there have been lot, but otherwise not that in modern times, no. In the Lamey's case, the khamtsen did not have, sort of one chabu decision and then went straight to Loseling.   

**Q:**  Not even all the chabu joined?   

**A:**  No, chabu joined, chabu have to be joined in decision, one chabu cannot do decision.   

**Q:**  So that was a big case then and then they went to, why did they go to Ratö Nyare?   

**A:**  Because Ratö Nyare is a close ally of the Drepung Nyare. And is almost the same. Almost.   

**Q:**  And Ganden?   

**A:**  Ganden Nyare is happen to be Nyare. Traya Lamey, is from Traya. So that's why three Nyare involved.   

**Q:**  So, I see, so Ganden Nyare also includes Traya Khampa?   

**A:**  Included Traya Khampa.   

**Q:**  So they wanted to not split the monasteries, you know get all the khamtsen involved with the Traya?   

**A:**  Not split monasteries...khamtsen who involved with the Traya all go together.   

**Q:**  All go together instead they take it back.   

**A:**  They going to distribute it among themselves.   

**Q:**  Yea, well, that's a lot of money.   

**A:**  A lot. Lamey is lot. I think it is, Lamey who had been winner in lot of business before he passed on, including Reting and all this.   

**Q:**  So the monks must have been there when the funeral stuff was going on and they must have just stayed? I mean that must have been   

**A:**  No, no, no. During that period there is no problem, I think about six or seven day after that, I think probably before they even, brother's dead body was not removed yet...so the one side the prayers going on, on the other side the meetings going on, I think that's exactly what had happened. And while the prayers going on and they said its now the time to take over and I think that's what happened.   

**Q:**  And the monks just never left the house basically.   

**A:**  No, it's not that true, because those who were saying prayers, they left, but the other ones come in. Another category of monks comes in.   

**Q:**  I see, well, that's a good example of one kind of incident.   

**A:**  Incident. Yes.   

**Q:**  And this is an incident where the shöndre overruled the tsondu.   

**A:**  Overrule the   

**Q:**  How would he overrule it though? I mean   

**A:**  They don't overrule but they don't agree and then the shöndre much more, even they, sort of, they used to yell down, I remember very clearly, shouting in the courtyard, tsondu are there, down there, they're shouting.   

**Q:**  What do they shout?   

**A:**  WEAWAWAWA, not like organized way in the west, like hey-hey business but everybody's shouting, yelling, screaming whistling and this sort of thing. So, I mean like a seven or eight hundred down there and like 50, 60, maybe less than thirty up there, so it is big.   

**Q:**  Like intimidation?   

**A:**  Yes, its very big scene.   

**Q:**  Do you think the people in the tsondu were a little bit frightened?   

**A:**  They did say it was frightening a little bit, frightened too. But then the shöndre did not really come up to tsondu but the phashara [Tib. བར་ཤ་ར] [ones in between the shöndre and tsondu] are going up and down, they come after tsondu talk and then go down and shöndre, they won't agree and then they go up, the phashara are [end of the tape].   

