#  Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་དབྲེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Cleveland, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 8 March 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English and Tibetan and translated completely into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་དབྲེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 50  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of the 10th Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview he describes the procedures for notifying monks of gye (alms) and what items of subsistence are received through gye. Additionally, there is a detailed description of the economic activities of Drepung monastery, and the positions in the monastery that had responsibilities for particular economic activities.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_06/M_0009_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How did they notify people when there is gye? and in the tsogchen there is a boy says chuke [Tib. ཆུ་སྐད]?   

**A:**  tsog chuke. One young boy used to go there and say ... I don't know how they select these chuke people in the tsogchen. Either the tsogchen jama has to make the arrangement or the parkhang depa [Tib. པར་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] makes the arrangment. I think it falls to either one of them. Maybe it is the parkhang's duty to make arrangements or the jama. Someone has to be responsible to select the boy and makes sure the boy comes and that sort of thing and get hold of the boys. Have to find someone with a good voice able to shout every where.   

**Q:**  Every morning he does this?   

**A:**  Yes, every morning.   

**Q:**  He stands on top of tsogchen?   

**A:**  He sits near the roof and then shouts out in the 4 directions starting from the east, then south then north. and then west.   

**Q:**  How did he shout?   

**A:**  Sound is like "hey hai" "hey" and he say "cho". That is supposed to be.   

**Q:**  When there is gye he says?   

**A:**  He says double, "Hey hey" "hey". A lot of people told me they used to say "phey phey", but some people say "cho".   

**Q:**  You were saying about how poorer monks could live on that. They get 4 big teas?   

**A:**  Yes. They get 4 big bowls of tea up there at tsogchen, and maybe thukpa up there too. Then followed by an hour later in tratsang the 4 things will be repeat. That is called traja [in tratsang]. Then 2 hours later the khamtsen will repeat. It is called the tsomja. [Tib. འཚོམས་ཇ] tsom means big gathering.   

**Q:**  You were saying that only a couple of hundred monks will show up at one time.   

**A:**  Regularly, for the mangja. I dont think it was a couple of hundred. About 100 I think.   

**Q:**  The abbot has to come?   

**A:**  No No, only the shengo has to appear there. And chabril and umdze, but no abbot or incarnate lamas will show up. Later Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] khamtsen made it compulsory that they have to go to the mangja. Ever since I joined, Triu has the compulsory. I know.   

**Q:**  That was since when.   

**A:**  Since I was there. Sometimes it was only the Triu Khambas who were there. No one else. At least the junior ones.   

**Q:**  If there is gye, more go?   

**A:**  If there is gye, then more will go. And if there is a big gye, then it is packed. [laughter] Then there is another thing. Outside the mangja, there is a kelen [Tib. སྐལ་ལེན] to collect your share. People who couldn't come to the mangja, can go to the kelen to get their gye.   

**Q:**  Do you have to have a reason?   

**A:**  I think it started with the priviledged people. Then it sort of covered off some, maybe with 50% inside and 50% outside. Kelen doesn't have to wear robe, just shawls, sen [Tib. གཟན]. They can go much later and leave earlier. Untill the kelen outside is finished, the monks in the dukhang inside will not come out. They will not let them come out. But none of the incarnate lamas or tsogchen trüku will go for kelen.   

**Q:**  They get separately?   

**A:**  Either you go inside or you do not go.   

**Q:**  But even if you do not go to the kelen you get your gye.   

**A:**  Yes, but if we go there we get one extra. We are going for that extra.   

**Q:**  What do you usually get. Grain? Do you get like a bag of grain?   

**A:**  No no, For grain you get a stamp. They put a stamp on a piece of paper and give it to you. Then you collect the stamps and give it to someone and they go to any shiga and collect the grain from there.   

**Q:**  Shiga where?   

**A:**  From the tratsang shiga.   

**Q:**  In Lhoka?   

**A:**  No not that far. For example, Loseling has a shiga in Gyaritsel [Tib. རྒྱ་རི་ཚལ] or somewhere.   

**Q:**  So the grain doesn't come up?   

**A:**  No the grain doesn't come up. They only give you stamp.   

**Q:**  So how much would they give you at one time.   

**A:**  Everytime it is one khe. I dont think there is less than 1 khe.   

**Q:**  How many times a year would you get?   

**A:**  At least 4 times a year: on the great summer retreat, yarchö chemo [Tib. དབྱར་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ], the great winter retreat, gunchö chemo, [Tib. དགུན་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ], the great spring retreat, jichö chemo [Tib. དཔྱིད་ཆོས་ཆེནམོ], thr great autumn retreat, tönchö chemo [Tib. སྟོན་ཆོས་ཆེན་མོ]. Definitely have 4.   

**Q:**  chö is what?   

**A:**  It is for chöra. You know, summer chöra, Its very much like a semester type. Tratsang system works that way. There is a yarchö chemo, jichö chemo, günchö chemo and tönchö chemo. Each one of those chöra chemo will have grain phog.   

**Q:**  And that is like one khe.   

**A:**  One khe. Then in between yarchö, tönchö there are small chöra. They run for 15 days type of period. These I do not think carries any grain salary at all. One or two additions were there.   

**Q:**  But that is only if you are in the chöra. If you are a working monk you won't get?   

**A:**  Anybody will come back to collect it. They know when it is given. Anybody can come and get it. Whoever is there. Interesting thing is Nyare khamba. When there is a grain phog tomorrow at Loseling, Nyare khamtsen will know today and we will send a messenger to Ratö [Tib. ར་སྟོད]. So all the Ratö Nyare monks will be there tomorrow.   

**Q:**  What are the Nyare monks doing at Ratö?   

**A:**  Nyare has a Ratö Nyare, Ganden Nyare, and Drebung Nyare. The Rado Nyare and Drepung Nyare has a special relations. So all the Ratö Nyare monks are considered Drepung monks. In the eyes of the Loseling monks they come under Drepung Nyare.   

**Q:**  Ganden also?   

**A:**  No. In the eyes of the Loseling all the Ratö Nyare monks are Loseling Nyare monks. therefore, when there is phog, drepung Nyare will send someone to Ratö in the evening and the whole night the Ratö monks will come up. And early morning they are there.   

**Q:**  But that is far?   

**A:**  It is below Nyethang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང]. But they get there anyway.   

**Q:**  Nyare is the valley near Sera?   

**A:**  No, it is the khamtsen's name. It was established by a famous siddhi, drubchen Nyare something [Tib. གྲུབ་ཆེན་ཉག་རེ] ... I forgot his name.   

**Q:**  What does Nyare mean?   

**A:**  I dont know. I forgot.   

**Q:**  What other kinds of things do the monastery give in terms of phog?   

**A:**  Gye, phog, money. And then another interesting thing is that during the summer, during the break period, [change out] In Drepung, in tsogchen used to get tsamba there. Everyday for about 20 days you get a dre of tsamba [20 dre = 1 khe]. This was during the Rigtra [Tib. རིགས་གྲྭ] period.   

**Q:**  What is Rigtra?   

**A:**  Let me explain--Drepung had three administrative points: Laji, Riji [Tib. རི་སྤྱི], and jiso. The jiso might not have been really administrative, it might have been more economic source. Laji is all the abbots including the ex-abbots involved in laji. I think laji has 3 different levels. The big laji, laji chenpo [Tib. ཆེན་ཨོཔོ], small laji, laji chung chung [Tib. ཆུང་ཆུང] and all this. All the abbots and ex-abbots become the big laji. Shengo, parkhang depa, tsomchen depa [Tib. ཚོམས་ཆེན་སྡེ་པ] .   

**Q:**  What is the parkhang deba?   

**A:**  He is the head of the Book Printing House Drepung Parkhang. There is also photrang deba [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ]- he is in charge of Ganden Phodrang.   

**Q:**  He is the one in charge of relations with the government.   

**A:**  He is supposed to be but not really. Then there is the chökhang deba [Tib. མཆོད་ཁང་སྡེ་པ]. That is the in charge of the Drepung tsogchen's temples. There are two chökhang deba. One for the east temple, chökhang shar [Tib. ཤར] and one from the west temple, chökhang nub [Tib. ནུབ]. chökhang shar comes from Gomang and chökhang nub from Loseling. All these are part of laji. I think they are in the small laji. The Parkhang, I think, also has two; one east and one west. Laji has lots of land and estates. Then the Riji. Is only the 6 working abbots. The Riji consists only of them. The Riji and laji has lots of lands and estates. These are managed by the six abbots. So they have to hire people all the time. They get volunteers. They really do not pay you but they get volunteers all the time. So all the Riji money they say that the abbots have to even count them everyday and lock them and, because nobody else works for the Riji. Only themselves. So all the tsamba used to come [as phog] from the Riji during the Rigtra. Each one of the abbots is responsible for giving that distribution. It is a sort of his personal obligation to distribute a dre of tsamba to each member of Drepung. Every 6th years when the 6 abbots make turns.   

**Q:**  That money comes from the Riji's estates?   

**A:**  Ah. I think it does but sometimes they have to use their own personal money on top. The Riji has estates and also does a lot of business. loan business. They give out loans and collect them. They do both money loans and grain.   

**Q:**  So who does that. It can't be the abbots?   

**A:**  Oh yes. The abbots will sit there and they will decide it. They will call so and so to come and help there, etc. Even the Riji has lots of cases pending in Lhasa. So they have to hire someone to go there. Lots of disputes because there are a lot of disputes. They ask people to help and it looks like volunteerings but they give some gifts to the helpers so there is benefit as well.   

**Q:**  So there are the 4 times you get a khe of grain each and then you get 1 dre/ day at Rigtra for 20 days (==1 khe).   

**A:**  Then if you are a poor monk. I think that for Rigtra at the first day it is a little bit bigger than 1 dre like a bo and at the last day a little bit bigger.   

**Q:**  Bo is like a khe?   

**A:**  Yes. I have to make sure how much is the tsampa is. It is a little bit bigger than what is called tsabre [Tib. ཚ་བྲ]. At tsabre in the tsogchen, they also get a dre of tsamba. I dont know why they get it. And then during the Ganden Ngamjö period they get one huge bread, fried one, called Tsagowra [Tib. ?] and the Ngamjö brown sugar [Tib. བུ་རམ]. So if you are very poor and living in a very meagre way, it might be just managable from these. Maybe you would have to add up a little more here and there.   

**Q:**  But how would monks add it up?   

**A:**  Then you get all the gye, phog and kuyön, all there. Kuyön, I remember many times, dewashung used to pay lots of kuyön. Whenever dewashung has additional rituals, shabten [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན] to do they give kuyön. And then you really have to be there. Otherwise you don't get the share.   

**Q:**  Some tratsang are richer than others so if you are in one tratsang do you get more?   

**A:**  Yes. If tratsang is richer you get more phog, if it is poorer you get less phog.   

**Q:**  So which were the richest.   

**A:**  Loseling was the richest.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  Sera Je. Loseling and Sera Je were almost equal. All the economic, education, number wise. Quality and quantity every wise, Sera Je and Loseling were outstanding.   

**Q:**  How much difference does it make if your khamtsen is rich.   

**A:**  A lot. Nyare Khamtsen is quite a well-to-do khamtsen. Almost 364 days they have the tsomja. Almost.   

**Q:**  That means you get tea.   

**A:**  Yes, tea and thukpa, plus whatever.   

**Q:**  Does the thukba have meat in it?   

**A:**  Oh yes.   

**Q:**  And Nyare is rich because it has a lot of shiga?   

**A:**  No, Nyare doesn't have a lot of shiga. It is rich because it has lot of buisness people connections. And khamtsen are involved in a lot of business.   

**Q:**  How many people are in Nyare khamtsen?   

**A:**  About 1,000.   

**Q:**  And how many people run it?   

**A:**  The tsondu.   

**Q:**  You mean a tsondu consisting of everybody?   

**A:**  No. The senior ones. There are seven elder ones.   

**Q:**  Called what?   

**A:**  {he didnt recall their name} Ok, how was this division done, let me go back to that. There are officials. Nyare has a very senior official called Jigen [Tib. སྤྱི་རྒན]. And then after that, a khamtsen gegen. And below him 2 nyerba. Then there are other staff that doesn't have much priviledges such as jama and all these. They are a different matter [i.e. of a different type]. But every monk has to be nyerpa or equivalent. Every year 4 monks will be transformed from the junior level to the senior level which is from shöndre to tsondu. The mark is they have to be nyerba. There are only 2 nyerpa in Nyare Khamtsen, so it is 2+2. 2 can escape without being the nyerba work. They become seniority but doesn't have to become nyerba and two have to be nyerba. How do you do that? They roll the names in the front of the protectors. Two will come out and they will be nyerba and the other two autonomatically will escape.   

**Q:**  Nyerba is for one year?   

**A:**  Yes. And the nyerba also has some expenditures too, in addition to those of the khamtsen. I think the nyerba is also responsible for the all the fuels for every day cooking. There is a little bit of additional expenses that you have to bear up by yourself. So where do you make that money? From the [Tara Temple in the Jokhang] Drölma Lhakhang [Tib. sgrl ma lha khang]. You know the Lhasa Tsuglagang's Drölma Lhakhang. It is belobged to Nyare khamtsen's. So Nyare khamtsen will give it to individual monks 4 months [must mean 3 months]. So all these people the 4 who are going to be transformed from the shöndre to tsondu. The year before that is to happen, they will have the Drölma Lhagang for 4 months. During that 4 month period, whatever the money that comes in goes to you.   

**Q:**  No kidding. That will be quite a lot of money. Particularly if you get there about New Years time since a lot of people come.   

**A:**  Well there are a lot of periods. Within a 4 month period there is always a particular festival occurring. Always there. So   

**Q:**  Then you have to go and sit there?   

**A:**  Yes or you can hire someone. And some people will say I am moving through it, but I do not want the Drölma Lhakhang and the nyerba, Ill give it to you to do.   

**Q:**  So the other guy will get two?   

**A:**  No no, for example, they can give it to me, I got several times. They gave me Drölma Lhakhang. So whatever gifts you get you take and whatever liabilities there are you also get.   

**Q:**  So who would you give it to? To somebody else?   

**A:**  No we take it and send someone else. I got nyerba like 4-5 times.   

**Q:**  Why would you do that? Just for no bother?   

**A:**  Just for no bother.   

**Q:**  And you have to worry about the fuels and everything?   

**A:**  Yes, everything collection you get and every expenditures you spend.   

**Q:**  Is that common to do that?   

**A:**  Yes, I believe so. You don't have to give it to labrang, you can give it so your teacher, or anybody else.   

**Q:**  Only 4 every year. It goes by seniority.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Not by knowledge or anything?   

**A:**  Nothing, only by seniority. After that, then you are part of the tsondu. Then a year goes by and after the jigen, then you become in the category of the 7 elders.   

**Q:**  I don't understand. After you become jigen?   

**A:**  Jigen remains for quite a long time. When you are senior # 8 in the list you become a jigen. If somebody dies before you (ahead of you in seniority) you can quit jigen and shift it up. But not before a year at least.   

**Q:**  So some of these people are geshe, pechawa and so forth and some are not. It makes no difference?   

**A:**  Doesn't matter. That goes according to the seniority always.   

**Q:**  So some are not too intelligent.   

**A:**  It doesnt matter. They are senior. They are still jigen. He can quit the jigen and make somebody ..... But the jigen doesn't really have much respobsility. You are beyond the abbot and khantsen gegen. You are respected.   

**Q:**  So how many people would be in the tsondu at any time? 50?   

**A:**  Maybe more.   

**Q:**  Could you as a trüku just go in?   

**A:**  We don't go anywhere. No, we don't go to the tsongdu, nowhere. So you really do not become too much in the decision making body. If you want to say something, you can call the tsongdu in. They come to you. [laughter]   

**Q:**  All of them come?   

**A:**  All come if you ask all. If you ask just the 7, they come.   

**Q:**  What are the 7 called?   

**A:**  They do have some sort of name, maybe like 7 seniors, gembadün [Tib. རྒན་པ་བདུན] or something. I forgot. The 1st 7 are important. I think they get a lot of priviledges too.   

**Q:**  So they manage all the estate of the khamtsen or thr tsondu?   

**A:**  The tsondu. The tsondu always meets there.   

**Q:**  Always is once a week, once a day?   

**A:**  Whenever there is important business. The jigen will inform that there is a meeting of the tsondu.   

**Q:**  Now all these monks are living there? Often I hear that of the 10,000 Drepung monks thousands are somewhere else.   

**A:**  Doesn't matter. Whoever is there.   

**Q:**  But somebody must be taking the organization leadership.   

**A:**  The jigen is responsbile. He is supposed to be responsible.   

**Q:**  But if he is not strong, there must be some other way to do it.   

**A:**  If jigen is not very capable then the khamtsen gegen will take it or nyerba will take it. Or there will be some respobsible monk who will tell jigen what to do it. There are a lot of ways how to do it. The jigen trusts somebody.   

**Q:**  What happens if the jigen can't read?   

**A:**  Then the jigen will have somebody else to do that. No problem. There are clerks and many others.   

**Q:**  And he has money to pay these people?   

**A:**  They don't pay money at all. Somebody from the khamtsen who is good at writing will be hired there. He will have some kind of priviledge sitting up there. And become part of the decision makers even though he is junior. All this type of advantages exist. And exempted to go for tsomja or anything for that period. You know when the tsondu meets, it is not like this. They put their seats down in the courtyard in the sunshine, all sitting in the sun. Nobody can come in and they will talk. All the teas will be served. They will eat pag and dried meat. All these to eat there. Sometimes they eat all day. It is a kind of semi-picnic type of discussions and make decisions.   

**Q:**  But there has to be a lot of organization since someone has to say make tea for 50 people etc. Get dry meat etc?   

**A:**  No no. Dry meat is there in the storeroom. The khamtsen stroreroom always has a lot of dry meat. Then tsamba there is no shortage. And tea is no shortage. The nyerba is there always. The nyerba has to be there for 24 hours. So nyerba has his own staff, so most of the 364 days there is a tsomja so there is already tea made for that.   

**Q:**  The khamtsen has its own rungkhang?   

**A:**  Yes it has everything. A huge rungkhang. The 2 nyerba have to sit in the rungkhang. They have to sleep there. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Why do they have to sleep there?   

**A:**  I don't know. Maybe to check if a fire breaks out. Thats there job. Below the nyerba there are jama and jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] and all sorts of things. Big staff thre.   

**Q:**  How do they get those staff?   

**A:**  The nyerba are responsible. They have to hire them.   

**Q:**  They have to pay them?   

**A:**  I don't think they pay, I don't think anyone pays anything. [laughter] It is all the priviledges they get. But they work very hard. They don't see the working hard part of it, only the priviledges.   

**Q:**  What are the privilages they get?   

**A:**  There are also 2 water carriers, chuma [Tib. ཆུ་མ]. These one have to collect the water all the time. That is just like nyerba. There are 4 people every year pass through the chuma period. 2 become chuma and 2 escape. So they really have to carry the water all the time. They have to carry at night. Sometimes the 2 couldn't manage and they have to ask friends to help.   

**Q:**  A lot of labrang and khamtsen have nangsen. Did Nyare have those non-monk nangsen too?   

**A:**  No. A lot of people have nangsen, yes. The jiso has a lot of nangsen.   

**Q:**  Those are like kind of miser?   

**A:**  They are out of miser. Some are not even out of miser. They are out of Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག], you know below Drepung there is that little village called Thambag. A lot of people from Thambag come.   

**Q:**  They don't have that [village] now.   

**A:**  They don't have that now?   

**Q:**  I don't think so. Maybe not.   

**A:**  Thambag might have been part of ... merged to somewhere.   

**Q:**  They have to work during the day and then they go home or they live there?   

**A:**  No, they don't live there. Nangsen have a little bit more priviledges again. But the worst ones are the thabyog. Even thoabyog have a little priviledges.   

**Q:**  They are not monks?   

**A:**  They are lay people. Some of the Drepung thabyog used to help Nyare Khamtsen to bring water. They bring in water and get the used tea leaves, jaro [Tib. ཇ་རོ] to take home. Khamtsen jaro is not like tsogchen jaro. It is much better. You can make tea again with it. Khamtsen always has better tea which is boiled less. The tsogchen jaro is mostly thrown away and becomes manure.   

**Q:**  Only the jiso has nangsen?   

**A:**  No also labrang have.   

**Q:**  Did you people have nangsen?   

**A:**  Not me but Demo Labrang had lots.   

**Q:**  Do the ones in Demo labrang come and live there?   

**A:**  Well later on they cut out all these nangsen. They don't live there, they just come in the daytime, or there is some meeting. Later one we cut it out. We don't have it anymore.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  It is not benefitial to the labrang at all. Except, it is a lot more expenditures because during the New Years there has to be a lot of gifts to the nangsen. That is their priveledges. They get meat and fried cookies, khapse [Tib. ཁ་ཟས] etc. they get a lot like tea, grease, butter and thü [Tib. ཐུད] which is like a cake made from butter and cheese.   

**Q:**  So they basically live in their own house.   

**A:**  They basically live in their own house.   

**Q:**  And they don't have to work?   

**A:**  They are supposed to be there for working, occassionally they are there and ocassionaly they get those gifts.   

**Q:**  But they do not get salary?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  But thabyog have to be there everyday?   

**A:**  Yes those who have to work have to work. The priviledged one even if they come they have to make an extra seat for them.   

**Q:**  It is very strange.   

**A:**  Yes, strange and they come and occupy their own seat and the tea is served and they eat pag, cheese and butter whatever they get.   

**Q:**  So the poor monks don't really get salaries? Gifts and whatnots?   

**A:**  Gifts and whatnot. I don't think there is any salary at all. Even the chandzö, I do not think they get it. Chabu, bungdzö, I dont think they get salary.   

**Q:**  There must be ways of making money?   

**A:**  Probably, there are many ways. Its all sort of under the table business.   

**Q:**  They can become rich?   

**A:**  They become very rich. Chabu is lifetime job. Unless the abbot fights   

**Q:**  Chabu is on tratsang level?   

**A:**  Yes. Tratsang actually has two differen categories of managers, one is chabu and the other is bungdzö. Bungdzö are established later, during my period. They change. The chabu don't change.   

**Q:**  That's the 13th Dalai Lama's period when they beat the monks swith switches after the Loseling trouble?   

**A:**  Yes. But then every tratsang has to have these. That means its easier for the government to deal with the tratsang since these managers are the ones who repsect kudrak, and they are easier to talk to. The chabu are more vulnerable to and are easier to control. It is away the government can have more power in the monastery.   

**Q:**  So the chubu are much more powerful?   

**A:**  They are much more powerful than even the bungdzö.   

**Q:**  The khamtsen is like independent. Nobody can tell it to do anything, can it? It has its own money?   

**A:**  Yes, but it is also under the control of the tratsang. If you don't like the khamtsen doing something and it is very funny. You can complain to the tratsang and somehow tratsang has to find a way to interfere. It just can't say to the khamtsen that you can't do this. Have to find a way. Mostly they will say it is a disgrace for tratsang or something in that manner. Otherwise, they can not. If you break rule of monastery, then they can say something. Otherwise no.   

**Q:**  So whatever resources the khamtsen has it is its own business?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What kind of issue would people go to the tratsang for?   

**A:**  For example, if a khamtsen gegen's disciplinary action doesn't satisfy you. You may go to the tratsang gegö for overrulling, then it's not very easy also. The gegö may interfere in the khamtsen gegen's decision and overrule, but tsondu of the khamtsen if it minded they can twist it around and complain to the tratsang and overrul the gegö's decision. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Like what kind of things can there be a dispute over?   

**A:**  Normally there is not much dispuite that goes from khamtsen up. They call down to khamtsen or monk to give an explanation of some action. That is their way of doing. If you are not behaving something, they will call you and simply yell at you saying that you are not behaving and are doing this and that. Why did you do this, give me a reply [Tib. ལན་ཁྱེར་ཤོག་ཨ ]. That means you are in trouble now.   

**Q:**  Who would say that?   

**A:**  Gegö or shenngo or khamtsen gegen. Whoever says, you have to go to that person.   

**Q:**  Then you have to go and give it in writing?   

**A:**  No, you have to go and explain it.   

**Q:**  But what kind of things?   

**A:**  Anything, they say give me an explanation why you cough here, why are you standing here, why you looked down here, why are you throwing a stone, why you are not here, why you are not here the day before yesterday and day before yesterday for week and why.   

**Q:**  When you go you have to give a khata?   

**A:**  Oh yes. You just can't walk in. Before you go there officially, first you have to go to their house and give lots of gifts and say sorry and this and that. This is before you go to explain. Then they will keep you like this. They will not give response for some weeks or months, it dedends, so everyday you have to go to give gifts. That is there way of collecting income. So if there is a fight with two khamtsen monks, the matter will be settled in the khamtsen. If thre is a fight between monks of two different khamtsen, the matter will be settled in the tratsang. But if the two khamtsen monks fighting caught by the gegö, and says bring the answer to me, it has gone beyond the khamtsen. Then the khamtsen cannnot interfere. But the decision of the khamtsen gegen, if one doesn't like it it can go to the gegö, but tsondu can stand by the khamtsen gegen and cause tratsang a little trouble. When the tratsang has to do something, it has to go to the khamtsen. The tratsang tsondu consists of the representatives of 23 khamtsen. So khamtsen will come and say we want to carry on the duties of the tratsang, however, if tratsang doesn't support us, then we have to rethink this and that. That's how they do it.   

**Q:**  I don't understand?   

**A:**  If tratsang doesn't support our demand or treat us well, or ignore our khamtsen gegen, then we also have to rethink how we will serve tratsang. Its a funny way. The old way.   

**Q:**  The khamtsen gegen is for how long?   

**A:**  One year.   

**Q:**  So these guys for one year have a lot of power?   

**A:**  Oh yes.   

**A:**  After the nyerba, it is the phardre [Tib. བར་ཁྲལ]] not the shöndre. Somtimes they even say Pharshara, [Tib. བར་ཤ་ར]. After the nyerba period of four years, then one has to wait untill it becomes khamtsen gegen period. The khamtsen genegn is selected once in a year, 2 monks by seniority. One becomes, and one get off.   

**Q:**  By senriy?   

**A:**  Yes. Always senriy. From nyerba to khamtsen gegen, it depends how many monks go through and how many died in between it became faster. So there are a whole bunch of Phashara who are waiting [to move into the khamtsen gegen post]. They are neither in tsondu or in shöndre. Sometimes they even call it shöndre gemba [Tib. རྒན་པ]. So when there is an important meeting on some issue for khamtsen, then the shöndre will meet down there and tsondu will meet up there. And then they negotaite and try to reach a decision. The shöndre will take their decision, the tsondu will take their decision.   

**Q:**  And the Phardre?   

**A:**  They will go with the shöndre and they become So the shöndre gemba and they send their representative up to tsondu and try to negotiate. Really the tsondu doesn't meet with the shöndre at all. The representatives go up and down.   

**Q:**  Last start today. You were saying that all the tratsang has a document, yigcha [Tib. ཡིག་ཆ].   

**A:**  Oh yes.   

**Q:**  I don't understand this?   

**A:**  In the tsenyi tratsang, the tratsang where the monks study tsenyi in Drepung or Sera and the Ganden wherever they go, basically, they are all Gelugpa, they will take the works of Tsongkhapa [Tib. ཙོང་ཁ་པ] Gyeltsab [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཚབ] and Khedrub [Tib. མཁས་གྲུབ]. these are sort of more authantic and important sort of over riding the others. However each tratsang will have their own yigcha, it means the accepted theory. So that is no matter whatever any quotation or they have over riding the yigcha. You have to accept your yigcha and can not lose your yigcha. Your loyalty of accepting the yigcha is more important even than Tsongkhapa and somebody else. Normally, you don't find much, but in case say if you find contradiction between the Tsongkhapa's writing and your own yigcha writing, then you have to somehow protect the yigcha writing rather than the Tsongkhapa's writing. This is the normal system.   

**Q:**  Protect means you have to defend?   

**A:**  Yes. And also when you lose your yigcha, somehow you lose your yigcha theoridacaly in the debate is considered more disgrace than that of losing any other quotation. So this is sort of important for each tratsang. Earlier, Loseling has one yigcha, I am not very sure which one. Then in the middle level they have the Jayang Gawai Lodrö's [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དགའ་བའི་བློ་གྲོས] yigcha. Later it was changed to Panchen Sonam Tragpa's [Tib. པན་ཆེན་བསོད་ནམས་གྲགས་པ] and now it is changed to Panchen Sonam Tragpa. So by 1600 at the period of the 3rd Dalai Lama, Loseling accpted the yigcha of Panchen Sonam Tragpa. Even in the debate, if they say it is according to the Panchen Sonam Tragpa, the answerer person has to remove his hat over the head and bow down and just swallow it everything.   

**Q:**  I don't understand that.   

**A:**  During the debate, sometimes the answerer person had to take their hat off. I don't know you notice here or not when some one giving some quatations, the answerer person has to take his hat off and bow down a little bit which means he is quoting from the yigcha. That means you just have to accept it with all due respect. You can't say all due respect, you have to say with all respect I swallow it.   

**Q:**  So somebody actually wrote the yigcha? Was it a whole book?   

**A:**  Oh my god! It is hundreds of books. On Pangya Paramita, Pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན] there are number of books and number of books on the middle path, uma [Tib. དབུ་མ] and on the vidaya miga, there are number of books and on the Yinaya, there are number of books. And each of these subject have their own commentary and they have their own subtile and problems where they worked out. I mean hundred will be exacturating, but for Pharchin there are 8 chapters and 8 different books and uma also has the similar. Altogether, there are about 2, 000 books.   

**Q:**  Those were books especially not written on philosophy?   

**A:**  They are written on philosophy by the authors which Loseling accepted it and Loseling shares with Ganden Shartse [Tib. ཤར་རྩེ] and they have the same yigcha. Similarly, Sera Je shares with Ganden Changtse [Tib. བྱང་རྩེ] And Sera Mey [Tib. སྨད] has separate yigcha. Deyang has the 5th Dalai Lama's yigcha. That is the very important funny trick share. The 5th Dalai Lama had gone out of the way to blame the Jayang Chöje's [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱང་ཆོས་རྗེ] yigcha.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  I don't know why. I am still not clear to me why and I think he sort of collected all ... I have not seen his historical writing, but over heard all the time saying that Jayang Chöje's works whether there are 7 or 17 volumes, I don't even know. Probably, looks like 7 volumes, but lot of people say 17. I don't know. It has been totally collectd by the 5th Dalai Lama and burnt. And also the blocks were burnt too. So the Drepung old monks sort of prostrated to him and begged and finally he kept only one set of copy in Drepung tsogchen under seal. Nobody can read it. I am sure it is still there now and I am determined to see to it. I wonder why, I have no idea. After that, his writings became Deyang yigcha because Jayang Chöje's yigcha are accepted by Deyang. Though he is the founder of Drepung, all Drepung doesn't accept his yigcha. After the banning of the Jayang Chöje's yigcha, the 5th Dalai Lama's yigcha was accepted by Deyang which is not that great anyway compared with Gomang and Loseling. Gomang also has realier yigcha replaced by Jayang Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ] and later Gomang's yigcha accepted by Tashi Gomang [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིཨོས་སྒོ་མང] in Amdo.   

**Q:**  So these differs in?   

**A:**  In theoridical points here and there not all the subjects. But all except the Tsongkhapa's. But the interpretation is different, there we come to the theoridical point of view. If we really make it, there will be sub-sects actually. Somehow they don't call it sub-sect. They satisfy by sending yigcha instead of calling it sub-sects.   

**Q:**  How many are there?   

**A:**  The well known are Loseling has a yigcha shared with Ganden Shartse which is the Panchen Sonam Tragpa and the Sera Je has Jetsün Chökyi Gyentsen's [Tib. རྗེ་བཙུན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན] yigcha shared with Anden Changtse and Sera Mey has the yigcha of Khedrub Tenpa Dargye [Tib. མཁས་གྲུབ་བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས] and Deyang has the 5th Dalai Lama's yigcha. Gomang has Künkhyen Jayang Shepa's [Tib. ཀུན་མཁྱེན་འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ] yigcha. I don't think Ngagpa has a yigcha because it is more and less rituals and not much academic study. Out of the three great monastery, there are five and then Tashilunpo, I have no idea. Maybe they have the Panchen Chökyi Gyentsen's [Tib. པན་ཆེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་མཚན]. Ratö has it's all.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes, every small monastery   

**Q:**  That was the study in the chöra? It is the curricular line?   

**A:**  Yes it is their curricular line written for them and buy them for them.   

**Q:**  Did somebody write this 17 vollumes?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  That's the issue. How would a yigcha change?   

**A:**  Well, probably, they must have some important reason. I do not know how it would be changed. Take Loseling, how would have changed from Jayang Gawai Lodrö to .... could probably my guess probably Panchen Sonam Tragpa becoming outstanding teacher and he was teaching in Ganden as well as Drepung too going up and down. So probably it had been his own ideas and started saying it and he may not probably accepting the others large and gradually might have picked it up and probably could be. Lots of outstanding   

**Q:**  Who is the incarnation?   

**A:**  Panchen Sonam Tragpa was the previous incarnation of the Trüku Tragpa Gyentsen [Tib. གྲགས་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] who was known as the trüku of the Drepung's Simkhang Gong [Tib. གཟིམ་ཁང་གོང] and the Simkhang Wog [Tib. གཟིམ་ཁང་འོག]. That is the source of Dalai Lama and other ones.   

**Q:**  So he is the incarnation of the other one?   

**A:**  Yes, the previous incarnation of Simkhang Gong. Before it was acknowledged as Simkhang Gong.   

**Q:**  He was acknowleged as Simkhang Gong?   

**A:**  Not at Panchen Sonam Tragpa's period.   

**Q:**  The next one?   

**A:**  Next to Panchen Sonam Tragpa was somebody else and then it is Trüku Tragpa Gyentsen. I think that was the period.   

**Q:**  Is Simkhang Gong is still existence?   

**A:**  Ngari Rimpoche [Tib. mgna' ris rin po che] supposed to the trüku of Simkhang Gong and these two were the outstanding lamas in Drepung actally.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  Simkhang Gong and Simkhang Wog, the source of Drepung. That's why the 5th Dalai Lama gave so much power to Drepung when he became the ruler of the Tibet. Why Drepung had two outstanding lamas called upper and the lower; Simkhang Gong and Simkhang Wog, Simkhang Gong was Trüku Tragpa Gyentsen and Simkhang Wog was the Dalai Lama. This is important to Drepung's historical back ground.   

**Q:**  I couldn't understand how the khamtsen works, there are shöndre, phartre and tsondu, if only four people are moving up, I mean they can't go up through all of the ranks?   

**A:**  Every year.   

**Q:**  Every year, but there are lot of monks four in ten years, only 40 monks go up, so most monks must be in shöndre even if they are old?   

**A:**  Yes, even they are old. The seniority of moving is counted not on the basis of the age but basis of when they joined the particular khamtsen. So maybe somebody who was very old in another khamtsen and because some kind of trouble and joined this khamtsen, he has to join as the junior level. If you are really really senior and outstanding thing, they may give you special exemption of something, but even then, somehow he has to go through that. It is the seniority of joining the khamtsen rather than the age or knowledge with the exception of trüku.   

**Q:**  Chöndze is?   

**A:**  Chöndze is exempted. From the beginning, they obtain the excemption, so they are way on the top.   

**Q:**  So they are in the tsondu?   

**A:**  No. They won't be in the tsondu, they have some special privilage, but you can't come into decision making body. At least Nyare Khamtsen is concerned, they can't come into decision making body.   

**Q:**  Shöndre is spelled like tax [Tib. ཁྲལ]?   

**A:**  Yes. It means like youth tax. The one called shöndre, is when you were a junior monk, you are supposed to pay the junior tax that is anything you have to do not in terms of money or anything, but it is more in terms of the physical labor to go and collect water though there are two water carriers called chuma [Tib. ཆུ་མ]. That was also part of shöndre. And serving tea.   

**Q:**  What are they called?   

**A:**  They are called chagde [Tib. ཕྱག་བདེ] or lagde [Tib. ལག་བདེ]. They have to get up and do it and sometimes when the nyerpa was supposed to buy fire woods, in case of difficulties, the junior monks have to go and collect woods.   

**Q:**  Was it cow dung or wood?   

**A:**  Cow dung and wood anything they get to make fire, but not sort of dry grasses. Then they collect the fule for frying the fried cookies, khabse [Tib. ཁ་ཟས]. Sometimes carry khamtsen's loads up and down from Lhasa to the monastery and from the monastery to Lhasa. So all sort of physical service without using much of brain come on the shöndre.   

**Q:**  The shöndre is for the khamtsen? What about the tratsang?   

**A:**  Khamtsen and tratsang both have shöndre.   

**A:**  What about the tsogchen?   

**A:**  I never heard the tsogchen shöndre. I don't think there was. Tratsang also not so much shöndre and shöndre are mostly in khamtsen and when Drepung need something, they would inform the tratsang and the tratsang would inform the khamtsen and the khamtsen would call the shöndre to do this and this. Say like if they need 50 people to carry something, then Drepung says Loseling needs to send 25 and Loseling will go and tell the khamtsen we need 25, so 24 khamtsen, each khamtsen produce one man. I think the shöndre also do this by turn, these are controlled by nyerba.   

**Q:**  In the khamtsen?   

**A:**  In the khamtsen.   

**A:**  How about the tratsang?   

**A:**  Tratsang doesn't have much shöndre and what they needed they inform the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  I read in a book that a person who was in a labrang said that the monastery told the labrang to send him to pay the Gyaling [Tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] instrument and the labrang send him to play that. Is this shöndre?   

**A:**  This might not be shöndre because labrang are exempted with shöndre. This must be some kind of request. Maybe he has a talent in playing Gyaling or whatevet the reason might be, maybe he looks nice. Normally, they call the Gyaling players who are not ugly fellows. They call some kind of good looking. Each of them have like quality.   

**Q:**  So playing the instrument is not shöndre?   

**A:**  For Ngagpa and Deyang Tratsang, it could be shöndre, but for others no.   

**Q:**  Deyang is not the tsenyi tratsang?   

**A:**  No, Deyang has both. They have tsenyi as well as the tantra, ngag [Tib. སྔགས] and Ngagpa is totally tantra. Whenever the tsogchen needs some Gyaling players, the tsogchen will call Deyang and Ngagpa in turn and I think the chökhang depa [Tib. མཆོད་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] will be responsible for that.   

**Q:**  Chökhang depa is in the monastery and not in the tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes, chökhang depa is in the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  When you mean the whole monastery, you say tsogchen?   

**A:**  Yes. Tsogchen is the general property and general association. But you know it is very funny. If you really go and each monk come down individually, ultimately they will be in the khamtsen or even mitsen sometimes and tsogchen only left with few responsible officials which maybe for 1-2 years period and the big empty building. That's how it really used to work.   

**Q:**  In the tratsang level the assembly place called what dukhang [Tib. འདུ་ཁང]?   

**A:**  Yes, dukhang. It is called tratsang dukhang. And for the tsogchen, it is called tsogchen dukhang.   

**Q:**  And khamtsen?   

**A:**  They call khamtsen tshom [Tib. ཚོམས].   

**Q:**  So you are eligible for shöndre until you move up? If you are 35-40 and you are still in the shöndre?   

**A:**  Yes, but then the shöndre also becomes lighter and lighter year by year. They have this system and somehow the first two years was quite tough because lot of shöndre would come and then couple of years it becomes lighter and lighter year by year. Like your turn comes 3-4 times in a year.   

**Q:**  Are there any specific taxes like working in the kitchen for the whole year?   

**A:**  That is totally nyerba's responsiblity.   

**Q:**  But the nyerba wouldn't take the shöndre? Or he would take somebody else?   

**A:**  The nyerba would hire somebody to get the work done as a full time and nyerba can ask for the shöndre when ever they need more people. So if you go down an buy like 100 of skin/bag butter loads, he will ask the khamtsen to send the shöndre and the monks will go down and get it. The nyerba would not make the arrangement of bring it up though nyerba do make the arrangement. And the labrang have mules going up and down and at this time the shöndre gets lighter. It totally depends on the individual nyerpa's handling and some ask a lot of times shöndre, they begin to dislike him a little bit.   

**Q:**  The nyerba has under him jama?   

**A:**  There is jama in the khamtsen, but I don't think jama comes out of shöndre. It comes out of the nyerba's selection and for Loseling and the tsogchen, jama is prestigious position and there is economic benefit and that's something to looked for and doesn't come as tax.   

**Q:**  What is the economic benefit?   

**A:**  Probably stealing [laughter].   

**Q:**  No but, what does the jama do?   

**A:**  Jama is the in charge of the rungkhang and they don't hava a nyerba in Loseling and the tsogchen. The position of the nyreba is not there. So the jama id really responsible for everything.   

**Q:**  In charge of the traja and the mangja, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they are responsible for those and in charge of the kitchen for every kitchen staff' and the kitchen artcles and there were butter is really alots.   

**Q:**  But he is not in charge of the shiga?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Were there nyerba in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Nyerba in khamtsen is for the kitchen and the store and jama in tsogchen and the kitchen is totally kitchen and the store is part of the kitchen.   

**Q:**  Under them there were the thabyog?   

**A:**  Yes, thabyog. Tsochen and tratsang both have thabyog.   

**Q:**  Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Some khamtsen have and some don't. In caes of the Nyare, they don't have thabyog separately, but the nyerpa will select few people to do the work. But at the same time, Nyare Khamtsen has lot of things to give for other thabyog og tsogchen and the tratsang. So most of the thabyog in the afternoon are lended in Nyare kitchen anyway because there are more teas to take and they also like to give it a way. They get benefited without being there. When the nyerba give ot away they give a huge big butter and 2-3 sola [Tib. ཟོ་ལག] container when the thabyog go home.   

**Q:**  What is the sola?   

**A:**  A wooden jar type of container for serving tea and the thukpa. When it is metle, [copper or silver] it is called sangyyen [Tib. ཟངས་རྐྱན] or Ngükyen [Tib. དངུལ་རྐྱན]. When they serve it from the big cooking pot, they put them into the sola or jabtra [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ]and carry it out.   

**Q:**  Thabyog and those people are not monks?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  The term thabyog is not used for monks and those are miser?   

**A:**  I don't think they are miser. In Thamgag there are few families become thabyog of Drepung and it is sort of family inheritage an for them it is something to be proud becaue in the Mönlam when they go as part of official and they have lot oo benefits too. I mean they will not take it as a tax. If you say would you give up thabyog and we will do it, they will say no. They probably have to pay alot get the thabyog.   

**Q:**  You mean they were heritated and make some benefit, but not trepa and not rich, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I am sure it was originallly volunteered by few families and after some time, they keep on asking them to do it every year and it became part of tax. There are lot of cases like that.   

**Q:**  But Thamgag was not Drepung miser?   

**A:**  No, in Thambag, there used to be a monastery before realier long before.   

**Q:**  It belongs to who?   

**A:**  I don't know. There is a big family called Thamgag Simkhang [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང] and they also have a small deity and the Thambag oracle, kuten [Tib. སྐུ་རྟེན]. I think it belonged to Thamgag Simkhang.   

**Q:**  Kuten is what?   

**A:**  Somebody who comes to trance and they have a deity and a temple.   

**Q:**  You mentioned about two chöshi of Drepung near Lhasa, what are they?   

**A:**  Gyaritsel and Ngodrubding [Tib. དངོས་གྲུབ་ལྡིང]. Both are Loseling shiga.   

**Q:**  And where are located?   

**A:**  Below the Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང].   

**A:**  Gadong is the oracle?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was it south or east? Towards Yarlung Tsangpo [Tib. ཡར་ལུང་གཙང་པོ] River?   

**A:**  It is at the west after Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར], the town at the west side of the mountain near Drepung and below Dongkar is Gyaritsel and Ngodrubding.   

**Q:**  It is quite close by?   

**A:**  Very close by. We used to go and ride horse and spend the whole day and come back. I think it is 15 minites drive from Drepung.   

**Q:**  Is there another one little bit further like in Phenpo [Tib. འཕན་པོ]?   

**A:**  Yes, I am sure. There was Loseling chöshi in Phenpo and there is also in Nyethang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང].   

**Q:**  What was that called in Nyethang?   

**A:**  I think it is called Norbugang [Tib. ནོར་བུ་སྒང].   

**Q:**  We have the shöndre and then and these thabyog. Do the thabyog come every morning or they sleep there?   

**A:**  For tsogchen, thabyog are responsible to make fire making sure if the water is boiling, the thabyog's duty is called tsakhol thönsum [Tib. ཚ་འཁོལ་ཐོན་གསུམ], the water must be boiled, they must serve hot, and the tea must be properly juiced out and not sort of wasted.   

**Q:**  They live in the monastery or just go home or almost live everyday?   

**A:**  I think they live home and come. There is no residence and they have wives and the children all these. But some thabyog used to live in the little house called Dzomomra [Tib. མཛོ་མོ་ར], it is very close to Drepung on the other side of the river flow. This is little place from where they collect water. The place is called Trogpo Phari [Tib. གྲོག་པོ་ཕ་རི]. Some are living in Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས] at the end of Drepung. Tashi Khangsar is not incluided in Drepung where women can stay there. And many of them go to Thambag which is not far away anyway.   

**Q:**  The thabyog are also responsible for cleaning out the tea pots and kitchen and ?   

**A:**  Yes, thabyog are responsible for mostly in the kitchen under the jama's direction every thing including the bringing the fire wood.   

**Q:**  There must be lot of thabyog?   

**A:**  I forgot the number like 24 or 46.   

**Q:**  They don't get salary?   

**A:**  They don't get salary at all. They get alot of benefit because they get lot of tea and butter, dry tea and butter and thukpa. But not only from the tsogchen but also from the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  They are like lend outs?   

**A:**  They don't lend it out, but they come by themselves and hang around and handle the bigger thing in the khamtsen, so the khamtsen has more sort of policy how to organize things and they come and led by themselves and say this is the better way to handle. And they get things from there and say thank you and go away. Thabyog are responsible to beat up the monks if the shengo decided to lash the monks out, the thabyog would come and lash them out.   

**Q:**  The shengo is the tsogchen shengo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  The khamtsen normally don't lash people. I don't think it is allowed. I don't think even the tratsang is allowed too lash out tough they do. They mostly beat by hitting on the back. That they do it in the khamtsen as well. I don't think they make them lay down and lash.   

**Q:**  They hit them with sticks?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Is it a thin stick?   

**A:**  Sometimes it is very thick stick.   

**Q:**  Was it like a cane?   

**A:**  Well, the wet willow branches not the thin ones, it is quite thick. Thicker than thumb or little more than that. No matter how much lashed out, the thabyog's rule is to collect them. They will have a bunch with all the leaves and they would throw on the ground with the sound "thro' which makes people feel afraid and they lash from both side and if they are lash 50 times each side hit 25 times from the right and left.   

**Q:**  Do they hit on the back?   

**A:**  No, on the bottom.   

**Q:**  You mean the buttoks [Tib. རྐུབ]?   

**A:**  Yes. They have a funny system, you know the thabyog really know how to hit and the shengo will not come down and they come down few steps and say, "hit him hard" [Tib. ཚ་པོ་གཞུས]. Sometimes, you had 200 lashes, but nothing happened to the individual. The thabyog know what to do and if they don't want to hit properly, they make a huge sound but they hit on the other side on the ground rather than hitting on the buttok. If they hit with the tip of the branch, that is really awful. So they also hit with the other side. Unless few thabyog don't like you and have problem with you something to settle it, then they hit with the tip. Another worse thing what they do is sometimes they cut your nerves.   

**Q:**  With a knife?   

**A:**  No, no, they hit like 25 on the back of the thigh and 25 on the calf and they hit 2-5-6 in between. That makes you crippled.   

**Q:**  Whose dicision is that? Thabyog or the shengo?   

**A:**  It is thabyog. Whatever shengo says, they won't, but sometimes the shengo try to influence the thabyog to do that. That's how it is.   

**Q:**  So they don't have to hit on the buttok then?   

**A:**  They really don't have to hit on the buttok. When they have to some body down, from the calf to the wift ? they can hit wherever they want to. That is the hitting area. And then it is the rule, they immediately has to pull the leg out, so the nerves doesn't shrink. The rule is supposed to pull out, but the thabyog refused to pull out and then you get shrinked and become crippled .   

**Q:**  But they were mostly hitting over here?   

**A:**  While you are lying down, they hit anywhere by two of them, so   

**Q:**  They can hit here too?   

**A:**  They even hit on the calf.   

**Q:**  But only on the back side?   

**A:**  Because you are lying upside down.   

**Q:**  You are lying in the ground?   

**A:**  You know the stones in the Drepung courtyard and there is another triangular stone and you are supposed to lay on the triangular stone. They put yopu down the triangular stone. That is the mark.   

**Q:**  That is outside of the dukhang?   

**A:**  It is on the stone floor in the courtyard outside?   

**Q:**  That's the power of the shengo?   

**A:**  Yes, that is how the shengo makes people afraid. [laughter]   

**Q:**  What would be an incident that makes somebody get a beating like that?   

**A:**  That is entirely the decision of the two shengo.   

**Q:**  They have to both agree or one can do?   

**A:**  Normally, they sort of agree, but if they don't agree each other, the one will say like 200 or something and when they count up to like 25 times, the other would come down and say that's enough. That's probably how they do. Otherwise, they supposed to agree each other. But as usual, like the Tibetan system, if one says something and the other keeps quite and just watch. When he thinks it is enough, he comes out and say that's enough.   

**Q:**  Do people try to bribe the shengo?   

**A:**  Oh yes.   

**Q:**  By saying please don't hit me hard and that?   

**A:**  Well, no. You bribe the thabyog and that you have to. If you think you are going to get whipped tomorrow, tonight you have to prepare all the thabyog. Thabyog get alot of things from that.   

**Q:**  And the shengo too must, right?   

**A:**  Yes, shengo for months. They will say give me an answer [Tib. ལན་ཁྱེར་ཤོག་ཨ]. Then you can't go and give the answer. You have go to the house and give gift and you have to keep on going through somebody talking to him and every time, they carry gifts. Finally you get the date when you can really go up there. That takes months and your representative [end of tape].   

