# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** September 1988  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and English and translated completely into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein  
**Name:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 49  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of the 10th Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview describes how he joined Drepung Monastery and the recognition of his incarnation, as well as explaining the ranks of incarnations, and details about the rules and regulations of Drepung.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_04/M_0009_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  section skipped   

**A:**  I can't say that when I joined Drepung I (decided to) associate myself with Drepung. That is not correct. Actually, the moment they recognized me as a reincarnation of Tashi Namgyel [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], I've already associated with Drepung even though I have not officially joined Drepung.   

**Q:**  Why don't you talk about yourself rather than talking about in general. How you came to be recogized in the monastery and anything you remember about that. How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was 4 years old when I was recognized (as an incarnation). My hope was to be recognized as Panchen Lama. [laughter] People were talking about it.   

**Q:**  When were you born?   

**A:**  The same year as the Panchen in 1939, the Hare Year. I mean, its not really my hope, I don't know, its just that people were talking about it. I do remember this and I do remember that the monks from Tashilunpo came to see me. People were also talking about me being Traya Kyamgön [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ་སྐྱབས་མགོན] and nobody was talking of me being Nyare Khentrü [Tib. ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ] [laughter].   

**Q:**  What do you remember? What did the monks do? They came to your parents and then came to examine you? Did they do things like they did with the Dalai Lama, such as showing ritual equipment, et cetera.?   

**A:**  Yes, I do remember that when the Tashilunpo monks came they brought a lot of the Panchen Lama's equipment. They brought a rosary and I remember very clearly that I was not satisfied with that rosary. I was not happy with the rosary at all. And I was looking for some more different one, and I remember very clearly that I told the monk that this is not my rosary. So straightways it seems I was going to be associated somehow with Drepung either to be Traya Kyamgön. Most probably not going to be Panchen. It became quite close to be Nyare [a khamtsen in Drepung's Loseling Tratsang], where I am, too [he was finally recongnized as Nyare Trüku (incarnation)]. When I was visiting Kongbo [Tib. ཀོང་པོ] (Province) on my father's estate and climbing up one of those long stairs, on the top was Sitraba [Tib. བསེ་ཁྲབ་པ] Nyare's protector deity. I was really happy to see that protector, so that kind of really established me to Nyare and Drepung in some way. It was sort of in everybody's mind. People thought it must be Traya Kyamgön because it was a bigger name [lama], I guess. So anyway, I do remember thereafter, I was selected as the reincarnation of the former abbot of Gyutö [Upper Tantric College] Geshe Tashi Namgyal. So some of those monks are coming and my father was refusing to give me saying it may not be, because it is not a high rank incarnation and it may not be worth it, and this and that- that I remember. Then they decided to apply for a little higher rank for this incarnation, to be considered as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku. But they had the idea that they were not going to get this unless my father used his influence or something. And I do remember very clearly that the late Jawtang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང], the head of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Office [office in charge of monks and monastery related affairs in the traditional Tibetan government-it is a monk-official office] he was a friend of the family and a relation of ours, actually of the previous Demo Rimpoche's incarnation not this one, so Jawtang [one of the most famous monk-officials of his era] came and met me and met my father and then they called me in and said this is the one we are asking the promotion for. But Jawtang was saying that it is not at all possible to do this. Anyway, he was told to please keep it in mind.   

**Q:**  Jawtang is with which <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>?   

**A:**  He is from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> [Tib. སྨད]. He was the Talama [Tib. ཏ་བླ་མ] of the Yigtsang. They talked and later I was informed that Jawtang said it was not possible.   

**Q:**  Whats the difference did it make if it was Tsogchen Trüku or not?   

**A:**  Oh, its a lot of difference.   

**Q:**  Which is the highest incarnation?   

**A:**  First are the Huthogthu, then the Trüku Namsum [Tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་རྣམ་གསུམ]. There are only three of them.   

**Q:**  Who is that?   

**A:**  Wön Gyelsey [Tib. འོན་རྒྱལ་སྲས], Losempa [Tib. ལོ་སེམས་དཔའ] and Lelung Shepey Dorje [Tib. སླེ་ལུང་བཞད་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ]. Cannot be be anywhere else. Known as the three incarnations of Tibet.   

**Q:**  These are from everywhere or just in Drepung?   

**A:**  All three are in Drepung. That is very important. Later, the Huthogthu became political power and started jumping on top, but earlier I think that the Trüku Namsum were the biggest <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</a> .   

**Q:**  Under that?   

**A:**  Under that is called Sumden Ngebö [Tib. གསུམ་གདན་སྔས་འབོལ] It means "three cushions and soft pillow and cushion. The cushion does not mean one to sit on, it is a plate on which they put meat. Nge is the back seat, Bö means cushion, but in the old system there was a cushion on the table on top of which a plate of meat was put.   

**Q:**  That was the in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a>?   

**A:**  That was a government title or rank.   

**Q:**  Which lamas were those?   

**A:**  There were quite a number of them. You can count the Huthogthu in single trips and there were only three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</a> namsum and maybe there are a 1-2 dozen of these Sumden Ngebö including all sects. They all enjoy the rank above the shape in terms of seating. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> goes before Huthogthu and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> goes below the Huthogthu and then trüku namsum. Then Sumden Ngebö. These are the bigger incarnations (trüku <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱེད་ཁག] Literally &quot;half,&quot; but when used in terms of tax obligations, it meant a family whose land and tax obligation was one half of the full obligation.">chekha</a> [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག]). Then the next is our type of trüku which is called the "middle incarnations" (trüku dringkhag [Tib.འབྲིང་ཁག]). These are also known as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku. This means that all your ranks and priviledges are acknowledged in the tsogchen [the main assembly hall of the monastery].   

**Q:**  Acknowledge means?   

**A:**  You enjoy all the facilities in the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  What does this mean? What priveledges?   

**A:**  A lot. You dont have to go everyday, and there are a lot of exemptions. You can get extra money.   

**Q:**  Extra money how?   

**A:**  When they distrubute the gye/phog (alms/salary) to the monks   

**Q:**  What is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a>?   

**A:**  Gye is when a special sponsor comes and gives money (alms) and the salary or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</a> comes from the monastery's endowment as well as collected from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> (estates). In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a>, if monks get 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>, all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku get 3 sang.   

**Q:**  All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the Huthogthu?   

**A:**  I think they get five. The Sumden Ngebö get four and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</a> namsum and Huthogthu probably get 5. Now these Sumden Ngebö are also known as Huthogthu, but there are inner (nang [Tib. ནང] Huthogthu Huthogthu) and outer, chi [Tib. ཕྱི] Huthogthu. I think this came from Mongol times. Outer Huthogthu were like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Chetsang [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་ཆེ་ཚང] and Dorjedrag Rigdzin Chenmo, [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག་རིག་འཛིན་ཆེན་མོ]. They all were outer Huthogthu. So they can act as Huthogthu using an umbrella, etc. outside Lhasa. Thus, they were called outer Huthogthu.   

**Q:**  The rights of the Huthogthu are the umbrellas?   

**A:**  It isn't only the right to have an umbrella, there is bogjag [Tib. འབོག་ལྕག], [tiger or leopard skin patterned rug stuffed and hung on each sides of the door], banners, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a> [Tib. གཟིམ་འགག], monk bodyguards, palinquin, [Tib. ཕེབས་བྱམས] and a tottaly different Huthogthu costume on top of monk's robe; they wear kind like a yellow satin overcoat called Tagotse [Ch. da gua zi] and the monks shawl, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟན] The upper part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">sen</a> [Tib. གཟན] has to be silk and a rosary of coral, and their shoes are rainbow designed, jachen [Tib. འཇ་ཆེན]. [laughter] The outter Huthogthu cannot wear the Huthogthu costume in Lhasa. At Tsogchen Huthogthu's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</a> is about same, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a> is more   

**Q:**  You <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku get more gye/phog?   

**A:**  Not much extra <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</a> which was almost the same, but we get extra gye.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a> comes from the endowment, right?   

**A:**  No. The moment it comes from the endowment, it becomes phog.   

**Q:**  I think on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a>, they give <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> and those?   

**A:**  They do.   

**Q:**  Was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</a>?   

**A:**  It is both. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a>, the moment it was belonged to the monastery and become part of their propfit for what year around, at the moment it comes out of that it becomes phog.   

**Q:**  So if I give the money to the monks it is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a> and if I give it to the monastery as the endowment, then becomes <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it becomes <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</a> afterwards in the next year.   

**Q:**  What is endowment called?   

**A:**  It is called matsa [Tib. མ་རྩ] or Chögyün Tongtsa [Tib. མཆོད་རྒྱུན་གཏོང་རྩ]. Also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku can ride and keep a horse inside Drepung. Even abbots cannot ride horse in monastery. Also can keep pets like cats and dogs, and flowers,there are a lot of such exemptions. There are 60 some exemptions. Every year when the new shengo comes, you have to give a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ་དཀར་པོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga garpo</a> for each exemption or permission.   

**Q:**  All <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku do this?   

**A:**  Yes, all have to give this. You say, (this is for) permision for this, permission for that. Every year we have arguments because of [Tib. རྟ་དྲེའུ] ("horse and mule"). This word means horses and mules but some shengo insist horse is one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ་དཀར་པོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga garpo</a> and mule is a second trangga garpo, but we will argue that together they are one trangga garpo. Always argument over this. We can also have bells on the horse. We can ring bells and cymbals in our individual house without asking permission.   

**Q:**  Can't other monks do this?   

**Q:**  No they can't, unless they get special permission because it will disturb other monks. They may keep these in room but not play them there. We can also wear the Chinese type shoes called hai.   

**Q:**  You can wear boots, right?   

**A:**  Everybody can wear boots, but not this kind of shoes. And you can't go on the roof top without the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟན] The upper part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">sen</a>, the monk's shawl and the others cannot. Even the abbots cannot ride horses in the monastery.   

**Q:**  But Drepung is really it is steep and hard to walk up and down.   

**A:**  We just keep on riding horse because it is a priviledge, but somtimes (there is) danger of falling from the horse. We can wear vest, tongga [Tib. གོས་ཆེན་སྟོད་འགག] made from multi-color brocade, we can always have servant wherever you go, even to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> [prayer assembly] the monastery will provide a seat for the servant who sits behind in a separate row. Main row is in the front of pillar and servants sit behind. And in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> all tsogchen trüku have throne. In tsogchen you don't have throne, but you are allowed to sit higher than rest by having more cusions piled up. Only the inner Huthogthu have throne in tsogchen. Its a higher cushion piled up and the not throne You also can come in late to tsog and leave early.   

**Q:**  You were sure that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> can't beat you, right?   

**A:**  No one will beat you (for being naughty). Technically they can beat you, but nobody will. Some of the abbots will give us a hard time, if <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</a> misbehaved so badly, the abbot will come and talk to you. But they won't scream and shout and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> doesn't come.   

**Q:**  When you go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a>, you can have your servants sitting behind you in the tsog?   

**A:**  Yes. This is in Drepung--in Mönlam <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> they can't sit behind you.   

**Q:**  So he would stay on the row or behind he row?   

**A:**  Behind the row in bewteen the pillars and their cushions were not so comfortable. The main row was in front of the pillars. Also you don't have to wear the cloak, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟླ་གམ] The cloak monks wear at the prayer assembly sessions.">dagam</a>, [Tib. ཟླ་གམ], it can be carried by servants and you can have a geyog.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟླ་གམ] The cloak monks wear at the prayer assembly sessions.">dagam</a>, what is the meaning of that? Was that because it is heavy?   

**A:**  Well, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> you have to wear dagam.   

**Q:**  Was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟླ་གམ] The cloak monks wear at the prayer assembly sessions.">dagam</a> the big thing made from wool inside?   

**A:**  Not that one, that was the one you wear in your room. In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a>, they have a different <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟླ་གམ] The cloak monks wear at the prayer assembly sessions.">dagam</a> made from woven woolen materials which is also worn by the shengo. The color is different. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོག་ཆེན་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] The highest rank of incarnate lamas in the government system of ranking incarnations. Literally, the incarnate lama of the assembly hall of the monastery as a whole.">Tsogchen trüku</a> wear bright orange dagam but the monks wear maroon.   

**A:**  So you don't have to carry that, but you have to wear?   

**A:**  We wear it in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</a> and the servants put it on you as you enter the door and take it off as you leave. They pinch you too. Oh yes, I got pinched by servants all the time. They whisper when putting it on saying you better behave yourself and pinch me. [laughter]   

**Q:**  How did your incarnation line then end up becoming a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku? First <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] A famous monk official who became an important Trunyichemmo.">Jogtang</a> said it is not possoble, right? Then what happened?   

**A:**  I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> [the regent] helped. Talungdra was determined to get me through. For some religious reason that Phabongka [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] [one of the most famous Gelukpa incarnate lamas of his time] had asked him to look after it. Even <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] A famous monk official who became an important Trunyichemmo.">Jogtang</a> was surprised.   

**Q:**  The problem is that this have to go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>?   

**A:**  These <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku ranks and above are governmental ranks and have to be applied, santioned and approved by the government.   

**Q:**  Does <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མཁན་པོ] The highest monk official in the traditional Tibetan government. He was the head of the monk official segment, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s household and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s private storeroom [tib. dzübug].">Jigyab khembo</a> must have to approve it?   

**A:**  I don't think so. Goes straight from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> to the Regent. Its not necesaary to go through Jigyab khembo.   

**Q:**  Would the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> make a petititon to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> would a make a petition addressed to Regent through Yigtsang.   

**A:**  What would such a petition say? Do you say a reason or something?   

**A:**  Well, it would say something in general application, this young incarnate lama is so bright and wonderful and so forth so please promote him to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku rank for the benefit for the sentient beings and he may be given the rank. In my case the Regent gave the reason--I have seen the letter-- (he said) that since he is son of nephew of 13th Dalai Lama and member of the 13th Dalai Lama's family , and 13th is so great, so here is giving the rank. That was the reason the regent has used it.   

**Q:**  Your father was the nephew how? To the female or male?   

**A:**  I have no idea, but he is nephew for sure. In Lhasa, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] and Horkhang [two elderly former aristocrats] will know although <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> [Tib. གླང་མདུན] is not there now. That was the reason Taglungdra used it. I think Talama [Jogtang] was saying that there was no reason [to promote this incarnation line] so how can we do it, so <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> came up with this reason.   

**Q:**  It is ususally hard to become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku?   

**A:**  Yes, it is used to be very hard, but later in 1950's then they started giving lots of these promotions to incarnated lamas from Kham for political reasons because Kham is important. It was dharma politics. [laughter] These lamas were important politically so the [Tibetan] government used this to try to win their favor. For central Tibetan incarnations it was very hard to get, I was lucky to get it.   

**Q:**  And there were 60 exemptions for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku?   

**A:**  Yes, there are a lot like something like 60. I do rememeber they collected 60 some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ་དཀར་པོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga garpo</a> for each one to the shengo every year. The shengo have sometimes have some kind of right called like cow dung tax, juchag [Tib. ལྕི་འཕྱགས] to collect all the cow dung from the villagers when they come to sell cow dung in the Drepung stone floor during special seasons and pay minimum rates but they can't take it from us if it is belonged to us. And there was also the market tax, tromchag [Tib. ཁྲོམ་འཕྱགས] collected anything from the market by the shengo in the Drepung stone floor. This is not all the time, it is just before the month of his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> at the beginning of autumn. But if something belong to us, they have to stop and identify and we can get it back. I remember very clearly once one shengo even had already poured the cow dung into his store, but I went and he had to put the dung back in the bag and I took it home. [laughter]   

**Q:**  How did the shengo come to have it?   

**A:**  Well some of the villagers belonging to us were carrying the cow dung below Drepung to Lhasa. He got from there. If some body is closed to you, you also go there and get it back. Then there are lot of tax exemptions and there were taxes for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་རྒྱུན] Monks who came to Drepung, Ganden and Sera from far distances such as Kham and Amdo.">tragyün</a> like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a>, monk's taxes, tratre [Tib. གྲྭ་ཁྲལ] these are all exempted.   

**Q:**  All the Jedrung [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] are also exempted too?   

**Q:**  Not from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> taxes, but from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> taxes. There were tratsang trüku and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> trüku and the tratsang trüku are never exempted from the tsogchen taxes.   

**Q:**  What are the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> taxes? Work?   

**A:**  There are a lot of things there.   

**Q:**  But the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</a> don't do the work, right?.   

**A:**  They have to give a lot of tonggo.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> is also a tax?   

**A:**  Tonggo is not a consistant tax.   

**Q:**  The other have to do the physical labor for the tratre and those things?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> tax is mostly <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a>, right?   

**A:**  No, they would call monks and say you have to do this much, or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> needs this to be done. And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> have to send the monks.   

**Q:**  What kind of work?   

**A:**  Sometimes, cleaning and you have to do that or this.   

**Q:**  You yourself don't need to work and you can send people, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We don't have to send people. All these kind of taxes were exempted.   

**Q:**  This is because you were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> trüku, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Some there <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</a> have to send somebody to work?   

**A:**  If you are just a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] A lower ranked trüku (incarnate lamas) in the government&#x27;s ranking system.">tratsang trüku</a>, then you would have to send somebody to do this work. You do not have to go physically, you have to produce the labor.   

**Q:**  I swear by the Three Jewels that this is really complicated. We can spend the whole year. This is so in detail and each question have many questions.   

