# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0009.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Cleveland, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 23 July 1985  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** with Gelek Rimpoche-Nyare Khentrü [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 46  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gelek Rimpoche, the son of the 10th Demo Rimpoche, is a well-known lama and geshe from the Loseling College of Drepung Monastery. In this interview, he explains the structure of Drepung Monastery. He talks about the seven tratsang and the administration of the monastery including various positions that one can hold and their responsibilities.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0009_01/M_0009_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  July 23rd. Interview with Gelek Rimpoche. Today he is going to tell me all about the structure of Drepung Monastery.   

**Q:**  How many tratsang (colleges) are there in Drepung Monastery?   

**A:**  In Drepung, originally there were supposed to be seven tratsang. However, later several tratsang could not function as fully as a tratsang, but though about three or four times a year they meet and function. But they still had abbots. And they more or less became the abbot of the labrang, rather than the tratsang itself.   

**Q:**  And these names are?   

**A:**  These are Gomang and they have the Loseling. And in Gomang they also have Düwa. And in Loseling there is Gyepa and Shagkor.   

**Q:**  Do you know how they're spelled?   

**A:**  Duwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ], Gyepa [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] and Shagkor [Tib. ཤག་སྐོར]. In addition to these three, then we have Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང], Loseling, [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] and Deyang [Tib. བདེ་ཡངས]. These are the four tratsang normally functioning in Drepung as tratsang.   

**Q:**  And each one has an abbot?   

**A:**  So everyone of them are headed by an abbot and the number of monks differ. Now, for instance, Loseling late in the 50's probably had about, more than about 7,000 monks. Though Drepung said they had about 7,700 monks, that was the number of monks in Drepung, but Drepung's numbers later showed it was over 10,000 monks. And then of course the structure of the tratsang ... then of course above the tratsang there are tsogchen [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] . The general assembly tsogchen is there. And the tsogchen was headed by the khempo tripa [Tib. མཁན་པོ་འཁྲི་པ] (abbot-chairman), the senior-most abbot of Drepung. He was called tripa, sort of chairman. So he was ... so he even was the senior-most. So it always was one of the ex-abbots of one of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  So it should be an ex-abbot?   

**A:**  Always an ex-abbot of the tratsang, khensur [Tib. མཁན་ཟུར]. So the senior-most ex-abbots would be the senior-most khempo of Drepung. So the senior-most khempo of Drepung would be the Drepung Tripa [Tib. འབྲས་སྤུང་འཁྲི་པ]. Not necessarily, sometimes the khempo tripa can resign. When you resign, the next one will be the most senior, otherwise   

**Q:**  So the tsogchen consists of all the khempo and ex-abbots?   

**A:**  Tsogchen consists of all the khempo and ex-abbots, and all the monks.   

**Q:**  All the monks?   

**A:**  All the monks. So all the monks ...   

**Q:**  So that's the whole monastery?   

**A:**  The whole monastery. And they meet in the morning.   

**Q:**  So how is the administration managed?   

**A:**  Tsogchen administration, there are two parts. That would be ... actually I think there are three parts. The day to day activities of the monastery was decided by the laji, and/or sometimes it is Rigji [Tib. རིགས་སྤྱི] (governing committee). And the discipline part of it was managed and looked after by the shengo (discipline officer). The economic part of it was looked after by jiso (economic officer).   

**Q:**  The jiso?   

**A:**  Jiso.   

**Q:**  And how many laji are there? Four laji?   

**A:**  There are three different laji: senior, junior, and medium laji. But whenever they need only the senior laji and not junior and medium laji would not meet. The senior laji consisted of all the abbots and ex-abbots of the monastery, headed by the khempo tripa. And on top of that there was shengo, two shengo, and a tsogchen umdze (assembly chant master), the chanting master.   

**Q:**  Who appointed the shengo?   

**A:**  The government.   

**Q:**  The government?   

**A:**  The Norbulinga appoint the shengo. And in the laji there are, in addition to the shengo, there is the tsogchen umdze. And on top of that, two jiso. In addition to that, phobrang depa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ].   

**Q:**  Who appointed the jiso?   

**A:**  Jiso was appointed by the government, but I think the government has to sort of stick to the candidates of what the tratsang says. So there are two jiso, and the period of a jiso I think was six years, or, I don't remember. So the jiso are appointed by the government because they enjoy the rank of the tsidrung.   

**Q:**  And they are in charge of the shiga?   

**A:**  They are in charge. Most of the monastery shiga are under jiso control. But some shiga are under control of the laji, and some under rigji.   

**Q:**  What is a rigji?   

**A:**  Rigji consists of the six abbots. Six abbots of the monastery. Six present abbots. Ngagpa is not included. Ngagpa does not have rigji at all. So I do not know why, but Ngagpa is not included. And rigji means there is a festival in the monastery called rigtra.   

**Q:**  Can you spell that for me?   

**A:**  Rigtra [Tib. རིག་གྲྭ]. It comes during May of the Tibetan calendar. The Tibetan sixth month. So in rigtra, a lot of offerings have to be made, and these are made by one of the abbots. So each one of these abbots' tenure in the office is six years. Every six years they make the offerings of the rigtra, and then they become ex-abbots. Or if they get extra, one more tenure, they stay another six more years. So when all the six abbots join together, the organization is called rigji. They have some shiga too. And they give a lot of lending money.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  The rigji has more business in lending money. And doing things like that, rigji has. And the laji I think they have less money. And the lajis' shiga originally I think had more than the jiso's. So it remained there.   

**Q:**  Jiso is spelled how?   

**A:**  Jiso [Tib. སྤྱི་སོ]. The jiso are appointed, recommended by the two senior tratsang; Loseling and Gomang, so it then goes to the government and is approved there.   

**Q:**  So the jiso is controlled by Loseling and Gomang?   

**A:**  Not controlled by Loseling and Gomang, but individual shagtsang have control.   

**Q:**  Individual shagtsang?   

**A:**  In a shagtsang, one monk will become jiso. And the one who becomes jiso will remain jiso for a very long time. So he becomes jiso and when his tenure is over, then his younger, and then junior and junior will become jiso. So for instance, as long as I was in Drepung, for almost nineteen years, at that time the Loseling jiso was the Phara [Tib. ཕ་ར] jiso, and Gomang jiso was the nicknamed, "tiger with torn up mouth, Takhare[Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ], and they never changed it. So I don't know before that.   

**Q:**  Did these jiso have names?   

**A:**  They were called the east and the west [Tib. ཤར་ནུབ]. Phara Jiso is the individual shagtsang's name. And the shagtsang's name is Jiso. And the house is also called Phara Jiso. So even today in India those people are called Phara Jiso.   

**Q:**  The next level of organization is the tratsang level?   

**A:**  Then the tratsang level. The tratsang level also has all the, as I mentioned, like a tsogchen, and the discipline part is taken care of by the gegö, (disciplinary officer), and the economic part is take care of by the chabu(treasurer) as well as the bungdzö. Now there are again two different organizations here. chabu are appointed by the government, after the [????] [unclear] incident of 1921, then the chabu was appointed by the government, and for individual tratsang, they appointed bungdzö. Now most of the shiga were then in the hands of chabu, and a large amount of shiga are still in the hands of bungdzö.   

**Q:**  Bungdzö, can you spell that?   

**A:**  Bungdzö [Tib. སྦུག་མཛོད]. Even at Loseling there are twenty, twenty-three khamtsen (residential dormitory). Out of those there are three big khamtsen , and then there are six   

**Q:**  The big one's are which?   

**A:**  Kongpo, Tsawa, [Tib. ཚ་བ] and Phukhang [Tib. ཕུ་ཁང]. So they have a chabu each. So then the middle one and the junior one I think they claim and then they go to bungdzö. I think there are four bungdzö, and whether the khamtsen appoint by terms, I don't know. I think they do it by terms. So the bungdzö are there too. So the bungdzö meet separately, they function independently, without consulting chabu. chabu function independently, but they have the most money.   

**Q:**  But it just depends on which one has more money?   

**A:**  Chabu has much more money than the bungdzö, but bungdzö do very well, too.   

**Q:**  Do chabu and bungdzö both have shiga, or is it mostly   

**A:**  They have shiga. chabu have shiga and loan, everything. And bungdzö also have a little shiga. I think they don't have loans. And still chabu have much more money than a bungdzö does.   

**Q:**  Now each of the chabu have responsibilities to give the assembly tea, mangja [Tib. མང་ཇ] and tonggo (expenses for ritual) and these kind of things?   

**A:**  No. A chabu is responsible for a certain amount of mangja and tonggo throughout the year, in combination, not individually. The chabu as an office. Not the individual monk, but all of them together. The chabu was headed by the khempo chandzö (abbot's treasurer).   

**Q:**  I didn't understand that. People mentioned that. That's appointed by the government?   

**A:**  No, khempo appointed. The khempo himself appoints them. Khempo chandzö is appointed by the khempo and the chabu is headed by the khempo chandzö.   

**Q:**  What does that mean? I mean, what does he do? Does he have any power or is that just in name?   

**A:**  No, no. He has power. It depends on the individual person, because he has equal rights to go there and poke his nose in. Because they will go around, he can say anything he wants to. And also they are headed by a khempo. Chabu cannot make a lot of independent decisions without consulting the khempo. And sometimes the khempo does not get along well with the chabu and khempo try to kick chabu out and there are a lot of incidents between them.   

**Q:**  The chabu's power is from economics?   

**A:**  Chabu's power is mostly economic power. And the bungdzö's is also economic power. Administrative power of the monastery, chabu doesn't have much, but everything has to deal with money, so they have to decide.   

**Q:**  And how are the khamtsen organized? These chabu are appointed by khamtsen , right?   

**A:**  Each chabu areâ ... the list is prepared by khamtsen. Phuchag [Tib. ཕུ་ཕྱག] is prepared by Phukhang Khamtsen and Kongchag [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྱག] by Kongbo Khamtsen . And khamtsen s themselves will function again. khamtsen 's economic power is controlled by the tsondu. Tsondu is the senior monks, they get together. They decide.   

**Q:**  In the khamtsen ?   

**A:**  In the khamtsen . It is all controlled by tsondu. But day to day economic activities were controlled by jigen [Tib. སྤྱི་རྒན] (managerial official). Not the khamtsen gegen, but the jigen. And jigen is responsible to the tsondu. And the khamtsen gegen is responsible for discipline. The officials of the khamtsen are the jigen, khamtsen gegen, and the nyerba [Tib. གཉེར་པ] (manager), and the chuma jama [Tib. ཆུ་མ་ཇ་མ] (water-carrier/tea-maker).   

**Q:**  Now how do people become officials? Do they usually become officials first in the khamtsen and then they go up to the tsogchen?   

**A:**  Not necessarily. I think through the shagtsang they go, mostly.   

**Q:**  Why don't you explain about the shagtsang?   

**A:**  Shagtsang is ... the rich monks ... they have their ... its like a lawyer's firm. They have their juniors. You know, the lawyer's, they have their juniors to go and do their junior job and like accountants, they also have their juniors. So the shagtsang's, they have their juniors, and the juniors and seniors share the same pocket.   

**Q:**  How do they organize themselves? How do they reproduce themselves over time?   

**A:**  Everybody knows that when the senior goes, become senior. Then the junior, the junior will become   

**Q:**  Well, where do they get the juniors from? How do they reproduce, meaning, like, in the households,[Tib. མི་ཚང], a woman marries and ...   

**A:**  No, that's true, but in the monastery its different. Sometimes they pick out the nephews and things like that who have to become a monk, sometimes they pick out some junior monk who they are not blood related to whatsoever. But in the monastery there is a system called gidru, every junior monk has to have his own sort of gegen or guide, or sort of a guarantee in the monastery. So the guarantor is responsible for this newcomer, for his discipline, for his food, for his clothes. So some of them, just incidentally, completely incidentally, that a rich shagtsang monk, one of the rich monks who belong to a rich shagtsang has to pick up one junior all of the sudden. So this junior, I mean one young monk, automatically becomes a junior in his shagtsang. Unless he misbehaves with the senior and is kicked out or something. Otherwise, its more or less   

**Q:**  How come its always the rich people who get to keep them? You told me its only the rich people?   

**A:**  Poor or rich. It doesn't matter. Its all seniors, they have to pick up the juniors, and they have to see that they wear decent clothes, and eat decent food, and see that he doesn't die out of hunger. That's their responsibility.   

