# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0019.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Mingyur [tib. མི་འགྱུར]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Mönkhang, Mag Xiang, Panam, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 2000  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Mingyur [tib. མི་འགྱུར]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 62  
**Date of Birth:** 1938  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Mingyur was from a middle income shungyuba treba household in Düjung county that had large land holdings and was classified as middle class status during the Democratic Reforms. In this interview, he discuses how as a youth he spent several years studying reading and writing with a relative in Gyantse in preparation for eventually becoming the household head and how at age 16, he began conducting business hiring out to transport goods for traders using his family's donkeys and mules. He talks in detail about the traditional donkey transport business. He discusses his falling in love with a woman from a "logjöpa" or reactionary household and the pressure put on him not to marry her because of her logjöpa status. He also talks of struggle sessions in which he participated, about life during the Mutual Aid Team and commune periods, and about the destruction of a local nunnery. Finally, he discusses reactions to the death of Mao Zedong and compares life during the era of democratic reforms and the cultural revolution with that of the Old Society.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0019_01/OR_0019_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I was from a treba household which was under Düjung county. My family was classified as middle class farmers during the democratic reforms. In the beginning, our lands and animals were not confiscated by the government, but they confiscated the land and animals from the ngadag, ngatsab, and the logjöpa classes. We middle class farmers could give land and animals to the government if we did not want them, and our family did voluntarily give away about five to six khe of land to some of our relatives and friends who lived in the upper villages. In our village, there was only one household, my wife's family, which was confiscated by the government. My wife was from the headman's [tib. གེམབོ] household. It was classified as high class and was considered to be from the logjöpa class at that time. The government took away most of their land, animals, house, and other property. They were expelled from their main house and were made to stay in the place where they used to keep animals. We had already fallen in love then. When we lived together afterward, the leader of the village criticized my conduct of marrying a woman who belonged to the logjöpa class. I told them, "I am a bad person. I have already fallen into the mud pit, and there is nothing that I can do about it." There were others in the village who also criticized me and some of them hated my behavior. When some of them criticized me too much I would get angry and argue back. People were saying that one needed to find a "comrade" [a good marriage partner who belonged to the poor class], but I did not find a "comrade." Instead, I married a woman from the logjöpa class. However, I was not afraid about my marriage. I did not believe that I would be arrested for this reason or that I would be accused at a struggle session. I always took an active part in political education sessions and I was very capable of speaking and reporting my thoughts. So I thought I could handle this problem. Sometimes I felt that if they treated me very badly by arresting and beating me, I would take my wife and escape to a foreign country, since I had been to Yadong, Dingri and other border areas in the past and knew the roads to India very well. Therefore, I was not really afraid about their criticisms. Some people in the village treated me well and did not say anything to me. I still appreciate their understanding. When people said something to me regarding my marriage, I always responded to them honestly. I had close relations with my wife before her house was sealed by the government. When she and her family were thrown out of their main house, I felt very sorry for her and hoped I would be able to give some food to her. Even if I could give her a handful of roasted barley grains, I would feel better. In fact, when we went to a meeting together, I did secretly give her a handful of roasted barley. When the commune was established, we already had gotten married and had several children. In the beginning, they didn't let me join the commune because I was middle class and my wife was from the logjöpa class. Since we had one ox, one dzo and fifteen khe of land, I felt that it didn't matter whether they let us in or not. Just before that, the head of our village had been treating me very well and he also treated my wife's family well. Consequently, he was accused of not listening to the Communist Party. It was also said that he did not report his work information about the higher class, the logjöpa class and the middle class to the authorities, and that he made decisions about these classes without making reports. He was removed from his position and some of his property was confiscated. The new head of the village said to me that they wanted to keep the purity of the commune, which meant that they did not want to include those higher classes in the commune. I did not say anything about this. One of my relatives was also not allowed to join the commune. Later, my relative came to me and he said, "They are saying that the door of the commune has opened so we should go to ask them to let us join the commune." I agreed with him. So one night when we went to a meeting in the village, I told the leader, "Now the door of the commune is open to everyone. It is being said that the commune is a golden bridge to the good life and we would like to walk through this golden bridge with the other people. Please let us join the commune." They agreed to our request and let us in. So we gave all of our land, animals and farming tools to the commune. At the same time, we also lost the rights to our land and animals. Before the commune, it was the Mutual Aid Team period. During that time in our village, seven or eight households were organized as one group that worked together. We helped each other with transporting manure to the fields and adding new soil to the fields. The work load was not heavy. At the same time, we could drink lots of barley beer and butter tea, and people had a good time. At first, the households had a choice whether or not to sell grain to the government. Then the yield of each field per mu was determined [by the government] and the households had to sell a certain portion of the total yield. Later, they actually gave us a quota. By this time, whether households were poor or rich, they had to sell a lot of grain to the government. The high quotas combined with bad years (for harvest) made people's lives very difficult. Some of the rich families had very hard times and did not have much left for themselves. Our family also experienced hard times at the end of the Mutual Aid Team era. My wife and I fed some tsamba to our children and we had tsamba soup ,which contained a lot of water but little tsamba. I remember that one day our family had to live without any tsamba at all to eat. Since so many people's faces were swollen due to lack of food, the government provided a kind of bean [tib. ཏྲེམ] to the people. These beans could be boiled and eaten. But they did not give any to our family. The other high class households also did not get the beans. So sometimes, we had to borrow several jin of tsamba from my relatives and sometimes the government provided about twenty-eight jin of barley as welfare. At the same time, I was sent to work digging a new irrigation canal called the "New Liberation Irrigation Canal [tib. jingdrü kasar [བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ་ཁ་གསར])" in Panam. I was one of the best workers from our village. Since I steadily worked on building the canal, they gave me one khe of barley. At the beginning of the commune, my wife and I were the main labors in our family. Our children were not grown up. My family earned less work point grain because of this lack of labor. Since each year we received only twelve khe of "ration grain" per person and two people had to feed four children, we had quite a hard time with our livelihood. Later, at end of the commune, our children had grown up and our grain from work points had increased. Just before the commune started, my wife and I split from my natal family because we had fifteen members in our family and could not work together well. So we told them that my wife and I would like to live independently. They agreed with our decision. We did not actually fight at that time. My parents' family and my family had good relations after the partition. During the Mutual Aid Team period, our family had two cows, one dzo and two donkeys, and our other conditions were good. I was a little worried about what would happen in the future and whether we would be able keep our own land. We mainly worked at farming and our livelihood was not that bad. However, I did not have any particular thoughts of having this and that. After all lands and animals were given to the commune, I was worried about what would happen to us. It was said that our country was a socialist country and all people needed to eat from one pot. Therefore, I thought in the future that we would live like the military. I thought that we would have tea, but we would not be able to have barley beer. I thought we would be just like those government cadres and that we might get together to drink hot water, eat vegetable dishes, and have broth. During the democratic reforms, the government sent monks and nuns to their homes and also encouraged monks and nuns to become "comrades" [to marry]... I thought that was not good and also wondered why the government was eliminating religion. At that time ordinary people like us could still practice religion privately. During the cultural revolution all religious objects, such as statues, scriptures and other related things, were confiscated by the red guards who were mostly from our villages. The first struggle session that I saw was in Düjung xiang. The former district head [tib. dzongpön] of Düjung District had treated the serfs badly and was the target of that struggle session. Several families who had suffered unjust treatment by him accused him. One of them said, "Why didn't you treat me fairly during the trial, even though the truth was on my side? Now the People's Liberation Army has arrived here. The situation has changed dramatically. Our sun has risen and yours has set." Then he took off one of his shoes and slapped the former district head's face. After that, whenever they called meetings, I was always scared because whenever I saw a table in the middle of the meeting place, I knew that meant there would be a struggle session and someone would be accused and beaten. Usually the people who were accused had their arms tied tightly behind their backs and would be lined up in front of the people. Then the person who was going to accuse them would stand up from amongst the people and start to criticize the accused people one by one. They would accuse them saying that so and so made a loan to me and took this and that much interest from me, or so and so forced me to do lots of corvée labor and work for him. If someone was the servant of a previous lord, he would say to his lord, "In the past, you people would always eat meat, but we could eat meat only a few times a year. You people lived in big and good houses, but let us live in small and bad rooms. Why didn't [you] give us meat and eat equally? Why didn't you let us live in a big room? Nowadays our sun has risen, and we can eat and drink equally, just like putting water into a washbasin. Now your sun has set." I felt that the way they accused people was not right. Since I had read some Buddhist scriptures secretly, the present situation matched with what was said in the scriptures. For example, in the scriptures it was said that lust would destroy religion and its body. However, I had to keep my mouth shut because middle class farmers were disliked by some people. It was said that the middle class was like the dung of sheep on a door sill and a grass on the grassland [tib. ཐེམ་པའི་སྒང་གི་རིལ་མ་དང་སྤང་རི་སྒང་གི་རྩ], that is to say, wherever the wind blew it, [the dung or grass] would fall in that direction. If they (middle class) thought a foreign country was good, they would go after it and if they thought our country was good, then they would follow our country. When I was a child, my parents asked a private tutor to teach me to read and write Tibetan. My parents were really good and my family was upper class. Since my wife's class was the object of a struggle session, I did not feel comfortable with the struggle sessions and always wondered what would happen in the future. My wife was classified as the "child of the reactionary class" [tib. ཕུཏྲུ], so she was not subjected to struggle sessions. However, when there was a meeting in the production team, she was asked to work without receiving any work points. I told her that she did not need to work like this because according to the Communist Party's policy, if one did not get payment for one's work performance, he or she did not need to work, or if one did not work, he or she would not get the payment. This was called the system of "distribution according to work." But she was a timid person and did not listen to me. Well, I was different from her and I somehow knew the government policy. And I also knew if one did this, his action was in violation of the policy. And if he did that, it was okay with the policy...   

**A:**  [Continued] During the Cultural Revolution, I was unable to burn butter lamps for religious purposes because of my family's poor economic condition. But I heard that some people in the village secretly burned butter lamps. For example, they hid the butter lamp in a pot and then covered it so that no one could see the light of the lamp. No red guards came to my house or to the other middle class households to search for and confiscate religious objects. However, the production team asked all middle class, logjöpa class and upper class households to destroy a nunnery near to our village. It took three to four days. Though I thought it was not good to destroy the nunnery, I could not do anything about it, but had to follow what they asked me. We had fifteen to twenty people who went to tear down the nunnery. The production team sent one of their leaders who was from the lower class to watch our work. While we were working, no one said anything about his or her thoughts. We all did not work very hard because it was not our wish to destroy the nunnery. When Mao died, some people in the village felt very sad and some of them cried. For us, we did not feel sad nor did we feel happy about his death. At that time, Mao's name was so famous that there was no way to say anything about him. It was like the Tibetan saying that, "Though a horn has grown on the head of King Lang Dharma [9th century, the last king of the Tibetan empire], there was no way to say anything about it [tib. རྒྱལ་པོ་གླང་དར་དབུ་ལ་དབུ་རྭ་འཁྲུངས་སྟེ, འཁྲུངས་ནས་ཟེར་ས་མི་འདུག]." So I did not tell anyone my true feelings about Mao's death. However, we had to take off all the bells from the donkeys' necks because the sound of the bells did not fit the sad atmosphere. We were also told that during the memorial meetings, we needed to shed tears for Mao's death. Since the tears would not flow from my eyes naturally, I had to put some saliva on my eyes secretly. I saw some people cry so painfully that they actually fainted. It seemed as if they had lost their parents or a close relative. During the democratic reform and the commune eras, when they criticized me severely, I thought that I would flee to a foreign country. Since I was not a real enemy for them, if I decided to go, I thought I would be able to make it. However, if they treated me good, I thought I would stay here. In fact, sometimes they treated me badly, and sometimes they treated me good. So I was not really desperate to leave my village. There were some people who fled to a foreign country and there were some people going back and forth between the foreign country and Tibet. From our area, two ngatsab who used to be ngagpa fled to a foreign country. I had a friend from another village who fled to India and then later came back to this area. When my friend came back from India, he stayed at my house. I asked him whether anyone stopped him on the way and he replied, "There was no one stopping me, and I will go back again." Then I asked him, "From our area two people went to a foreign country. Did they go with you? Here the red guards are making accusations that these two persons had guns and lots money. Did you find they actually had guns and a lot of money?" He said, "Yes, they were with me, but they did not have any guns nor a lot of money. Each of them only had fifteen yuan. Both of them were very clever. We had some difficulty with running out of tsamba on the road. Otherwise, things went well." So then I asked him how he went and what were the exact roads. He told me in detail about how to make the trip, which roads I should go through, and how to avoid the People's Liberation Army soldiers. I knew he used to live on this side of the border mountain, and that he had a lot of relatives and friends on the other side of the mountain. He told me that some day if I had to flee, I could contact his relatives on the other side of the mountain. He also told me their names. I said if I needed to I could contact them. Shortly after that, my friend went back to the foreign country. If they subjected me to a struggle session, I was all ready to flee to a foreign country. But they did not actually do that to me. Instead, the leaders of our production team asked me to attend the meetings, and they consulted with me about how much milk or butter a cow would produce in a year, and how much wool a sheep would produce etcetera. So in front of the lower and middle class people, I was able to tell them my estimation which was usually very accurate and close to their calculation. Though they did not praise me, they did not say many bad things to me. In fact, they liked me. However, I planned to flee to a foreign country if I needed to. My plan was that I would first say I had a serious pain in my hands and legs. I would pretend to be sick and stay at home for a while. Then, I would tell the production team that I wanted to go to some place to use the hot springs bath there to cure the pain, and I would ask for a leave of one to two months. I would also tell them that I would take my wife and three children (at that time I had three children) with me so that they could nurse me. Finally, I would take my wife and children and beg for food on the way as we fled to the foreign country. I had been to many border areas such as Dingri, Zhamu, and Gampa. Therefore, I was familiar with the routes. I did not tell my secret plan to anyone because it was very dangerous, but when I told my wife, she was very scared and told me not to do it, that we would not be able to escape. She said that if we were caught, we might be beaten and even killed. I said to her that we would not be caught because I knew the road and knew a place to stay. During the democratic reforms, I never thought that the Dalai Lama who fled to India would get the help of foreign countries and come back to take control of Tibet. I knew that he would not able to return to Tibet. There were people who returned from the foreign country who had been treated badly. My friend came back and he told me all of those stories. He was not treated badly on his return because he lived in a border area and I guessed things might not be strict for them. For me I had a better life during the old society because we had land. For others it was very difficult to tell because some of them had a house full of grain and plenty of meat, but others did not have anything. After the old society, we also had a good time in the mutual aid period because everyone got plots of land, and everyone had food to eat and barley beer to drink. Plus there was not much public grain tax [tib. སྤྱི་འབྲུ, ch. gong liang] and selling grain quota tax [tib. ཚོང་འབྲུ, ch. shang ping liang]. Usually, after the harvest, they would come to each household and ask the yield, and the percentage of public grain and selling grain quotas would be based on the actual yield. We did not give much public grain to the government and we had the choice of whether to sell or not to sell the selling grain to the government during the first two to three years. The commune period was the worst time for me because in our family there was not enough food to eat. In addition, the public grain and selling grain quotas were not based on the actual yield, and by that time, they were very high. The individual households had no choice. They were saying that our yield per mu should exceed the standards of the Yangtze River and the Yellow River. In fact, with our conditions, it was impossible to exceed those standards. Today, the yield per mu is at maximum eight or ten times the seed. After the land division, our family has enjoyed a good living standard. In the old society our family did not have much meat to eat, though I did not prefer to eat meat. Today, I still do not like to eat meat. I consider eating meat as a sin because you kill those live animals first and then eat their meat. I also stopped drinking barley beer twelve years ago. And I do not eat eggs and pork. I usually drink butter tea and have broth. Whether one eats meat or not really depends on one's own mind. If you keep eating meat, your desire to eat meat will be more and more. But if you stop eating meat, it is possible that you can have foods without meat.   

