# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview H.0236.01  
##  : with Taring, Tsering Yangdzom [Tib.འཕྲེང་རིང, ཚེ་རིང་དབྱངས་རྩོམས] also: Betty Taring   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Rajpur, , India  
**Date of Interview:** 28 March 2006  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Tsarong Paljor  
**Name:**  Taring, Tsering Yangdzom [Tib.འཕྲེང་རིང, ཚེ་རིང་དབྱངས་རྩོམས] also (Betty Taring)  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Betty Taring was the daughter of the famous Tsarong Dzasa and the wife of George Taring. In this interview she discusses her family's history and how the name Tsarong came into being. She describes her early life, her four years of school at Mount Hermon in India and her betrothal and marriage to George Taring. The interviewee completed four years of school until about the age of 16 years when she was married to George Taring. The interviewee goes into great detail about the marriage and betrothal (longchang) ceremonies that took place.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0236_01/H_0236_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What is your name?   

**A:**  My name is Betty Taring   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  Seventy-Eight.   

**Q:**  What is your lopta [animal year]?   

**A:**  I wonder what the animal year is...my mother told me I was born in 1928, October 23.   

**Q:**  Okay.   

**A:**  So my age must be around seventy-eight and three or four months old...turning seventy-nine soon.   

**Q:**  First, I want to ask is that since you are from the Tsarong family, whether this was from your father's or mother's side? Also how exactly did the Tsarong family originate?   

**A:**  You mean the name Tsarong?   

**Q:**  Yes, some people say Tsarong family first originated from a physician, etc. There was a lot of talk like that, right? What have you heard about its origination?   

**A:**  Tsarong is a place near Sakya, but I havent been there. So the name Tsarong was already there. Our ancestors are...It is said that my father was a person from Phenpo. One version states that he was the child of an arrow maker from Phen. Another version states that he was the illegitimate child of the Lhagyari Trichen. So I have heard something like this, but according to most of the books written about father by foreigners, every one has written that he was the child of a man who made arrows. So even we considered that is the case. Nevertheless, if you asked particularly about Tsarong, then the name Tsarong was there from an early time. If it is said that we are descendants of Yuthok Yönten Gompo, this confuses and creates two problems. How this comes about is that our mother's mother is Yuthok's daughter. So it is said that we are his descendants, or it is said that we are Yuthok Yönten Gompo's desendants? So these two things get confused and mixed up. When one tries to see which one its it, it gets quite problematic. So I asked my late mother and she said, "we consider that we are descendants of Yuthok Yönten Gompo and we do not consider that we are Yuthok's ancestor because Yuthok's daughter came to our Tsarong's family as a bride. There is however a relationship through the mother. If we consider how the relatioship with Yuthok Yönten Gompo first originated, it seems that our grandfather's ancestor was a physician [Tib. མེམཔ] and that this physician used to take medicine on his back and went to see the sick. [On one such occasion] its said that he met a Dremo [bear]. The [Dremo] through his gestures, insisted and guided him [to some place]. When he went there, there was a very sick male Dremo. Then through gestures, they asked for medication and our ancestor gave some medicine and it seems that the [dremo] was cured. So the [Dremo] invited the physician and nearby there was a dead nomadic-like person who had braided hair with the turquoise on his hair. Even today we can see such people; people from the Hor and Northern areas. The Dremo plucked off the turquoise and offered it to our ancestorial doctor. Since then the name Yuthok Yönten Gompo came into being. Yönten Gompo was already the name of the doctor and Yuthok came into being since the Dremo plucked and offered him the turquoise. It can't be offered just like that since it had to be plucked from the hair of the Dremo and offered to the doctor. That's how Yuthok Yönten Gompo came into being and that's what our late Tsarong grandmother told us when I asked about it.   

**Q:**  What I want to ask now is that when you were at Tsarong House.... What are the things that you remember when you are around 5,6,7 years of age before going to school?   

**A:**  When I was young, I was born to my mother in Taring. She and the Taring mother had the same father. About ten months after I was born, my mother said, "I am young and it's not just one child because if I give birth to more children then I might upset my sisters also and it won't be pleasant. So I want to go out from here so please plan my future. I don't want to stay at Tsarong. I have already given birth to one child, so nothing can be done about that. But if I stay like that, my sisters will have more children and I will also give birth and then later there won't be a pleasant relationship among the sisters. I want to go and so sister, please plan my future [drotang so ro nang]". So she seems to have said that. There was a large gap of sixteen years between the Tsarong mother and my mother, and she appears to have considered her like a mother because their mother died when they were young. So mother [Tsarong] said "Alright, but I am not going to let you take the girl. I will keep her. If you have the wish to marry and leave we cannot stop you, but I will keep and bring up this little girl." So she said she would not let me go. So I stayed at Tsarong. Taring mother and the younger mother [maternal aunt Jangchup la also known as Anela] (both of whom were daughters from Tsarong) were sent together at one time as a bride to the Gyantse Taring family. So I stayed at Tsarong right? I couldn't remember the days spent at Tsarong from the age of ten months on, isn't it? If I were to tell you what I remember, I can sort of remember things when I was around three years old. I seem to have faint memories, but then it seems that I don't remember; then again I seem to remember some things clearly. Around the time of three years old, I recall that I was very demanding and smart. My brother in Tsarong [Damdul Namgyal or George], my sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Kunsang Lhakyi, later married to Shatra] and me, we were the only ones [at Tsarong House]. Horkhang aunt's children stayed at Horkhang [Tsarong's makpa Dasang Dramdul had children from Lady Horkhang who was also a daughter of Tsarong]. There were many children; around seven children. When I was born, [Horkhang] had already given birth to four or five children. So all the children didn't come [to Tsarong House]. We were the only ones staying at Tsarong House; Tsarong brother [George], sister [Kunsang Lhakyi] and myself. If I misbehaved and did whatever, Tsarong grandmother [mother] pampered and cared for me a lot and told my brother and sister not to bully me as my mother was far away from here. At that time Gyantse was far away, since we had ride on a horse for like ten days. So it seems that they regarded that to be a great distance. She used to say, "Her mother is far away and so don't bully her". So she used to protect me a lot. My brother and sister allowed me to do what I wanted and cared for me a lot. They never scolded me. So that's one thing I remember. Then when I reached around five or six years old, brother and sister were not there. When I asked where they had gone, it was said that they went to an English School. So I was the only child in Tsarong House. My brother and sister were not there. This is one thing I can remember. Then after sometime, father and mother were not there also. There was just me, Nyerpa (steward) Wangyal la and an attendant Drönyer la, who was nicknamed as Mr.Goat.   

**Q:**  Billy goat?   

**A:**  Yes, Billy Goat. So only the three of us were there in the house. The main person was Nyerpa Wangyal who offered food, and there was also sister Sonam Drolma there. Anyway, brother, sister, father and mother, none were there.   

**Q:**  Who was the maidservant at that time?   

**A:**  The maid servant was Tsechok. Earlier she looked after sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> and then looked after me also. Sister was four years older than me...   

**Q:**  [Sorry battery was down earlier]...Anyhow now what I want to ask is what kind of games did you used to play during that time in the household?   

**A:**  Do I have to tell what I said earlier?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  There were many different types of games. There was a game called 'Boli.' You know, everybody knows about Boli.   

**Q:**  I don't know much, only that you have to make a hole in the ground.   

**A:**  Yes. You make a hole and throw coins. The one who is watching it, tells you where to hit. If six or seven persons were playing, and when you throw five or six coins, then he will tell you to hit an obstacle without touching the others. If you could hit that, then you win all the money. So this game was quite involving. Then the girls skipped. They loved this skipping game. Then the real girls game was when the tree flowers first bloom around April, the flowers are very flexible and one can make them into any shape one wished. So we plucked them, attached the flowers and made ladies headgear [patru] and artificial hair [lentse] out of it. We plucked <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱང་པ] A person (nomad) from Nakchuka prefecture north of Lhasa.">changpa</a> and made changpa's hair [changpe trabzün]. So they [the girls] totally get involved in these.   

**Q:**  What is lentse?   

**A:**  Lentse is an artificial hair that we used to wear. We made it from Changpe. In any case, all the artificial hair is called lentse. For example, when they braid their hair along with the artificial hair, it's said that they wore lentse. I think lentse is a Chinese word.   

**Q:**  Oh then what about Abchu (a game made from the joint bone of sheep or goats)?   

**A:**  Yeah. I liked (Abchu). It is a fun and absorbing game. To mark your abchu, you can color them green, red or yellow. Otherwise abchu was rubbed a lot on one side and one side was made as an image of a donkey and then the other side as a horse. Then the rounded side of abchu was a sheep and the sunken side was a goat. So when you flip it, whichever stands up as goat, horse or donkey, you were not allowed to touch others and have to throw making sure not to touch anything else. So you can win according to how much you can throw. It's very involving game. There are so many different types of game of Abchu.   

**Q:**  Then what about the game thebi?   

**A:**  Thebi (Guwo). We asked for the thebi guwo from the persons who carry the dead bodies to feed the vultures. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན] The name of the corpse-cutters at Sky Burials.">tomden</a> (corpse-carriers) feed the vultures and the vultures get busy feeding on the dead body, their tail feather (guwo) were taken away from backside... [Interrupted by phone call]   

**Q:**  (back again.) So yes about abchu.   

**A:**  Yes abchu was a very absorbing game. I had lots of abchu in my biscuit cans and for the thebe (guwo), we needed vulture's tail feathers (guwo). So when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན] The name of the corpse-cutters at Sky Burials.">tomden</a> took the dead body to feed the vultures, they cut the body into slices and the vultures get busy feeding on the dead body. Then their tail feathers (guwo's) were taken out from the back and were sold. In Lhasa also, different colours of green and red guwo's were sold. Sometimes even ones made of leads were sold also. These days we cant find such thebe, how unfortunate! At one go, we played around 100 without dropping it once. It was a really involving game.   

**Q:**  Oh yes, earlier you spoke about the Chökyong [Oracle]?   

**A:**  Yes, the Chökyong. Our brother had the full Chökyong dress. He needed lots of instruments to play around with. (Should I repeat what I said earlier?)   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Brother had all the army instruments; the big drums, the dung (horn instrument), small drums and everything. He had all the sets. Father got them from Calcutta's Hall and Anderson. We use to receive it from there. We had a man named Tenpa Chödrak, a businessman at our residence. During <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལོ་གསར] New Year.">losar</a> (New Year), he used to go and keep an account of all those things which the children wanted. At that time, father asked the children what they wanted and marked it down. So the children told him whatever they wanted. Father gave everything the children desired without leaving anyone out. So brother asked for mechanical sets to make bridges and everything. You have seen that in the picture of the three of us, haven't you?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Then he fixed the screws to build bridges and did different things out of the mechanical sets. He also liked the Chökyong (<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> Oracle). There were different sets of Chökyong [costumes]; a few were long, a few had lots of feathers, but brother wanted Nechung Chökyong's dress set. Brother's oracle dress was not just a jumbled one, but it was properly made and looked exactly the same as the real one. It was given to my brother. The size fit me when I was 6 or 7 years old. Whenever brother wanted to play Chökyong in trance, I had to wear it and show it to them. Then whenever father's guests use to come, my brother put on the clothes for me and took me there. Everyone couldn't stop laughing when I tried to make the same hiccup sounds of the Chökyong, while brother pretended to be the secretary of Chökyong and I made the hiccup sounds of the Chökyong in trance while showing weird faces.   

**Q:**  Then finally you leaned back and fell down!   

**A:**  I use to shout out loud "Bod Gyalo" and then brother came and untied the knots. I made the same sound (horrrhhhhh) which my brother taught me how to do.   

**Q:**  Who else were there, didn't you need a helper?   

**A:**  Yes. Brother had two servants. Then Aunt Chökyi la and Jamyang la were there and most importantly me, but sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> was not like us, she stayed quiet most of the time.   

**Q:**  Then what about Maktse (military drills)?   

**A:**  In Maktsee also, sister (<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>) won't come. She use to tell us that she won't come. It was said that sister Shatra was a reincarnation of Chupsang Jetsun. She was different and stayed quiet all the time. Unlike us who were active all the time, she was not like that. She didn't play thebe or anything else. She didn't beat the drums either. If Sister Dikyi Drolma la and Kapshö Sedön were given drums, they use to beat them like anything.   

**Q:**  Then played the maktse.   

**A:**  Yes we played maktse. Since the household was big, we wandered around in the household and played maktse as we made noise with the drums. It was not like stupid and trivial, it was wholesome play. Brother wore the leopard skin and took the bigger drums and marched. Horkhang brother played the horn and looked very elegant...   

**Q:**  Was that Horkhang, Sonam Penpa la?   

**A:**  Yes, Sonam Penpa la was the one who played horn. He is one year older than my brother. Then all of us were like their followers.   

**Q:**  Was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> dress ordered or was the tailor called to your home to make it?   

**A:**  The master tailor Dorje la was expert at this. If given an example how to make it, he used to make everything. When the tailor came, a small-scale factory was there where they stitched and made the clothes. All the tailoring machines were there (at home).   

**Q:**  Did they stay there until the work was done?   

**A:**  Yes, they used to stay for months. Sometimes for like 2 months.   

**Q:**  Did they return home in the evening?   

**A:**  Yes. Afternoon lunch was served. Food was served only once, but tea was served from morning till evening. Then their salary was paid daily. Then our late father had a photo studio! In that, we had everything there, [such as the hypo and the things to make enlargements]. We had the material to put on your head to make it dark so you can take photos. He told us to put the [negatives] in the hypo and put it here or there and he used to say "Hypo come, Hypo come." He gave each one of us the names of the chemicals for photo processing. Procedures of picture development and enlargements were also taught to us and we also get involved in this.   

**A:**  So one which was not recorded was about the Khache Pola [a well known old Muslim guy] who was very humorous. When you just look at him, you know he is a humorous guy.   

**Q:**  Did he wear the Mongolian style dress?   

**A:**  He wore a bunch of torn clothes in a very unorganised way. He came with a bowl walking with a black beard. We called him Kache pola. When he reached here, he use to say Salam alekum. Nowadays in Urdu, they say Salam alekum.   

**Q:**  Yes Salam alekum.   

**A:**  We use to say Sala malekuk. Mele is chin and ghuk. The Tibetans just said like that..Sala mele ghuk...[ha ha ha] {she burst into laughter.}   

**Q:**  What did he have to say.   

**A:**  He had nothing to say...[Ngarang tso le gawa. Thingcho lha le min duk. Lhachin T<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>pa=gyajin.=Ngarang=tso=le=gawa.] Rigda rigda rigda...That's the luter tune... he sang like that.   

**Q:**  What exactly does it mean?   

**A:**  It was just like that... It doesn't have any precise meaning. It says: "We are so happy here that there is nothing like this in heaven [??]."   

**Q:**  Then I heard there was another guy who came?   

**A:**  Yes, Tashi Tsering...he use to sing...[la la la la la la la lala...] I don't remember what were the lyrics that he use to sing. He kept on singing that. Sister Tashi la used to care for him a lot. He made a sound and banged his head on the wall untill it bled. Everybody use to recognise him by his voice. So now I have jumped a bit here and its bit new and not during my childhood days. You shouldn't mix it up, its not good.   

**Q:**  Then others who use to come like...Lama Mani?   

**A:**  There were two different Lama Manis, Lama Mani shelda and Lama Mani khadoma. The Lama Manis didn't come all the time. They use to come during the month of Sagadawa. Every year, they came for a month. On Sakadawa from day 1 of the 4th month until day 30th, they used to come. So when the Lama Mani came, they didn't come in monk's robes, rather in a Nambu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> (wolloen robe) with a waist robe, a conical shaped <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> and a staff in his hand. Then using the staff to point, he use to tell a story. He had thangka (paintings)that told the famous Tibetan opera stories such as [Kala Wangpo, Suki nyima, Pema Wömbar, Chungpo Dönyö Thondrup]. A whole lot of these stories were told through those thangkas. People use to love these. During Sakadawa there were thousands of people going for circumambulation. At circumambulation, there were lots of Lama Manis scattered all over the place. All the people passing by took a rest and listened to the Lama Manis (tell stories) and then puts coins in the their bowl. They use to carry a box on their back, inside of which we could see small size images of different gods. I saw one statue of the Lord Buddha and then one of Milarepa also. The others I didn't take much interest in. They shut the cover back and forth and we could see certain kind of a brightness that shone from there. It was really nice. So...what else...   

**Q:**  Then what about the opera singers and dancers coming to your household?   

**A:**  During the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] The &quot;Yogurt&quot; Festival held in Lhasa to celebrate the end of the monks&#x27; summer retreat in the middle of the 5th lunar month (usually August). It was a time when Tibetan operas were performed.">Shotön</a> [Tibetan opera] period, the Achi Lhamo opera troupes used to come. Chungpa and Kyumo Lhunga were famous ones, then Gyankara also came. Opera dancers used to come to particular households. For example, for the household of Tsarong, it was Shangpa. When the Shangpa Achi Lhamo troups came, they had to offer them a special prize because they were Tsarong's Shangpa.   

**Q:**  How come Shangpa?   

**A:**  It was near Tsarong, where it originated.   

**Q:**  Shangpa? Isn't that the place called Shang?   

**A:**  Yes exactly! That was the place.   

**Q:**  That's the one in Nyemo. Isnt it?   

**A:**  No, no. Not that one. There was one household called Shang.   

**Q:**  Was it the one called Shang Ganden Chönkhor?   

**A:**  No. Not that one. Yes there was one Shang Ganden Chönkhor, but the opera dancers came according to the particular localities. There was one Tsarong Shangpa.   

**Q:**  Did they (Tsarong) sponser the clothing for the performers?   

**A:**  They did it according to the particular locality that was nearest. From Lhasa, we had to prepare the gifts along with the money gift. Otherwise nothing special had to be done.   

**Q:**  Then around what age did you go to school?   

**A:**  I can't tell you exactly, but it must have been around 8, 9 or 10. I only went for a year.   

**Q:**  Which school was that?   

**A:**  It was called Daböling. It was also called the Kire school. Both are the same. The monitor there was Ugyen la, who was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> dzasa's real uncle. Kundeling dzasa came from there and that was where his real home was. That child was raised there from an early age and served the government. So at that time the monitor Ugyen la was very famous. Most of the government secretaries and officials graduated from here. Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a>, our Taring mother and Yuthok Lhacham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ཞབས] A respectful term of address usually for monks, but also to show respect to a layman.">Kusho</a> also graduated from there. After that, there was the Tharkhang School. When the other teacher became bit unfamous, this school called Tharkhang was formed. Many students became famous in that school. Sey kusho also went there.   

**Q:**  Could you please tell us how you spent your first day at school?   

**A:**  On the first day, we had to offer scarfs and presents for all the teachers and their family. Then a mound of sugared rice with miniature sweet potatoes in a bowl had to be prepared. We offered that and tea according to the amount of students and monitors in the school. When that function was over, it was a holiday. At first, we were taught one type of prayer.   

**Q:**  What that Gang ki lodö?   

**A:**  Yes, the first prayer, Gang ki lodö, was taught.   

**Q:**  Then was the Jampeyang ... prayer taught?   

**A:**  Yes all these were taught. The problem was that there was no explanation for the words. It was like a parrot speaking out some meaningless things. Otherwise, there wasn't a thing that we were not taught including such things as the Sakya lekshey (collection of aphorisms) [Tib. ས་སྐྱ་ལེགས་བཤད]. We mucked up everything. Since we hadn't been to school, as we grew older we became more aware of the things that we needed and the importance of education. We became more responsible. Then, once we were taught after that, we could easily catch up with the things that we had mucked up. It was a big difference and very useful also. At that precise time, they didn't give any explanations.   

**Q:**  Did they offer tea and eatables when you go to school?   

**A:**  We had to go early in the morning when the stars were still visible. We were pampered since the servants use to carry us on their backs. We slept on their back and went to school.   

**Q:**  During that time did you feel like going to school or not?   

**A:**  Well, I didn't felt like not wanting to go, but yes, if I did, it kept me occupied also. We totally got involved chatting with the other kids. There was one dirty pool near our school. It got frozen during winter and it was very pleasant there. We use to slide there. When we had a one-hour break after morning prayers, we went to slide on the ice. Outside the school, the merchants and shopkeepers knew which eatables were best in demand, so there were plenty of things to buy, such as bread and milk. Those were very delicious. So we use to go into those kind of shops. We use to get bread at cheap rates [8-sholkhang bread].   

**Q:**  When you go to school, did you have a tea break after the morning prayers ?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. We had to go after that, we had a one hour break after morning prayers at around 8 o'clock. We are not supposed to stay inside the school. We went outside and had tea. There were stools to sit on outside. A few of the students use to go to slide at the frozen pond when it was winter.   

**Q:**  Were you given some daily money to use when you wanted to buy bread and other eatables?   

**A:**  Yes, we had money. A Sholkhang or Shoto were given to us.   

**Q:**  Then did you have to go back to school after it was finished?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we went back. We then had to write till lunch. After that was done, the particular households use to send the lunch. If your house was near, you can go to the house to eat. We had a 2 hour break.   

**Q:**  Where did you go for lunch?   

**A:**  Since Horkhang looked after me and it was nearby, I use to go to Horkhang with other children. Sister Dikyi Drolma la and Kasur Sedönla and I used to go together for lunch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Rinchen la was also there with this much snot hanging out.   

**Q:**  Do you have to come back after lunch for school?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you have to do only reading after that or also writing?   

**A:**  The reading was done during the morning. Then it was time for shaping one's handwriting (calligraphy). Only thing we had to do was practice writing. We had to write at least 10 lines and have the monitor look at this and correct it. We carried on like this until our handwriting became good enough and then the teacher let us write on paper. When we could write on paper, I felt very happy. At every end of the month we had exam and our teacher monitored the exam. We use to worry like anything when the teacher was there. If we didn't do well, we were hit on the cheek (theja). The boys were hit with a piece of flexible bamboo cane. This caused some of the students' skin to turn red and some shed blood where they were beaten. Some student's skin was pierced because of that. We girls would be beaten on the back. Once when Dorji la was beaten, he shit himself. [Laughs...]   

**Q:**  So they were beaten up that harshly?   

**A:**  Yes... Then kundeling, the school Awa, used to sent us with a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> to collect eatables. We pretended to be nice since he was school Awa. We gave a bit from all the different and tasty foods we had brought. The hat used to get totally full.   

**Q:**  Were all different kinds of kids allowed in the school?   

**A:**  Yes, they were, since there was no discrimination. Anybody could come, and it was only the very poor ones who were not there. There were different types of children, but most were middle class and businessmen's children.   

**Q:**  What about the seats for the children? Was there any differentiation for the upper class by giving them better seats?   

**A:**  No. Every one was treated equally, although our Tsarong brother was treated bit special. Everyone else was equal.   

**Q:**  So totally how many students were there?   

**A:**  There was no exact amount, but not less than 100.   

**Q:**  So if it was not less than 100. If we calculate majority through percentage and if there were 50% from aristocrats...   

**A:**  Well more of fat businessmen's children were there.   

**Q:**  More of them?   

**A:**  Yes. There were less from the aristocratic side. We had to bring our own square mattress and place it there and name it Tsarong or Horkhang or Shölkhang. All the schools had to place their own mattress together, piling up one upon another. Then sweepers had to sweep turn by turn. The older children in the school did the sweeping. The smaller ones didn't have to do it. When they finished sweeping, they had to place their own seats and writing boards at the front. They had to put the files in the table box and lock it and take the keys. They had very good discipline.   

**Q:**  What about the school holidays?   

**A:**  There were no holidays, but we did have off during on the last day of the month. [Nanggang]   

**Q:**  Or on day 10th?   

**A:**  No. But Bode Rinpoche wished that Nyila could die so that we could have a holiday. When somebody died, we used to have holiday.   

**Q:**  Did Bode <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིན་པོ་ཆེ] 1. Title for an incarnate lama. 2. Term of address for incarnate lamas.">rinpoche</a> also use to go there?   

**A:**  Bode Rinpoche went to another school, but I remembered him all of a sudden. He use to say "if Genla's [teacher's] Nyila [wife] would die as soon as possible, then we will have a holiday." [Laughs] So I guess there were no special holidays.   

**Q:**  Did the school meet together or go for a summer picnic or something?   

**A:**  During Sagadawa, all the students were taken for Circumambulation. Otherwise there was no particular gathering. Everybody went with their parents and if you wanted to take leave, you were allowed to take it whenever you wanted. You could ask the teacher when you needed leave, but otherwise there was no special holiday.   

**Q:**  So how long did you stay at this school?   

**A:**  For a year only.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for this short stay there?   

**A:**  I was sent to the Convent School at Mount Hermon.   

**Q:**  Around what age you were sent to the Convent school?   

**A:**  Maybe when I was around 10 or 11 years old. Oh yes, it was during the year when His Holiness first visited Lhasa and my brother joined government service. It was the year 1939.   

**Q:**  So the year 1939...?   

**A:**  Yes it was in 1939 when I first went to school. Then my brother came back after finishing his school. He stayed for a year only. I cried when he came and said that I wouldn't go if my brother was not there. So I didn't go. Later when Sister Tess la got married, I went with her and stayed at the Kalimpong School. I did weekly boarding. I stayed there for the weekdays but during weekends I went back to stay with Ashi kelsang la and Dashi Rinpoche and Lambi la. Otherwise, I stayed at school.   

**Q:**  This was in 1939?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you go to school after His Holiness left from there (Qinghai)?   

**A:**  No, no. I first went once during 1939.   

**Q:**  '39? When was it when you first went to school?   

**A:**  It was in 1940 when my sister first went to school. This was when Namla was born.   

**Q:**  Which year was it when you first went to school?   

**A:**  I first went to Mount Hermon in 1939. Later together with sister Tessla, we went for my sister's marriage. That was when Namla was born. When was it, 1941? [Asks this to Paljor la, the interviewer]   

**Q:**  It was during 1942.   

**A:**  In 1942,we went to school again. We went to my sister's marriage together. At that time Namla was already born, Norzin was yet to be born. When I came back from school, Norzin was born already and Jigme was also born.   

**Q:**  So when you first went to school. How did you go? Who went along with you?   

**A:**  At the beginning, my brother use to come. During '39!   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  At that time, my brother and Kabshö Sey and Surkhang Jigme la, [also known as] Sursur Jigme la.   

**Q:**  Oh there were several (aristocrats at) St.Joseph's... Taring George la and others... right?   

**A:**  Yes. Kapshö seykusho...during that time.   

**Q:**  Kyipo was not there?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Ok, all of them were together.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So, when you finished Tibetan school and started convent school, was it bit difficult for you to start getting use to it?   

**A:**  Wherever brother used to go, I loved going there. I loved my brother. When he wanted to go, I agreed to go also, otherwise if my brother didn't go, then I refused to go. Later, when I went with Sister Tess la, I really liked it and left happily with her since we were friendly.   

**Q:**  First you went in '39 once and then came back. After that how long did you stay?   

**A:**  Oh then I stayed for a long time in Lhasa...   

**Q:**  Without going to school?   

**A:**  I stayed for like 3 or 4 years in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Why didn't you go?   

**A:**  Until Sister Tess la got married, it seemed like there was no chance going back to India for school again. After Sister got married then...   

**Q:**  So for like 3 years you stayed there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then didn't you go to school?   

**A:**  I didn't go to school.   

**Q:**  What did you do then?   

**A:**  I stayed with father and went with him. I went along whereever he went...   

**Q:**  So was it this all about the debts?   

**A:**  Yes. He inquired about all the debts that had to be paid by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and their problems. So he tried to solve their problems and this was the kind of job he did. He went to do the nam ki dang, since lots of animals from there had died.   

**Q:**  What is nam ki dang?   

**A:**  Tang tang. There was a place called Nam between [Chushul and Lhasa]. There was a tang ... a tang was, what do you call a steep area or something. There was little space where we passed by when we were carrying wool since our major export business was wool. When we touched a single side of it, we fell down and the river carried away all the wool.   

**Q:**  So was it a path that was cut into the rock?   

**A:**  Yes into the rocks. It was cut to make it broader. At that time, construction was going on and father had to stay months and months over there. So I was with him all the time.   

**Q:**  Since lots of animals use to fall from there, was that the reason why they planned to make a bridge?   

**A:**  No, not a bridge. The tang itself was cut apart and made broader. Like over here they cut the tang and make the roads broader. So it's same like that.   

**Q:**  Okay... so you used to stay there?   

**A:**  Yes we set up tents and stayed there. The household tents were obtained from Kanpur. They were English tents which were really nice and could protect us from rain. It was really good.   

**Q:**  During that time, what do you used to do, Aunt?   

**A:**  I use to play games. I was given the work of making accounts and many other things. He used to tell me get it done and let him know.   

**Q:**  So you did some keeping of accounts?   

**A:**  Yes. Lots of work. Nowadays I am able to stand on my own feet because of my father.   

**Q:**  Were you there when they were building the Trisam [bridge]?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there when they were building Trisam. When they were building Trisam, we shifted and stayed there. At that time, the late lady Tsarong use to go for holiday to India during school holidays. For about four months, they didn't come back. Horkhang Somola came along with Dondrup Drolma la [Aunt Nancy la] I was a toddler at that time. We stayed at Trisam for a pretty long time. Taring grandfather was the Trisam project's assistant.   

**Q:**  Trisam's?   

**A:**  Yes, Trisam's. We stayed there while the Trisam bridge was being built. Later, when Trisam was about to be finishrd, Tsarong grandmother was there and Holkhang Somola wasn't there. Tsarong grandmother and we all were invited to the Tsurphu monastery. The first inauguration was done by the Regent Reting. At that time, rolls of silk were tied from one end of the bridge to the other end and Regent Reting cut the first ribbon of the silk. Then we went to Tsurphu monastery because Tsurphu Rinpoche's previous re-incarnation had been very close to father and liked him. So for around 7 days we had functions and opera shows, it was really nice. Like this time went by...   

**Q:**  At that time did Tsarong work in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> office?   

**A:**  He worked at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> mint [Trapchi Ngülkhang].   

**Q:**  So Trisam was built around that time?   

**A:**  No, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> office was later on. Much later on. The first 100 Sang note and 3 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> and 10 sang were minted by father. Gold coins [sertam] also.   

**Q:**  So in between, did Tess la got married?   

**A:**  Yes, ... I was at Mount Hermon so I came back. When I stayed there for a year, Sister Tess la and Dashö Silön loved each other. So Dashö sent lots of love letters to Sister Tess la. Other children use to come shouting "Tess la - there is letter for you." Sister had many close friends, around 7 friends. All these friends tried to take her letters. She asked me to keep the letters and not to show them to anyone else. So they loved each other and that was a very strong love.   

**Q:**  They must be knowing each other from when they were in school together?   

**A:**  Yes, they loved each other a lot. Since Dashö Silon needed to see my sister, he made excuses saying, "This girl is small and cries, so if I don't come everyday, it is not good." Since I was small, I cried and gave so much trouble to Tess and George Tsarong. So he said like I have to come and make her comfortable, but he mainly came to see her only, not me. We went back to Lhasa at the end of '39. I also left. Over there, Dashö Silon continuosly sent love letters along with gifts and jewellery. Dashö Silon was a person who had lots of respect for his mother. He would put the shoes of his mother in his Bhutanese Chupa and during parties, he bowed down and put on the shoes for her and took the dirty shoes back in his bag. And he served her a lot. What Raja Saab and Rani Saab wanted was for sister Tashi to be given to brother as a bride and for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Küsang la to come to Dashö Silon as a bride. That's what the parent's plans were. However, Dashö Silon said I want Tess la and not Kate la. He didn't want sister [Acha la] at all. So things were out of control. Then brother [George Tsarong] liked sister Tashi la. Brother had kept lots of pictures of sister, maybe around 7 or 8 pictures in his room. We shared a room together so I knew about it. At this time when brother liked her, it didn't worked out because at that time, the Bhutan king, the present king's grand Uncle, needed a wife. So they mentioned that sister Tashi la shouldn't be given to anybody else as she should be offered to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> [Pon] who is the present king's uncle. Remember there was the present king's uncle? What lord was he called ?   

**Q:**  Dashö Wangchuk, the Patro Pönlop?   

**A:**  Yes, but it was the former Patro Pönlop. At that time Wangchuk hadn't yet been born. He was the Patro Pönlop. So she had to come as the Patro Pönlop's bride and it wouldn't be proper to give her to Tsarong. So it didn't work out. So what the parents wanted didn't work out. Sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> was not wanted for Dashö Silon. Ashi Tashi was needed for brother, but this was not possible since she has to be given to the Patro Pönlop. The [Bhutan] King was very insistent so we couldn't do anything. So at that time sister Tess la was fixed to be given as a bride in Bhutan. Since sister and we had good relations and we kind of got along well, she said she wouldn't go until Betty la comes. So I came and we stayed at school.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay after you came down? Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Kalimpong Palace, Bhutan House.   

**Q:**  Ok.   

**A:**  My Goodness, the marriage ceremony was such a grand one. From the day when we left Lhasa, it lasted for a month.   

**Q:**  Why did it take so long?   

**A:**  That was because of the functions. One household had like 7 servants, 1 representative, moreover Taring mother was there.   

**Q:**  Oh, so you came down for the marriage?   

**A:**  Yes, for the marriage. There were grand functions.   

**Q:**  At Bhutan house?   

**A:**  Yes, at Bhutan house.   

**Q:**  So what was there on the path to [pheblam] the marriage?   

**A:**  There were the 1st, 2nd and 3rd requests. The 2nd Sujang at Phari was from Bhutan. Then Bhutanese came along with the Bhutan trade agent [Drug ki loja] and other women companions. It was really grand. The 2nd Sujang was at [Shasingma in Tromo] It was really wonderful. Then the 3rd one took place all around the Kalimpong market. Paper made flowers were distributed to people and monks. It was really a grand t one.   

**Q:**  Rai Dasang means?   

**A:**  Rai Bahadur.   

**Q:**  Rai Bahadur Norbu?   

**A:**  Norbu. He was the trade agent at Sharsingma. At that time it was about grain. At that time it was the 2nd [sujang]. So like that I came down and stayed with my sister.   

**Q:**  So did you stay at Bhutan House?   

**A:**  Yes I stayed at Bhutan House for 3 years.   

**Q:**  What did you do then?   

**A:**  Went to school.   

**Q:**  Which school?   

**A:**  Ashi Kelsang la, Gangtok Semo Jinla and me and Labin la, we all went to St .... what was it?   

**Q:**  Laureto Convent?   

**A:**  No, no, It was in Kalimpong school.   

**Q:**  Homes?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  At St. Augustine?   

**A:**  No, St. Augustine had not started at that time. Hmmm. It was the Convent School.   

**Q:**  Oh yes.   

**A:**  It was just below Arunachal. That time all the Bhutanese daughters used to go there. So I also went there.   

**Q:**  Down there?   

**A:**  I also went for three years. Because of that my English improved.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Not much though, but its kind of okay.   

**Q:**  You went to school over there and stayed at Bhutan house for holiday?   

**A:**  Yes at Bhutan house. During winter, the palace kids went to the Bhutan Palace to stay there. Then during summer when it rained hard and wasn't pleasant to stay there, then they came down.   

**Q:**  So you stayed at Bhutan house in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  All of us used to stay at Kalimpong. So we went back and forth.   

**Q:**  So for 3 years you stayed there?   

**A:**  Yes we stayed at kalimpong Bhutan house with sister till she gave birth to two children. That's how we got along well as we had the same kind of personality (shiga). Then when I came from Tibet, me and the late [Sey] were allowed to stay at her place for a year for which I am very thankful to her.   

**Q:**  So what did you do at Bhutan House?   

**A:**  At Bhutan hmm...   

**Q:**  By then how old were you?   

**A:**  Maybe 14,15 or 16. I was a teenager. There Rani Sahin told us to teach the students but we didn't had to teach them much. We have to help them with homework at [Changchang gong kundun]. Ashi Tashi, Ashi kelsang and Dashö Silön, all of us had to go together. [Gunsho] came from kepen together with Tsesen Kunphel la. Since Gunsho was highly qualified in education, Rani Saheb offered all the facilities of accomodation, servants and made a room above the Bhutan house. Then all the kids were offered tea and we had to teach tibetan to the kids. Dashö Silon and all others could write Tibetan and had good handwriting also. So I was told to teach also and I did as they told me to.   

**Q:**  So like that.   

**A:**  Yes during the vacation, we stayed like that otherwise we went to school. Then I had to do paintings with Ashi Kelsang even though I never felt like doing it... So when a letter was sent to father about it, he fully supported her and told us not to say no. He has written a letter to Rani Saheb mentioning that he will cover up the expense for the paintings but she has to be taught whatever she wants as she is smart and could catch up whatever she is taught. Then we taught oil paintings and stuff, so there were lots of side works and we had no time to relax.   

**Q:**  So till which grade did you go to school?   

**A:**  Till 4th grade.   

**Q:**  So you left after that?   

**A:**  Yes I left after that and went back.   

**Q:**  What was the reason to leave your schooling?   

**A:**  I had to marry then.   

**Q:**  So it was about marriage.   

**Q:**  Yes, they considered that a girl needs to get married when she is grown up and doesn't need to be taught much education. That's how Taring got me paired up with my late husband.   

**Q:**  While you reached around the age of 16 or 17 when you were at Bhutan House. When did this talk about marriage start?   

**A:**  Hmmm...   

**Q:**  So how did the decision to marry with Taring come up?   

**A:**  Since my husband was growing up, they said that he should be given as a bridegroom to Taring since Taring had two daughters [Semo] and no sons [Se]. Then there was one family who asked for him as bride groom [makpa] but he rejected it. He said he didn't want to go as [makpa], but rather wants to stay in Taring. So since my mother was [Sirpo] she said, "Okay. Now I will have to ask my daughter from Tsarong, because I have only daughters and no sons. I will have to take one [makpa] either for Ngodup Wangmo la or Yangchen la, so instead of taking from outside, George Taring <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> la will be best since he is Kunyo la's cousin also. Then Betty la is my child and if I ask my sister and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Chenmola, they wont say no also." So that's how I was called back to marry.   

**Q:**  So when was it? 19..?   

**A:**  Maybe 1945 or 1946! I forgot. Maybe 1946, because when I went back, Paljorla was already born, sorry I mean Jigmela was born. Maybe 1946.   

**Q:**  Did Reting uprising already started when you came at Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, they couldn't do i t then, but the uprising did happen. It happened when Rinpoche and my daughter were born during the Tibetan dog year. My first child was born in the dog year and was around same age as Drikung Kyabgön but Nordön la is six months younger. So it's the same.   

**Q:**  So according to Tibetan tradition, the asking for the bride [longchang] was done?   

**A:**  Longchang and everything was done.   

**Q:**  So how was the longchang done? Does some representative from Taring have to come?   

**A:**  Representative... Yes they had to talk. Mother and father goes in the household and talks then when it was agreed, longchang was done as if they were going outside.   

**Q:**  So what has to be done during longchang?   

**A:**  How grand you want to make it depends upon the girl's family. There were no demands. A noori [money] has to be offered...So in longchang, a noori has to be offered. Noori is milk. It's like when mother gives milk to the baby. So it is your wish to give how much money you want to give during longchang like 100 or 200 or 1000. Then clothes [Namsa and Kunchuk] had to be offered to each one of the families.   

**Q:**  So not only to the bride?   

**A:**  Yes, offer them all these and then put a letter and two [bakpa]...What do you call that in english?   

**Q:**  Intermediary.   

**A:**  When you deposit money in the bank... we need something, we need two persons. What do you call?   

**Q:**  Witness.   

**A:**  Yes, witness. Two witness's sign what was needed for the marriage. When Tsarong and Taring signed, then it's considered that the girl is given.   

**Q:**  So who were the witness? Was there anybody?   

**A:**  There was one called Taring Kapshö. I forgot whose was Tsarong's?   

**Q:**  Wasn't it Kapshö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> la?   

**A:**  No. no.   

**Q:**  Is it the one in Tibet right now?   

**A:**  Wait who was Tsarongs...?   

**Q:**  Maybe Delek Rabten or Namlha?   

**A:**  Maybe! I don't remember... Yes so that's how longchang was done. After longchang was done... Then the main marriage...   

**Q:**  Did you had to offer some other presents like wheat or grains during longchang?   

**A:**  Yes, a whole bunch of daily eatables has to be offered. One box of tea bags, rice, wheat, flour and that was 7 or 8 bags full and upon that the clothes [namsa kunchu] were offered.   

**Q:**  Since the talk was within the family [Nangtsa], there must not be much of formalities like other people?   

**A:**  Yes, the letter was written and already prepared. It just has to be read. On the particular date of the function, both from Tsarong and Taring side, it has to be read and then the two witnesses signed.   

**Q:**  During marriage and longchang, there was [longyig] where some high lamas write something in it. Was there something like that?   

**A:**  In Lhasa, we didn't do like that. When Sister Tess la got married and over here when they get married they do like that. We don't have such in Lhasa. When the marriage was finished we went to [Jokhang] where [Soja lama] was there and asked for blessings.   

**Q:**  How long does it takes for the marriage to get started when the longchang is done?   

**A:**  It depends. According to the time, it was done. Some does it right after that, but when mine was done, the household Tsarong got into lots of work. My clothes and Kapsho Sedon la's were both made together. So within 2 month, two girls were given as bride. One for kapsho and another one for Taring. First Kapsho Sedon la was given. She married two months earlier. After her I got married. So the household of Tsarong had to prepare or make clothes for two girls.   

**Q:**  So after longchang, how long you did you stay? Was it few months?   

**A:**  Don't really remember. Maybe few months. In Tsarong, it was very strict. We were not allowed to love and spent time with other person like the other aristocrats. Its not that we were not allowed to but it's just the way we were brought up so nicely by our grandfather that we were scared to do. It doesn't even come in our mind and we were totally clean.   

**Q:**  So how was it done during the particular marriage day? Did Taring's steward [Nyerpa] or others came early morning or came a day or two earlier and stayed at Tsarong?   

**A:**  We had to send invitation from Taring. For example if we talk about my marriage and take it as base. Otherwise most others were same like mine also. So Taring sents a representative with invitation and he had a [dhadhar]. He wore a chanda <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> with official's dress. There were like four servants wearing Soksha hat. Then the brides horse [Chipka] were brought and they have to put the saddle and Serka and all decoration has to be done. Bride's suit case of clothes were brought.When the bride is taken from there, they put on all the Taring dress and Tsarong's clothes were packed and wont let her wear it and her share was sent along with her in the suit case. Otherwise she has to wear all the Taring's dress and jewelleries when taken as bride to Taring. If you don't have, you can borrow also and give it back later on. So all the jewelleries and everything have to be borrowed from the place where bride is being taken.   

**Q:**  As far as I have heard, during longchang or marriage, the one who asked for bride, they stayed there for one or two nights.   

**A:**  Yes they stayed and were offered lunch and dinner. That was fixed according to the astrological order like around that time and date we had to leave from Taring and around that time and date, we have to leave from Tsarong. Its all done according to the astrology. Some had to stay for three or four nights and some had to stay for one night only. When I was there, they stayed for one night.   

**Q:**  Stayed for one night and then if they have to leave to Taring tomorrow morning, what did they have to do from early morning.   

**A:**  Again morning was done according to the astrology. If they have to wake up at 1, 2, or 5 o'clock according to the astrology then they have to wake up according to that. Then the throne was placed in the hall and all the family members were invited in the hall and all the servants use to come and give you goodbye scarf.   

**Q:**  Then at that time, do they sing and dance?   

**A:**  Yes, they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> [shechen] and offered Droso Chenmar. Right after that, the bride was escorted outside.   

**Q:**  So who was the one who <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> shechen. Was it from Tsarong or Taring side?   

**A:**  From the Taring side also and the Tsarong also. So when bride has to be escorted back, then Taring use to sing. Then the one wearing the officials dress use to put the scarf on the bride's ceremonial arrow [darda] which was given from Taring.   

**Q:**  Was there something to explain about it?   

**A:**  Yes, there were lots of explanatios for the Darda.   

**Q:**  So can you remember something?   

**A:**  Well I can remember when brother Tsarong took sister Yangchen la for his bride, I heard something like [Bhutsa gya yi mama dhi thong ki chenmo zöchig]That's what I heard. Kapsho <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> wrote it. It means have 100 children and become 1000 children's grandparents and stay. It means something like that.   

**Q:**  So there were some kind of proverbs?   

**A:**  Yes, they appreciated it and prayed for it. They prayed to stay till they become 100 children's mother and 1000 children's grandmother.   

**Q:**  So Chenmo zö.   

**A:**  Yes, Chenmo zöchik and shuku la dom.   

**Q:**  So what is Chenmo zöchik?   

**A:**  It means to give it to me [mdzod].   

**Q:**  Ok. So Tsarong stayed at Chögyelgang hall?   

**A:**  Yes, and after inviting down from the throne, then a [Bayoma] used to come. What do you call in English?   

**Q:**  Bride's maid?   

**A:**  Yes, a bridesmaid was needed.   

**Q:**  Who did the bridesmaid?   

**A:**  Hmmm. Our Tsarong grandfather's cousin named sister Dorjee la did. We were cousins, but distantly related cousins.   

**Q:**  So the bridesmaid was from Tsarong?   

**A:**  Yes from Tsarong. Then from Tsarong, one maidservant, one horse with all the saddles, and another servant [simpön] was also given.   

**Q:**  Then they offered the scarf?   

**A:**  Yes, they offered the scarf and then rode on horse since there was no vehicle. Horse saddle...   

**A:**  So where was the horse saddle from?   

**A:**  From Taring. Its necessary that the horse.... What do you call for the female horse?   

**Q:**  Mare.   

**A:**  Yes. A Mare has to be given. Some times they brought a newly born one and sometimes the one in the mothers womb was also fine. For me they brought one in the mother's womb. When brother took bride, again one from the womb and during Sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>'s marriage, one young horse was brought.   

**Q:**  So maybe it was necessary!   

**A:**  Yes. A young one was necessary from a family to hold the generation.   

**Q:**  Then after a goodbye from Tsarong...   

**A:**  Then I offered a scarf to Tsarong's father and mother and they offered me back. After that I had to leave.   

**Q:**  So this was sort of a sad occasion?   

**A:**  Yes, a somewhat emotional moment for both sides. Then for us it was a sad moment. I didn't have much problem since Taring mother was there, so it was fine. But for Sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> and Kasur Sedön la, they didn't knew anyone and it was arranged by their parents. They didn't have a choice since their parents arranged it and they were told to go there. So it was kind of sad for them, but for me it was fine since I knew everyone.   

**Q:**  So after leaving from there, you went to Taring's place right? Reached Taring and then on the way...   

**A:**  Then on the way..There were 1st and 2nd Suchang [Reception]. Or the ladies [cam] use to come. For me [Dode cam] was there wearing the headdress and offering [Chema]. She greeted me with Tashi Delek and offered [Chundu] on the way...   

**Q:**  Then how many receptions were there?   

**A:**  Sister Numo la was there. There were three. The final one at the outskirts of Taring household.   

**Q:**  So that's the third one!   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then over there...   

**A:**  Yes, after reaching at the [Tsomchen] hall, Tennor la's parents Lhayum kusho la and Maharaja were there.   

**Q:**  So before going there, was there some function before you start your ride?   

**A:**  No, Yes, there was a function. You got down from the horse and then at the gate, they have to put 5 different colors of [gyöchen] and have to put white scarfs on the doors and stairs. After I reached there, Lhayum kusho la took my hands and did some introduction, which kind of showed that now I belonged to Taring.   

**Q:**  What was the kind of introduction?   

**A:**  The first introduction. My hands were taken into Lhayum la's and rubbed a bit and then went ahead and seated.   

**Q:**  So when you stayed at the household of Tsarong, the dadar was placed on you. So what does it mean actually?   

**A:**  Dadar was kind of a [ngöndzin] symbolic of recognition of the bride by Taring. Rigzin <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a>'s bride. We had to tie it on the rooftop for the gods. We had to go on the rooftop and do propitiation to the gods [lhabsö].   

**Q:**  So after that you have to go upstairs?   

**A:**  Yes, had to go upstairs and do lhabsö. So Taring was kind of a refugee and was not one of the old Aristocrats of Tibet. So they didn't have temples at home. Otherwise <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> and Ragashar were old families so they have to tie it to their protector deity room [Gönkhang]. In our household also we had a chapel [Lhamogang], but Taring didn't have one, so so there was nothing we could do.   

**Q:**  What do you have to do at the Lhamogang?   

**A:**  At the Lhamogang, they tied the scarf and dadar to the goddess (Lhamo) and then offered holy water and then lots of prayers were done. So maybe the lhamo took care of it after believing that she is Tsarong's bride. Later if there were some kind of harm, the goddess will protect her.   

**Q:**  Then after reaching at Taring, what did the Maharani do?   

**A:**  At the beginning of the stairs, she took my hands, which might be kind of a recognition, I guess! I don't know. Then we went up till the throne and placed me beside my uncle[Aku la]. [Aku la] was there on the throne. Many of our Taring family were there. Above all, Taring Maharaja, then Lhayum, Taring grandfather, Taring grandmother were there and then both of us seated there.   

**Q:**  How was the seating done! Was it all on one line or did bride and bridegroom had a different place to sit?   

**A:**  Well it was done according to the limits and spacing of the hall. In our marriage, it was placed in line. When the bride came in the household of Ragashar, both the brides were at different sides in the hall. I was the [Gyaltsam] when Ragashar [Sey kusho] took his bride.   

**Q:**  After reaching there what was done?   

**A:**  After reaching there, we greeted saying Tashi delek and ate like at Losar. Then a song was sung [shechen]. Right after finishing that, we went upstairs.   

**Q:**  So when Taring came over, who was there from the Tsarong side?   

**A:**  No, nobody from Tsarong, only Taring alone was invited seperately. Then Tsarong use to come with the gifts according to the dates.   

**Q:**  Later?   

**A:**  No, not later. The second or third day, whichever comes in the astrology. They came according to that and stayed there. They stayed for 7 or 10 days, so we had to make the beds for them. They shifted permanently for while.   

**Q:**  Then after the seatings were done, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. སྒྲོལ་མ, 2. གྲོ་མ] 1. The goddess Tara. 2. A woman&#x27;s name. 3. A wild sweet potato.">Droma</a> desi and Chema were offered. Was there [shechen] after that?   

**A:**  Yes, they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> [shechen], and the morning breakfast was offered.   

**Q:**  So was there token gifts from Tsarong's side at that time?   

**A:**  No, no as we had talked earlier. They used to come according to the dates. Then grandfather and grandmother used to come wearing the best dress at the function.   

**Q:**  What was done after seatings and after the giving dreso chema were finished?   

**A:**  After finishing that, I was taken to Sey's [her groom's] bedroom and then if you wanted to rest then you can or talk with the cousin brother or sisters who came over. It was party time. Then the bridegroom use to become busy because so many people come to offer scarves for him with presents.   

**Q:**  So the bride doesn't have much work?   

**A:**  No, the bride doesn't have to much.   

**Q:**  So there were lots of guests from outside?   

**A:**  Yes, but its not like now a days. They offered scaves and then they left saying thank you. We offered tea and then they left after that, but now a days they offer scarves and stays and eat and play [majang]. They never used to stay. They kept a list of all the people who came to offer scarves and the presents given by them. Then once this and the scarf ceremony was done, all those people who offered scarves were called for feast for 3 or 2 days or 1 day. Then the feast was offered for 10 days.   

**Q:**  What about the people coming to offer scarves one or two days later?   

**A:**  Yes, there were people who couldn't come on the first day and came later on the second day. So for like 3, 4 days we have to wait for them to finish it up. Then when they decides the limit. Then we can't wait for one or two people. So then invitations were sent for lunch and dinner and there was party for the whole day.   

**A:**  Is it working....[checking the recorder]   

**Q:**  Yes. Then after that it was kind of a party?   

**A:**  Yes, it was party all over. All the aristocrats' children and servants used to come. Servants played majang among themselves. There were lots of servants. There were more servants than the main guests who came at the function. For them [Cards, majang, and Shumbe] were arranged.   

**Q:**  What is Shumbe?   

**A:**  It is a kind of Chinese card game. Bakchen [a type of majang] and everything was arranged. Lots of games were arranged. When it was during the summer, then we had sort of picniced. We enjoyed it a lot and played Caram and lot of other games also.   

**Q:**  How long did you celebrate?   

**A:**  At Tsarong household, they celebrated for around 16 days when sister Yangchen la and brother got married. At Taring, we celebrated for around 10 days.   

**Q:**  Did all guests used to come at Taring?   

**A:**  Yes... At Tsarong, they celebrated a lot. They also celebrated Sister Tess la's marriage, then Sister Dikyi Dolma la's, then Sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> la's marriage very grandly.   

**Q:**  So during the marriage, the bride's family had to go to Taring? What do they have to do at that time? Did Tsarong bring the presents during that time?   

**A:**  Yes during that time, they came with the present and even the servants and cooks had to be given presents and scarfs. Then they gave me my share with boxes and boxes. The jewellery...   

**Q:**  Jewellery and clothes and then what else?   

**A:**  Yes something like that. Anything you can send, there were no demands. If you can give it was fine and if not that's fine also. Over here [India] they fight for dowry. There was nothing like that.   

**Q:**  When they brought those, did you have to be seated on the throne or something in the hall when Tsarong came?   

**A:**  Yes. We had to be seated on the throne, then they greeted uys with Tashi delek and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> [the shechen]. Everything was done.   

**Q:**  So they put the presents there?   

**A:**  Yes, they decorated the presents there nearby the altar. Then until the marriage ceremony was not finished, the presents were decorated around the seats. There were no places to walk properly since it was packed with presents. All of them were placed there and if there still were no places to fit in, they piled them one upon another since it's already marked in the list from there.   

**Q:**  What kind of presents did they bring?   

**A:**  So for the worst, they brought one box of tea bags or one sack of flour or some eatables or the other. At that time, they brought silk clothes.   

**Q:**  So this was offered from anyone of the people who offered scarfs?   

**A:**  Yes, anyone. There was one for each.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by one for each?   

**A:**  It means if in Taring, you have to offer presents for all 10 members of the family, then Tsarong had to offer it to each one of the family. But the strangers or near and dear ones will offer one together for the whole family. They offered one sack of tea, silk, and one gyochen clothes and a scarf. That's it!   

**Q:**  If it is tea then they offered tea.   

**A:**  Yes, one tea and then one-silk and gyochen clothes. Or it doesn't matters if there is only a silk one and if you don't have a sack.   

**Q:**  So you have to offer this to both bride and groom?   

**A:**  No no, you can offer it together as one.   

**Q:**  Okay.   

