# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview H.0236.02  
##  : with Taring, Tsering Yangdzom [Tib.འཕྲེང་རིང, ཚེ་རིང་དབྱངས་རྩོམས] also Betty Taring   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, , India  
**Date of Interview:** 28 March 2006  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Tsarong Paljor  
**Name:** Taring, Tsering Yangdzom [Tib.འཕྲེང་རིང, ཚེ་རིང་དབྱངས་རྩོམས] also (Betty Taring)  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Betty Taring was the daughter of the famous Tsarong Dzasa and the wife of George Taring. The interviewee describes giving birth to her first child which was at the time of the Reting trouble. She also describes the Taring household where she lived. After the Chinese first came to Tibet the interviewee worked as a teacher for young Chinese military personnel, went to Yabyum School and joined the women's association. She describes what life was like during that time. She also descibes how she and her father Tsarong Dzasa met Prime Minister Nehru in Tromo in 1958 when he was on his way back to India from Bhutan. The interviewee also discuses her different travels around Tibet and India and the people she meet on the way. Parts of her travels which she describes were with her father while he was on pilgrimage. The interviewee also describes traveling to India in 1958 to buy tents for the Dalai Lama.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0236_02/H_0236_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When was your first child born after the marriage?   

**A:**  First child was Nordön la. Nordön la was six months younger than Drikung Kyabgön. It was during the dog year. Both of their animal signs are dog.   

**Q:**  Earlier or during that time in Tibet, how did people manage. I mean who came to help? Like abroad, earlier they had like a midwife.   

**A:**  Well, If I have to tell you, then it was really a special case when Nordön la was born. She was the first child. Rani Sahib came over to Lhasa when she was born. Rani Sahib, Sisters Tashi and Kelsang came over. Rinpoche also came. Formerly they came to Wöte Rinpoche when he was recognised and invited there. Ashi Kelsang and Tashi stayed at Taring. Rani Saheb and Rinpoche stayed at Lheding. Ashi Tashi and Kelsang stayed at Taring. So Ashi Tashi studied a bit of Medicine but she couldn't continue her study from Delhi. Since she knew a bit, she told us she could become sort of a midwife. She agreed to help with the delivery of the baby. There was another doctor from Dikyilingka who was called to help also and she was called...?   

**Q:**  Which doctor?   

**A:**  Which doctor was it? Hmm. Dr. Terry the one who worked for Rinpoche's...Who had no fingers?   

**Q:**  Was it Doctor Gatri?   

**A:**  Yes Doctor Gatri who was heavily built. Dr.Gatri came but still we couldn't deliver the baby, we waited and waited since it was very difficult.   

**Q:**  Did the labor take long?   

**A:**  Yes it took 17 hours. Since Tsarong household had my part of the share, so Taring mother sent somebody to pray to the lhamo. Tsarong mother knew that I was in pain, so she couldn't sleep at all. She told [Kungö] father that we should go there since I couldn't sleep at all. So father immediately agreed to go there and did quick prayers before the goddess Gangja. Over there prayers were already done since Taring mother had already sent somebody to do it. Then father and mother came over around 7 am in the morning. So he told me, "why you are sleeping like that. Rather you should be turn over and sleep in a position where your face should be facing the bed. Dr. Gatri told me to sit in that position, but father told me to sit in the opposite position. So Tsarong mother said, "I knew that this girl was not going to have ababy until me and Kunyö and I were here. Then we couldn't deliver at all. Sister Tashi went to [Lheding] and told Rani saheb that she couldn't deliver the baby. So Rani saheb came over and Wöte Rinpoche also came. In my room, Rani saheb, Wöte Rinpoche, Dr. Gatri, Father Tsarong, Tsarong grandmother, Father Taring, Ashi Tashi and Ashi Kelsang, everyone was there. In front of all of them I cried. In one way I think was lucky also. Father took my hands and mother also did the same. Then after a while when Tsarong father and mother came, my child was born 20 minutes after they came. That's why Tsarong grandmother said, "I knew the child wont be born until we come here, because i dreamed like that". So it was delivered safely after all.   

**Q:**  So there were no such kind of midwife at that time?   

**A:**  Ashi Tashi was covered all in blood. In her hand, the child was born. She helped for the delivery. Gatri also helped. Dr. Gatri said, "[Forceps] had to be put in, so she will try to save the mother because if the child has to die then it will die but she will try to save the mother. But Tsarong father didn't agree and said, "No this won't happen since we don't have a tradition like that. If the mother dies, its her <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a>, but let her deliver first and the baby shouldn't be killed intentionally". So I was let to deliver. Like that we had Tsarong grandfather, grandmother, Rani Saheb and everyone. If you ask Wöte Rinpoche, he will tell you everything. Ashi Tashi and everybody were there. Since everybody is alive right now, you can ask them, it happened like that, they will tell you everything.   

**Q:**  So was that around 1946?   

**A:**  In 1947, during the dog year. Maybe I guess it was during the pig year because she was six months younger than Rinpoche. Rinpoche was born earlier as he was born in Sagadawa [4th month]. Isnt it? During [Drukpa Tseshi]. Yes yes. In January he was born. Exactly. Rinpoche is older by 6 months.   

**Q:**  So Reting's Sera battle already had arisen at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, Reting battle did occur, but he allowed us stay at his palace with my baby and Wöte Rinpoche. I guess I wasn't fully recovered from my delivery. Rinpoche cracked lots of jokes. He told me there was one big black scorpion from the bridge. Then I laughed and laughed and he felt really happy at the fact that I was laughing out loud.   

**Q:**  So you were hiding in the palace?   

**A:**  Yes, in the bedroom. Otherwise they shot lots of bullets at the household. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> was the main target. Samdutsang was near by Taring.   

**Q:**  Yes nearby.   

**A:**  Yes nearby. At <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a>, bullets were shot like rain.   

**Q:**  So the windows must have been broken at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a>?   

**A:**  Nothing happened at Taring, but still just for precaution.   

**Q:**  Were there emergency precautions?   

**A:**  No nothing like that. We couldn't really understand. They were saying they were shooting at Samdutsang. Just take them! Take them down. That's what I heard.   

**Q:**  So the Sera monks came down to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes heard like that, but I didn't know since I was in bed.   

**Q:**  So how was the 2nd and 3rd delivery done?   

**A:**  Yes, those were done by Taring grandmother and Tsarong grandmother but 4th was done by your mother at Kalimpong, Parvati-Arunachal.   

**Q:**  Then around 1946, '47, and eventually in 1949, we heard in radio that Chinese were going to liberate Tibet! Right?   

**A:**  Right. But when the Chinese came, we couldn't do anything. Rather we just sat there watching the whole thing. There was no battle. Outside Taring, they came with the Mao's picture and with all that noise and all we couldn't do anything so we just sat idly and watched everything.   

**Q:**  When you stayed at Taring, did you do the works of Taring?   

**A:**  Tsarong or Taring?   

**Q:**  Taring   

**A:**  Taring. Yes, I did. I looked after the kitchen [Nyertsang]. Taringfamily were refugees from Sikkim. So they had whatever Deshe kundun had offered to Taring. Otherwise there wasn't anything.   

**Q:**  Taring had an estate?   

**A:**  Yes they did have an estate, but the estate was poor. So it was like having nothing. So they made the household and stayed there. Sikkim offered alms every year for them. An allowance.   

**Q:**  So Sikkim offered alms? There must be nothing much they could get?   

**A:**  No. Nothing much. They were poor. They did have some, but it wasn't worth having. They did have people [miser] for labor. Taring didn't have that. A household was made particularly for Taring. They stayed there permanently. They had good relations with the foreigners. [Gyantse Changlo] was near by and she had an English trade agent and made good relations. Otherwise in the Tsarong Household, Nyerpa Wangchuk use to look after everything and I didn't have to do anything. So when I came here, I never wanted to do it.   

**Q:**  So at Taring, the Nyertsang [kitchen] had to be looked after daily?   

**A:**  Yes daily, but I never really wanted to do it.   

**Q:**  So did they do some accounts or business in the household?   

**A:**  No, they didn't do business since their salary was enough. Then mother sold all the jewellery that she wore from Tsarong and survived on tha. Otherwise there was no such business. Later when Chinese came, they offered salary at the Mirukhag detention camp. I did work as a teacher and we get a monthly salary.   

**Q:**  Then I have to ask something, I kind of forgot now.... Anyhow when the Chinese first came and government had the Seventeen-Point Agreement, then all the Tibetan officials worked at a particular office like the Youth Congress and the Women's Association, etc. So during that time, what kind of work did you do Aunt?   

**A:**  I worked as a schoolteacher for the young soldiers. There were lots of young Chinese soldiers, both boys and girls. So I worked as their teacher at [Drungchi lekhang].   

**Q:**  Was there aschool built over there?   

**A:**  Yes, one school was built.   

**Q:**  Was it an Army school?   

**A:**  Yes, an army school.   

**Q:**  What do you have to teach?   

**A:**  We taught them the Tibetean language. We had to teach them from the Alphabets and things like "goodbye," "how old are you?" "How many family members do you have?" "What is your name?"   

**Q:**  So were all of them Office Staffs or only soldiers?   

**A:**  Only soldiers when we went for the first time, but we are not placed there for long. I taught only for 6 months. They gave 60 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> (silver coin) monthly for salary. Then we were told we had to go to [Kempo sheshar], which was to look after the staff's school. At the teacher's school, there were teachers from different places and they were not soldiers. The teacher's themselve had a time limit. They had to teach properly within 3 months and then they had to leave. The old ones left and the new ones came. Then we had to go to Teacher's training school where we had to teach. So this was really nice and my Tibetan really improved a lot from here. I taught [khebe khake, dronsel] and I taught everything which was needed. Then I taught Sheting also. I was very lucky, as Rinpoche Kherab Wöser was the teacher. So I did everything to please Rinpoche since he loves Majang. I asked <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིན་པོ་ཆེ] 1. Title for an incarnate lama. 2. Term of address for incarnate lamas.">rinpoche</a> to teach me during the morning time for 2 hours and then prepared the majang after lunch for him since he loved it. Then Rinpoche became completely satisfied and taught me two hours every morning because after lunch he had majang to play. Then my Tibetan improved.   

**Q:**  Aunt, where did you go after you worked as a teacher at the school?   

**A:**  I went to the Yabyum school where Chinese were taught. Sister Yangchen la came there. All of the ones who are married came there. It was a school where all the married women came and it was called Yabyum School. I studied there for 6 months. They don't keep us for long.   

**Q:**  Did they teach Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes Chinese.   

**Q:**  So in order to study there, who else can go there?   

**A:**  Everybody can go. Any Tibetans can go. Yabyum is one for those who are married and who cant go to school. Ones who were young but pretty old to go to school, like us, around 21 and 22.   

**Q:**  So while teaching over there, was there any protest from the monasteries and masses?   

**A:**  No, there was nobody protesting. Then Ngabö Somola, oh yeah not my somola, its Yabchi Lhacham and my mother were president of Miruthang and women's association. Yabchi lhacham was president and my mother was the Miruthang women association. So all of them had to go turn by turn for around like 7 months. They had to go everywhere for shows and all. They just couldn't finish it.   

**Q:**  So what were their opinions at that time. Like some might think it's not good to go and some did go and some didn't?   

**A:**  No nothing like that. Since everyone had to stay back at home, all of them gained lots of freedom. They wore good clothes. It made us feel good since we met lots of people and we looked forward to it.   

**Q:**  Then what did they talk about during the meeting?   

**A:**  Well in the women's associations meeting, they talked about health, and how to raise the children. They prepared the subject from before and taught on that and stressed that Tibetan language shouldn't be forgotten and Tibetan spelling should be taught also. They also stressed that when the religion studies were taught, it shouldn't be like the words coming out of parrot's mouth, it should be explained properly. So it was all education. It was very good.   

**Q:**  Then do you have to go to do practicum work?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to but not far. For the praticum we had to go to schools where toilets were not clean and then we had to make the proper canal system and toilets should be cleaned if they were dirty. It wasn't that difficult when we were there, but I heard later that it was difficult.   

**Q:**  So when you came over, it must be around 1951 or '52?   

**A:**  Yes around that time. There was ping-pong and it was like a picnic. So after school, everyone came with their food and once you displayed everything, it seemed like a party. We had like around 10 or 20 different varieties of vegetables and we ate like we were at a party. Then we cracked jokes and played ping-pong and when the bell rings, we went to school.   

**Q:**  Do they have some shows also?   

**A:**  Yes unlimited shows.   

**Q:**  Was it movies?   

**A:**  No not movies, it was like a stage show which they were expert in it. They played a lot.   

**Q:**  What did they play?   

**A:**  If it was movie, then they showed some nice ones like old stories and stuff. It was nice ones specially if you hadn't seen it.   

**Q:**  Then when the Chinese came over, they have the thought of Socialism. Did they explain something about it? Like what is Socialism and how you have to do it etc?   

**A:**  Well the Rangkyongjong office...   

**Q:**  That was started during 1956?   

**A:**  Yes, they hadn't started, but I guess they were planning to set up or something. We were not called.   

**Q:**  Then if they showed a movie it was about the battles and stuff.   

**A:**  Yes they showed it outside in the street, whereever there were huge gathering of public. They also offered lots of feasts for the aristocrats and invited them for movies. We had lots of shows, big feasts and then dance parties.   

**Q:**  What I heard was from the officials, few of them werer engaged with Chinese. Since a few considered it was a bad omen to clean up the toilets and stuff.   

**A:**  This wasn't started when I was there. We didn't have to clean the toilets. These things were much later.   

**Q:**  Then in 1954, His Holiness... Then around 1951-52, you must have come to India by then?   

**A:**  Then I came to India a lot of times because my late husband and Tsarong brother, Thame <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> came to work for the electricity project and all.   

**Q:**  For the electricity plant?   

**A:**  Yes, they worked for that and stayed in India for long. So we were not aware of that news in India.   

**Q:**  Were you in India during 1951?   

**A:**  In '51, '52, '53, during all these years we were in India. When Raja Sahib passed away, I was in India at Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Then how was it done when Chinese came to Chamdo and His holiness visited Tromo. So was it before or right after that when you came to India?   

**A:**  So that's when His Holiness visited <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> and when he was about to come from Chamdo. Thet couldn't easily arrive.   

**Q:**  After arriving at Chamdo, Chamdo was already lost. After one month His Holiness was enthroned as the political and religious leader, and a bit later after that he went to Tromo.   

**A:**  When he went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a>, I can't remember properly. At that time, Paljor la was young and my son Jigme was young also. So Tsarong father told us it's not good to stay with young children since we will get into trouble. So he sent me in a leather boat [coracle] with Tsarong's children and my children. Tsarong Sister Yangchen la's youngest child was you and I had Jigme. So we came to India.   

**Q:**  When you had to go in the coracle, How far did you have to go?   

**A:**  From Changtsö lingka to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushur</a>. Two leather boats [coracles] bound together and it was a easy ride and we reached easily. After reaching Chushi since we couldn't arrange the horses properly, me and Yangchen la got seperated. Nyerpa wangyal la invited sister Yangchen la and children to Phebgothang (Gyantse). I was left, since I didn't have horses. So I was left there and had wait. I was told that first sister Yangchen la will ride till there and then the donkeys will be sent from Phebgothang to receive me. I waited at Kyakashar. When I was waiting there, Kasur Sedön la came over with her children. So Kasur la and we came together from Chushur till Ganga [India]. Tsarong Phebgothang had sent donkeys for me and kKasur Sedon la had her horse.   

**Q:**  Where is Phebgothang?   

**A:**  Gyangtse Phebgothang is where my brother broke his hand. Gyangtse phebgothang.   

**Q:**  Is it in Lhenga?   

**A:**  No its not Lhenga. Lhenga is nearby.   

**Q:**  So Phebgothang was Tsarong's (estate)?   

**A:**  Yes Tsarong's.It was not exactly Tsarong's. You can take it on [bawma] lease agreement.   

**Q:**  So they took it as a lease?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Otherwise, who was the owner of Phebgo? Must be one of the officials?   

**A:**  It was the hometown of Ponpo Daje and Achi Nangsel. They had a monastery also. Achi Nangsel was taken as a bride for Ponpo Daje. Phebgothang. I have a movie of it...   

**Q:**  Did Gerpa [aristocrats or private] own Phebgothang?   

**A:**  Phebgothang was sort of a monastery.   

**Q:**  Gompa [monastery]?   

**A:**  Yes gompa [monastery]?   

**Q:**  Did they take it on lease agreement?   

**A:**  Yes. Tsarong took it through [Bauma].   

**Q:**  All the fields?   

**A:**  Yes, all the fields. Then after reaching there from Lhasa, they told us that the atmosphere was slowly getting calmer, so I was told to come back. Since my late husband was there at Lhasa, they told me to take the children and go back.   

**Q:**  Didn't you come back in 1951? At that time His Holiness was in Tromo.   

**A:**  At that time my late husband was not there. I came with my children only.   

**Q:**  Later, Tsarong grandfather and father and everyone came...Isnt it?   

**A:**  No that was different. First listen...Tsarong grandfather's feet had a problem as I told you earlier. Then this created a problem again. So he went to Phari hot springs at that time. Even I also... My late husband also was there with [Shasur Sawang Chenmo]. My late husband was his aide [lejar]. They were at Lhasa having Kashak meetings. So Tsarong grandfather wanted to go back as he had finished the hot spring and Tsarong grandmother and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> grandmother who were there also came back. Then Shatra grandmother and you guys who were at at hilltop also came back. [Born army] offered hill top for Tsarong with permission from palace [photrang] [unclear?].   

**Q:**  What is born army?   

**A:**  It was given to Taring. That was Dakshö's also. Both of these were given to us. They rented a room for us without charging a payment.   

**Q:**  Like that you stayed there in 1951?   

**A:**  Yes, listen... so Tsarong grandmother didn't want to stay in India and wanted to go back. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Cham kusho also wanted to go back. I didn't have a choice as I was ordered to go back since my late husband was there at Lhasa. So my children, Tsarong grandmother, me, and Shatra grandmother went back. We couldn't pass through Nathu la Pass as the snow was heavy there, so we went through Zereb la Pass. At Phari, Tsarong grandfather was waiting there. So we got to see him there at Phari. At Phari we have Tsarong household's businessman called Lachung. He had a home there since he did trading for our household. So we stayed at his household. Then father went to the Phari hot spring. Father told us that he met the present Bhutan king's late grandfather, who treated him very well.   

**Q:**  Did he go to Phari also?   

**A:**  Yes, the present one's father was sent to offer Bhutan's food at the hotspring.   

**Q:**  The present one's father?   

**A:**  Yes the present one's father was the crown prince at that time. Then the king had sent lots of presents to father. He treated him very well. From Phari, me and Tsarong mother and father, we went to Gyantse Phegothang. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Cam kusho knew one of the wealthy families of Shatra who arranged the horses and invited her to lhasa. So once again we were seperated. I went with Tsarong father and mother. There Aufschneider came and said that he came to see our father. He really loved our father and told us that he came to see him. He cried like a kid. Then he stayed for three or four days at Phebgothang and then cried and went back since he couldn't stay in Tibet, as the situation wasn't good. Then he went back through Nepal from Phebgothang. and bid goodbye to father from Phebgothang. Then Tsarong mother, father, and me went back to Lhasa with my children.   

**Q:**  Then at Lhasa, you worked as a teacher?   

**A:**  Then at Lhasa, everybody started coming back slowly. We kind of started the first move and then slowly everyone came back. Brother and Sister Yangchen la also came back for while. Likewise Namlha and Norzin la also went to the Tseshing School. Slowly everyone came back. So in between what did I do? Hmm...[She starts thinking]   

**Q:**  Schoolteacher?   

**A:**  Yes, I worked as a schoolteacher as well as student also. Along with it I gave birth to my children also.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay when His Holiness went to China?   

**A:**  Then this story... It was in the year 1954 when His Holiness went to China that I gave birth to Tennor.   

**Q:**  So Taring grandfather and father [her husband] along with [Thangme] worked in Electric Plant and they use to come back and forth from Kalimpong. So must have come back around that time.   

**A:**  Yes they were there.   

**Q:**  So around that time, you must have come back.   

**A:**  Yes, Tennor was baby at that time and we planned to go back and stayed at Bhutan palace. The Crown Prince was not the Chögyal at that time, we didn't say Chögyal. We called him crown prince lama la. So Gyelse lama la and Lhacham Sangthe la were just married and one son was born to them [the one who passed away in a car accident]. So they were heading to Lhasa also. They told us that we should go together. So from Bhutan, Chögyal, Sangde la, my late husband and me, we four went together till Gyangtse. Then when we reached at Gyangtse, they received a Guard of Honor for the Crown Prince from Changlo and also told the two of us to stay there.   

**Q:**  What is Changlo?   

**A:**  Changlo is where the Indian Trade Agent was.   

**Q:**  At Gyantse?   

**A:**  Changlo is the [thunka kushi??]. From early times, they had an army camp there from British times.   

**Q:**  Isn't it the quila?   

**A:**  Yes, quila. Quila is India's army camp. What do you call it? Khartso is called Quila. So when we reached there, we were offered a feast. Then Rimshi Penpa and others went to visit Tsomchen [usually a large prayer hall] near the area of Taring Rinpoche. So when they reached the Tsomchen, it was full of people's skulls. So what I thought was if you see in the water, you can see your own reflection. That's why he might have just said like that and told us it was plenty of people's skulls. Then after spending the night there, my son and me were to leave that tomorrow to Gyantse. Oh not my son, me and Se kusho [my husband]. At Gyantse we received a [chaklor] telegram from Dikyilingka from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] The name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families.">Samdru Phodrang</a> which says-"Chögyal leave immediately as His Holiness and the Panchen Lama are leaving for China on 24th. So there are no chance to get an audience till the 20th. So we leave immediately. "Luckily we received that telegram and right after that we left. We went together. On the way we heard the roaring sound when we passed by the Zaleb Pass. They told us the snows were melting and its falling from the mountain and it was exactly right. The snow melted and Gyantse Chanlo was carried away by water and Rimshi Penpa was also carried by the water. So the thing that they saw in the Tsomchen of the place full of peoples skulls was in a way true. It must be a true prediction that we might die. So once Changlo was taken away by water, it was taken up tp Tsarong's household. So it was such a big flood at that time in Gyantse.   

**Q:**  Yes, the 1954 Gyantse flood.   

**A:**  So if we might not have received the telegram saying His Holiness is leaving then we might have stayed there comfortably and all of us might have been taken by the flood. Gye <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས] An honorific term for the son of an aristocratic family, e.g., Sambo Sey (the son of the Sambo family).">sey</a>, Sangde la, my late husband and Tennor la, we all might have been carried away in the flood. We might have stayed there. Oh my goodness! So because of the telegram sent by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> saying His Holiness is leaving, we were able to make it.   

**Q:**  Where did Gye se stay after reaching to Lhasa in 1954?   

**A:**  At Samdru Phodrang.   

**Q:**  So did he stay for a while?   

**A:**  Yes for a month. He came lots of times to Taring. He was invited to Taring also.   

**Q:**  So in 1954 he came down and in 55, His Holiness went back to Tibet after like nine months. After a while, father [husband] also went to China. So didn't you go to China?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. Since I was working in school and had a monthly salary, I couldn't escape. I didn't get holidays.   

**Q:**  They organised the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region with a big event?   

**A:**  Yes, they had a big event.   

**Q:**  So what do you remember during that time?   

**A:**  Yes, that time we dressed up and we were young at that time. So when ever there were foreigners, we were called to offer flowers since we knew the English language. All of the Tsarong girls were called. Then we took flowers and lots of foreigners came. Most of them were Russians.   

**Q:**  So the Russians also came?   

**A:**  Yes, lots of them came during the Autonomous Region celebration. That was when an airplane landed on northern plains [Changthang].   

**Q:**  At Dam?   

**A:**  Yes on the Dam side. Whenever the foreigners came, we had to go there to receive them.   

**Q:**  Who otherwise had to go there with you?   

**A:**  Me, and Dondrup Drolma la, and Kasur Sedönla. All the Tsarong girls were called. So among them, the ones who knew English were Dondrup Drolma la, me, Ngodrup Wangmola, Yangchen la and many of us were there. But most often they called me and Dondrup Drolma la. Yes so it happened like that.   

**Q:**  So during the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, you had to go to offer flowers?   

**A:**  Yes. Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Russian organisations used to come. So when they came, we had night sessions also and had to invite them to come for dance parties. [She sings- tang.tang..tang....] Had to dance.   

**Q:**  What about their music? Chinese music isn't that nice and not the latest ones. Isnt it?   

**A:**  It was nice, they had nice ones.   

**Q:**  Can't you get nice ones from Darjeeling and Kalimpong?   

**A:**  No, no way. They won't even think of taking from there. The Chinese had nice ones..Tang tang tang ta rang tang...] Senphu Senphu. Chik nyi sum.. 1, 2, 3.   

**Q:**  Okay, so do they have many people taking videos?   

**A:**  Yes, lots of them.   

**Q:**  Foreigners?   

**A:**  No. Not foreigners, but Chinese. Lots of Chinese people took videos. So we had parties and time went on like that.   

**Q:**  So in '56...   

**A:**  Then in '58, Tsarong grandmother passed away.   

**Q:**  First, after Chögyal came back once. Then in 1956, His Holiness and Panchen Rinpoche went to India for pilgrimage. During that time where were you?   

**A:**  Maybe I was in India at that time. I don't really remember. I went back and forth to India. Must have reached back in India. I don't really remember.   

**Q:**  So do you remember that...?   

**A:**  I remember the year 1957. In 1957, I was teacher of officials. Then Tsarong grandmother got sick. It was in 1958 when Tsarong grandmother passed away.   

**Q:**  In 1957?   

**A:**  It was between '57 and '58 when Tsarong grandmother passed away. During autumn she passed away. Father visited India to offer prayers for the deceased.   

**Q:**  At that time were you there?   

**A:**  Yes I was at Lhasa at that time.   

**Q:**  Then at that time, around 1955-56, in eastern Tibet, Chinese already told them that they are going to do reforms but the Tibetans said 'they didn't want to'. Anyhow the problem already arose.   

**A:**  Was Chushi gangdruk already started by then?   

**Q:**  Chushi gangdruk was later. Before that, they met in battle and many of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khampa (Khamba) sub-cultural group.">Khampa</a>s came up to Lhasa. Then in the year '57, Chushi gangdruk was established and then the Khampa problem started. The whole society was pretty messed up. Did you see some problems in that? During the time, what was your thoughts? Did you think that there are lots of problems here so I should better go to India or stay back. Since education was better in India for the children, so like that you must have had a different thoughts at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, I wished to stay in India. When I prepared to go there, mother was working in Meru thang as Chinese staff. So mother told me, "not to talk ill and that unless she didn't worked for the Chinese, she cant give a proper lesson to the Tibetan people. That's why in order for the Tibetans to wake up, I am working here." That's what she told me. Since she worked hard there, I had to be careful and couldn't really move also.   

**Q:**  Then like that Tsarong grandmother passed away? You must have gone before she passed away?   

**A:**  Yes, of course I went there before she passed away. Every next day I went to see my father and mother. My heart belonged more to Tsarong. Grandmother suffered from gallstones. She suffered from this disease for 19 years. She suffered like anything. She suffered a lot. One time, Sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> and brother took grandmother to Calcutta for an operation in a palanquin. Dr. Rice bow was invited and did the check up and went to Calcutta. Then in Calcutta, she said she is not sick so she didn't do the operation and came back. The result was she didn't controlled tea or anything and she got sick for long time. She was aged. Mother also got sick and it wasn't pleasant at all. Then sometimes when she gets better for like 2 weeks, she says, 'only a little amount ... la', so she drank again and got sick. Like that she stayed for 19 years. If she were to die tomorrow I was in the household. Moreover she told me, "we will go get some tomatoes" and I said 'yes'. She told me to "go get one bucket" and I went to get one bucket and then we went down. I had one coat which I wore. I had one of the soft and beautiful pieces of clothing from India which she wore. So she said, "you are really broad-minded and nice that you brought this beautiful and nice one, but I don't want to put this kind of expensive coat on my body, but I am wearing yours. She was about to die that tomorrow. Then we went down and plucked the tomatoes. So there were nothing. Before two or three days, since I came often to the household [Chabe sedön la's mother [Chabe Lhayön la] passed away and before that [Dejong Samdela] passed away. So during that month, they passed away one after another. When she heard like that, she felt much grief and cried for each one of them. We never use to feel that much grief for others other than the normal feelings, but she really grieved for them. Otherwise, she wasn't sick at that time and was fine. Then during the day she passed away. I was in school [at drunje linga]. So my late husband sent a servant with the news that "Tsarong mother had passed away and told me come immediately to Tsarong House. Both of the Taring grandfathers were there in Tsarong household. Right after that, I took leave from school and came back, but she has already passed away. Father and Nampo grandmother were there in the sitting room. She had passed away during morning in the bedroom. We heard she took prayer books and did prayers and Dhondrup Drolma [Nancy la] was there, so she talked with Nancy la. So there wasn't any pain for her. She passed away without any problem. When I went down, she had already passed away. So Sister Shatra was told not to come since she was weak because there wasn't anything to do. Tsatrul Rinpoche was invited. There was a truck to carry the dead body. It was taken from the office where Tsatrul Rinpoche was working. At that time, lots of flowers bloomed, so I plucked lots of them and grounded them onto the sheet of the dead body. Both the eldest Taring grandfathers washed the dead body and wrapped it up in a white sheet. Then (Ri Nga) were invited and placed the body into a [Dorji kyirom] position.   

**Q:**  Who else was there?   

**A:**  Nobody was there. Within one week or before the first Gutse[ ninth day] was yet to finish, Brother and Sister Yangchen la arrived, but they were not there when she passed away. Otherwise...   

**Q:**  Father and Mother were there when she passed away.   

**A:**  No they were not there.   

**Q:**  Yes, they were there.   

**A:**  I was there then. They were not there. After 5,6 days of passing away, they arrived. Then I saw them.   

**Q:**  They were there.   

**A:**  Then I didn't seen them. I am telling you whatever I have seen.   

**Q:**  Anyhow, people have different memories. Father told me he was there and somebody from Horkhang came there.   

**A:**  Horkhang brother Penpala came there. I was there. He cried for momola (grandma) and hugged father. Otherwise they didn't talk earlier as they had quarreled. On that day they made up. They hugged and cried. I was there. Brother came before the 1st [kutse]. So this is my memory and this is what I remember. Everybody has their own memory. Otherwise I can't tell you in details. This is all I can recall. Then when the dead body was place in a truck. ...   

**Q:**  Was it a truck?   

**A:**  Yes, a big truck, a Chinese truck. So we spread all the flowers on the sheet since lots of flowers like rose flower and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདོ་སྨད] Eastern Tibet, Kham.">dome</a> flowers were grown there. These were placed on the dead body and taken in that. Then father told Nyerpa wangyal la to go and get the [Chedo]. He brought the chedo but chedo was like the Indian ladoo [Indian sweets] which they give during the function. So it was exactly the same as that and father placed it on the table to offer it, but it was totally yellow and rotten, it had gotted soiled. It was not useful. All other people's were like stone, but grandmother's was like Ladoo. Nowadays I cant eat ladoo since I have seen that and its the same. Like that, grandfather called Nyerpa Wangyal la and he brought it. That's what I remember... now you can ask.   

**Q:**  Then in '58?   

**A:**  Then father [husband also] went for pilgrimage to India, at that time you were in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, I was a school teacher. Taring mother was not there when grandmother [Amala] passed away otherwise they were really close.   

**Q:**  Oh she went to China.   

**A:**  Yes she went to China at Miruthang for a meeting. Moreover Tsarong mother told me, "Rinchen Dolma la is the one who does everything. Why do I have to go even though my health is in such a condition, but still she left". So I apologized to her.   

**Q:**  At that time, Chushi Gangdruk already started and they fought also, so didn't the situation deteriorate after that in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Nothing happened. Father went for pilgrimage and from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> he called me for service since his feet were creating a problem.   

**Q:**  Was that when he came back?   

**A:**  Yes, so I went there to help. I went to Yatong. He wasn't there at Shar singma. When I visited him, I heard President Nehru was going to come at Yatong and Lhasa. Oh yes, during that time, they said that President Nehru was going to come to Lhasa and at Sharsingma also. They were doing lots of preparations. They had made preparations in Lhasa and in Sharsingma also. When I reached there[Phenge la Pass] I was there with father. Over there, I heard that Silön Nehru was going to come the next day. The Indian trade agent was there to receive him. There was a Chinese man called Wang Qimi who was very demanding and short and there was the one which Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> used to scold a lot. He was there. Then father fell from the kitchen we used to have in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> Rinchengang where we use to stay with the another family, which was like a Tibetan wooden house. He tumbled down and sprained his thumb and bled. So I did a quick dressing with my handkerchief. He told me it wouldn't look nice if he doesn't go so I told him, "Should I tell them that you have hurt your thumb." He said, "No, its not good leaving such a high official. We have to go and he said lets go. At our household we had a Land Rover. There Nehru was waiting for father. He said "Oh Tsarong! Tess la's father!" We said, "yes, yes." "Oh ... la I have heard about you. Tess la's sister." I said "yes." Like that they hugged. Farther said my hands are dirty. So we will hug like a foreign tradition. That was what I translated my father's words to Nehru. So Nehru said "that's even better" and Nehru hugged. He said, "your daughter Tess la looked after me very well in Bhutan." He had gone to Bhutan.   

**Q:**  He came from Bhutan, and was not going to Bhutan. Right?   

**A:**  Yes, he came from Bhutan. That's why I remember. I was told by Tess la that you are with your father. that's what he said.   

**Q:**  So Nehru hugged him?   

**A:**  Yes hugged him. Father's hand was hurt. Then father's hand was medicated. Nehru ordered for medication and then the whole of the dispensary set was brought. Then we had lunch with a big function. Since Nehru had come, Chinese officials were there, Indian officials were there also. Sane Satho were there. Bhutanese Banya Aathi[who is the representative of the king ] was there. When it was finished, me and my dad went back to Rinchen Gang.Somehow Nehru couldn't go to Lhasa and the plan to go there had been cancelled. I didn't know why they cancelled. They went through Gangtok. I didn't know whether they went through Gangtok or Medong. Maybe they went by Helicopter. [editor's note: See Goldstein 2019, p. 215 ff for a discussion of this visit]  

**Q:**  Didn't the other officials like Surkhang and Wang Chimi have meetings?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard they had meetings.   

**Q:**  Did you happen to come?   

**A:**  No, but father told me about how Wang Chemi scolded <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> a lot and made it difficult. [Editor's note: The Chinese official was actually Tan Guansan]   

**Q:**  So Wang Chemi scolded Szukhang?   

**A:**  Yes, Wang Chimi. We nicknamed him Ani.   

**Q:**  Did he look like a nun?   

**A:**  Yes he looked like a nun, since he was bald and short and had a nun's face. He was very dominating and loud. Then father stayed there for awhile. We didn't come back and asked if we could go to Kalimpong. I told achala that it isnt pleasant to go back as the problems are already on the edge. But father insisted that he must go back once, as it is very important. Then he told us he can easily come back like that. I don't have any small children and stuff. So I can easily come back. In the bag, he needs some money,some dollars, some Tibetan money and those are the things which he needs. So he needs to go back as he has promised His Holiness that he will come back. So when he had agreed doing that, he said, "I must go back as my conscience wont allow me to lie. I must tell them I have come back and then I can do whatever I want, so I must go back. I can't fool His Holiness. Then Phungyal la got angry since Phungyal la must have been going with many of the youths to Jomo rinchen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> for a picnic riding on bikes. My late father also must had a small handy pistol and Phungyal la took it. I don't know what kind of pistol itr was since I wasn't really interested. Then he took that pistol and lost it. So father got so angry and said that that is the thing which saves me and he is a fool. Now when I need it, I don't have it. I wont accept him as my son now, as he always makes me angry. Then he said we will go and we left him behind. Then we reached Dun na when it was totally dark, very late. We had tea at Phari Sechö.   

**Q:**  You guys were in a Land Rover?   

**A:**  Yes, in a Land Rover. Dargye and Thrinley, both of them were there. Both can drive. Oh yeah, Dargye came later in a truck with Phungyela. Late father, me and Thrinley came together. We reached Dingrab. There is a Kashmir Seera, with brown chocolate color. So Tess la told father that if during an emergency you have problem, here there is emergency <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> which is ready to eat. So father told us we will have it and sleep. Then we had it and slept. Next morning he told me to sleep for a while, but I have to wake at 8.00 am. Then we woke up and left and reached Gyantse. There we stayed in Nethab. Nethab acha la was there. Acha Dikyi Drolma also came from Gyantse Changlo. The next day, Phungye la also arrived and he scolded him a lot. Then father went to visit Duri Kunnyö. Duri kunnyö couldn't see properly. They [the household] had like around 20 dogs, like Absos and all. I didn't go. Acha Dikyi Drolma la went to help. Then he came back and Chandzö [Senior manager] Lhundup la of the Tsarong household arrived. Oh sorry, Chandzö Lhundup la arrived at Shigatse, not here. Like that we stayed in Shigatse for one night. Then Chandzö Lhundup la was sent to Tsarong and all the [schalthang] were told to pack up and take it back here. All the holy ones. Chandzö la had taken everything. Then when he came back, it was repacked and he told brother to send it. There were things, but I was small... Then when all the things were finished, Shigatse kunyö were offered a feast. Then they offered a long life offering for the Panchen Rinpoche. Father's anger was gone by then and he said sorry to Phungye la. Father took me and Phungye la to the Panchen Rinpoche. 2 gold coins were offered to the Panchen Rinpoche for long life. The Pachen Rinpoche and all of us were in gyöchen thabri. I was in Dark green Gyöchen, Phungyela was in Tsamdok and father was in gyöchen tabril also. They talked there and stayed like that with the Panchen Rinpoche. So [shedo shede-dresi were offered. When father was talking, the paper in which he was having the dresi food got hit and the dresi fell on father's fine chuba. I laughed like anything and seeing me, the Panchen Rinpoche also laughed. That was really funny. The Panchen Rinpoche stammers a bit like Gyalsey lame.   

**Q:**  Stammers?   

**A:**  Yes stammers. I came to know during that time. Then we went to Lhenga.   

**Q:**  Lhenga is in Shigatse?   

**A:**  Yes, that is the one. At Lhenga, Late aku la was there. So aku la had made a proper household with his own earnings and looked very elegant. When father reached there, [women] wore the jewellery and the men wore the {Bokdo] and [shegön] caps and were in line with the [chemar] and [chojang].   

**Q:**  Ok Aunt, then Lhenga? [We are disturbed by the servant]   

**A:**  Then we went to Lhenga, but we encountered a bad omen. Tashi Delek got upside down. It wasn't a good sign but father told us it was "nothing to worry and that nothing will happen." "You shouldn't consider it a bad omen." Then we went back and packed at Lhenga. All the holy scroll of thanga paintings were packed and brother made a list of them. Again we set off from Lhenga and we reached Margyang. After that, the next day we were to reach the Tsarong household. Then what I did was that there were lots of beggars and nomads in Margyang so everybody cames to beg. Thinking that we are going to reach Tsarong House tomorrow, I gave all the eatables, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, tea and all the leftovers from the ones which Acha Tess la had sent along with us. So I told father that I gave all the eatables to the beggars and he said 'well done.' Like that father went to sleep. I had to tell him stores. I had to bring a book and tell the stories until father got a total rest. After he fell asleep, then I use to go to bed.   

**Q:**  What was the book. Was it in English?   

**A:**  Yes in English. It was simple English. I had to translate it and tell him the story. He use to bring his own books and tell me to read. He asked to bring a dictionary, a pen, a paper and when everything was ready then he told me to read. If I didn't know, then I had to search for the meaning in dictionary. Like that he taught me. On the way, also he told me to read. Then the Land Rover got struck somewhere. The wheels couldn't roll in the sand. We tried and tried. After a while Dargye and Trinley were there and they tried to fix it but the engine caught fire. Dargye caught fire and father told us to put sand on him and told me to get sand in my apron and pour it on him. He was told to roll but he was sweating like anything. After he rolled on the sand, the fire got extinguished. [Break]   

**Q:**  [We stopped here] Did the car catch fire when you reached Margyang?   

**A:**  Yes father told Dargyal to roll in the sand. He was wearing a leather jacket. When he rolled on the sand, the fire got extinguished. Since father told us to put sand, I collected pretty large amount of sand in my apron and put it in the engine and the fire got extinguished. Later the engine was totally covered with sand, so there was no question of going on then. We tried to get a lift [hitch hike] but no body was there or nobody came by. Then we walked and walked. Father, Phungyal la and me walked and walked. Since there was lots of sand all over, you get tired easily, but you don't feel it when you are young. At that time I was even younger than you. I might have been around 27 or 28. That was a long time ago. Then we walked and walked cracking jokes with father. After a while the stars were twinkling. Father told us to "keep quiet and listen to the howling of the dogs as we had to follow the sound of the dogs so that we might find the nomads, or otherwise we wont find any place to stay." So it was true as father told us. There was a nomad. We greeted them; 'Hello!', and they asked what do we want? The nomad lady came over and we told her we need a place to spent the night [a guest house]. We told her the story. I told her 'I have my father and my brother along with me and our car got struck, so we need a house to stay for the night and we will pay for the house'. So she agreed and told us to come inside. We asked if she had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, so we could get a tea and tsamba mixed dish [Jamdu]. 'Sure' she said and told us to come inside first. Father wore old clothes as usual so she thought he was our servant. She told him 'you can sleep here' addressing him as a servant. She addressed me as [Seymo (aristocratic young woman)] and told me to sleep there and told my brother to sleep near by me since he was young. She treated me the best, addressing me as [Seymo]. Then I told her that he is my father. She said, 'We thought he was your servant' Then we placed the [Ga] and [Gimo]   

**Q:**  What is Gimo?   

**A:**  Its [Pheko]. Drikung Kyabgön said he used to braid that. He had brought one. On the Gemo, he made a seat. Most of the time in the Gemo, cow dung was placed. It was like a sack bag.   

**Q:**  In India its called Bura.   

**A:**  Yes, exactly. Bura. Very heavy and hard stone. Then I placed my apron on it and made fire. So father said, now even though you have a gold coin to offer, nobody's there to change it for a bowl full of tsamba. Really there was nobody to exchange it with tsamba. Anyhow I tried to flatter and pleaded with my fingers crossed and feeling pity upon us, they gave it to us. They said, 'we have only sufficient amount and we cant buy any. So father had 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> notes in the purse and gave it to them, but she said we don't need this, its of no use to us. So father said, 'No problem, you can give to the ones who do trading from Lhasa and Shigatse.' 'They will take it and you don't have to keep it'. So after much pleading, he gave 3 of the 100 sang notes to them as we spent the night there. We were given Jamdu. They allowed us to make a fire, so I made a fire since father might get cold. Phungyal la was fast sleep. I kept on making the fire in order to keep father from getting cold. Father told me he couldn't sleep. I rubbed his feet and didn't let him move. Then early the next morning, he said 'lets go'. I told father that we... Then we walked down and said 'see you later' to the nomad lady. We went on looking for a lift. Suddenly Yuthok's car came. I knew one of the drivers whose name was Tenshi la. So he asked me what are you doing here? So I told him I was with my father and all. He said 'Is it Tsarong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a>?' I said yes. He said 'Oh my goodness' what happened? So I told him the story. Then he told me to invite father back in the truck. Then we were in the truck. Since they had gone to India and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> and all, they had lots of things to eat in the truck. They offered pooped rice and they have bread and offered tea also. It was sweet tea. They didn't have butter tea. We had already given all our food to the beggars and so we don't have anything. I was the one who gave everything. So they drove us back safely to our household. The next day, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> household had a jeep, which my late husband and me bought from Calcutta earlier, and I was the one to transport it. That was sent to take the Tsarong's Land Rover. They pulled it by chains and got it back. Then when we reached at our household, again father did lots of packing. My late husband and me were sent with a government truck and a Russian jeep since we had to get the [Ouphuk??]. It was free and didn't cost anything when we came back. That's why everything was sent in it. I offered everything to brother.   

**Q:**  So did you come back? How come you came back? How long did you stay there when you reached there?   

**A:**  Yes, stayed for 9 months.   

**Q:**  Were you at the same job?   

**A:**  No, this time it was to make tents for His Holiness.   

**Q:**  No what about your work?   

**A:**  No my work was not the same.   

**Q:**  Did you take leave from school?   

**A:**  Yes. I took leave from the school. Since Tennor was born, there was no chance of going to school. Then father packed a lot. Do you know there were like this huge scroll of paintings ofrRibbon gifted for Bhutan's queen. Have you seen the huge scroll of paintings at father's place?   

**Q:**  No I don't remember much.   

**A:**  They have such big ones. So I brought along all of those and offered them to my brother.   

**Q:**  So how did you manage to come to India?   

**A:**  We came to India to buy the tents for His Holiness from India.   

**Q:**  What kind of tents was it for?   

**A:**  It was for His Holiness, since he has to go for to Lake Chökhorgyal. When he reach the age of 18, he had to go to Chökhorgyal, but he couldn't do it so it was extended for a few years. Otherwise it has to be done when he was 18 years of age. Then the Chinese came and created commotion and he couldn't do it. So when the time came and they took it out, all the tents had been eaten by rats and got rotten. So it was of no use. So Tsarong father knew that that it was a nice one. Hall Anderson had a nice factory of tents at Kanpur. So they ordered by looking in the catalog. We had this kind of tents in Tsarong household. It won't let the water inside even though it rained so hard. It was a nice one with the steel hooks which can be placed easily.   

**Q:**  So did grandfather order it?   

**A:**  Grandfather gave the idea to Ten Norla. Ten Norla and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> were the Dzasa's leader. Then Ten Norla was the staff.   

**Q:**  Then Norla's father?   

**A:**  Yes, Ten Norla's father. Sorry! Ten Norla's father was very kind hearted but he was kind of a foolish guy as he was not an efficient guy who can really look after his family.   

**Q:**  Before coming here, wasn't there commotions of Khampas and stuff in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. FDather told us about it. He said, 'it isn't good'. He told me that "you will get stuck here so you must go since I can go anytime without any problem with everything ready in my bag. You are the mother of a child; you can take them bare naked or wrap them in a blanket or graze some cattles there and live your livelihood, so you don't have to worry. You should leave immediately. One day, there will be a time when it wont be possible even to go from Tsarong to Taring. So its better if you leave before that. Go Go Go. You wont have any problem since you are already a smart girl and have served a lot for your parents. So you will have blessings for that and you will never face any problems." He made a wish, 'Seriously you will never have any problem.' I think it happened exactly the way father said.   

**Q:**  Did you have a conversation about it when you reached the household?   

**A:**  Yes, when I asked about it, Taring grandfather wasn't very smart [as far as livelihood was concerned], their ancestors and generations were high class but not smart and efficient at all. They couldn't do things properly. So for me also, how can I stay there and make the livelihood by leaning on one person. He will fall down and make me fall also. So Taring grandfather said something like this, 'Hmmm. How come the Chinese are that powerful as they cant even make it. Since he was an old man, his thinking was bit different. At that time he was 75 years. He was younger than me. He died at the age of 75.   

**Q:**  Wasn't he 72?   

**A:**  No 75. I asked.   

**Q:**  So when you came there, was your plan was to go for a while and then come back soon?   

**A:**  Yes. It was to go back. Otherwise it was not possible for a mother to pass through.   

**Q:**  So did you have permission to take the children and leave?   

**A:**  Yes, I did have permission and they told us to take them. When I said, I will take them. Mother said, "You consider your father like a Buddha and treat your mother in an ill manner (giving her a difficult time). You will be giving hard time for your mother. If you take them away, what should I tell the Chinese. If you want to go you can leave, but leave your child behind. She wouldn't let me take the child. So I couldn't survive leaving behind my child. I was going to come back then. I told them I want to take Jigme, but they wouldn't let me do that also. Otherwise, I had left all the expense for Jigme with my sister. I gave around 30,000 Indian Rupees. It was a pretty good amount of money. I sold my headdress to get that.   

**Q:**  Those times were gone when they used to wear headdress and jewelery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was slowly going aeway. So like that it was difficult and one can't escape since it was a joint family. It was difficult, you didn't have the freedom. Moreover, my husband was not clever. He was a nice person and very religious, but he didn't have that sense of earning money and being clever. Cleverness wasn't there. That sensitivity was not there. The whole Taring family didn't have that thing.   

**Q:**  So like that you came to India. Right? Where did you go? Did you go to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  No, to sister's place.   

**Q:**  Bhutan House?   

**A:**  I stayed at Tashithing. No not at Bhutan house since they were driven out from there. So I stayed at Tashithing which was just above [Peno Rai]. Then it was really difficult for me because Sister Tess la and brother were not on good terms. They kept on fighting. Oh my goodness! I didn't know what I was to do! If I don't stick at one place then I don't have another place to stay also. So if I don't stay at Tess la's place, brother took care of Daisy la. Then everybody cant enjoy meals from there you know...You also have to think.   

**Q:**  So Daisy la stayed there?   

**A:**  Daisy la stayed at Tsarong [Penarai]. So I cant stay at Tsarong also. You have to divide. I couldn't make it difficult for my brother. If I asked my brother and Yangchen la to take care, then it's a difficult situation since they can't say no and if they do take care, then how can they look after so many of them. So we had to think of other's difficulties. Then when I stayed at sister's place, they don't get along. So I stayed calm and didn't get bothered. Sister Yangchen la knew about it and she told me nowadays that Betty la also stays quiet. Obviously I had to stay idle and not get bothered, since what can I do when I don't know anything and it will get worse if I got bothered.   

**Q:**  So how long did you stay like that?   

**A:**  I stayed for one year at my sister's place.   

**Q:**  Then did you go to take those tents?   

**A:**  Yes, I packed all the tents and took all the accounts from Kanpur. I have photos also.   

**Q:**  No, before taking the accounts of the tents, did you go to Kanpur?   

**A:**  Yes, I went to Kanpur and took the accounts. I fixed up the tents and stayed in the tents and took pictures also. I did everything.   

**Q:**  Who made it in Kanpur?   

**A:**  At Kanpur they had a tent factory. It was established during the British time. It's a branch of the Hall Anderson.   

**Q:**  So they made Hall Anderson's tents?   

**A:**  Yes, father knew about it. Father took the things from Hall Anderson. Calcutta Hall Anderson. At that time, most of the big shops of the British were there in Calcutta.   

**Q:**  So was it Hall Anderson or Hall and Anderson?   

**A:**  Yes it must be that, but we Tibetans called it Hall Anderson.   

**Q:**  Then did they packed and send it?   

**A:**  Yes, they sent it and it reached Sikkim. From Sikkim, we had to send it on people's backs, but then we received the news [of the uprising] and couldn't send it. So all of them were sent to Dharamsala. They were distributed among the refugees.   

**Q:**  Was it one big tent?   

**A:**  No, it was 28 tents containing Kashag's [cabinet's] office, His Holiness wash room, bathroom, bedroom, living room, toilet, audience room. Everything!   

**Q:**  So was it all kind of sizes?   

**A:**  Yes, all kind of sizes.   

**Q:**  Then how long did you stay there. Was it in '58?   

**A:**  I didn't stayed long in Kanpur.   

**Q:**  No, was it in 1958 when you came from there? Was it during winter?   

**A:**  '58. That was when His Holiness was about to flee Tibet. When sister Kunsang la went for a protest. It was just two weeks before that.   

**Q:**  Was it before the uprising then?   

**A:**  Yes, the same month.   

**Q:**  So you came in March. Between Febuary and March?   

**A:**  Yes. I came two weeks before.   

**Q:**  So if they waited for two weeks then they might not have finished.   

**A:**  It was finished. Everything was finished.   

**Q:**  Must have ordered it earlier.   

**A:**  Yes, we ordered it earlier from Lhasa. Until we are called to take it, we didn't use to wait for it while they were making. Tsarong father told us to do like that. "We have to order it and then go and take it as there will be no problem".   

**Q:**  So when 1959 uprising started, where were you?   

**A:**  In Calcutta at Sister's place with Dashö Silön.   

**Q:**  Where in Calcutta?   

**A:**  In Wood Burn Park.   

**Q:**  In Wood Burn Park?   

**A:**  Yes, just when they shifted about a month before. Before that, they stayed in Machine Row, which was a bad apartment.   

**Q:**  What about Olympic House?   

**A:**  Olympic House was much later on. Tivoli court was also much later on.   

**Q:**  Yes, Tivoli was much later on. At that time how did you come to know about the disturbance [in Lhasa]?   

**A:**  Well, Dashö Silön recieved a monthly call from Apa Saheb [Apa Pant] from Gangtok. As Dashö Silön was already ... and Apa Saheb was also a political officer already. So wireless messages were received. So right after receiving the message, he left for Bhutan by helicopter.   

**Q:**  Was there a party that night?   

**A:**  After receiving the message that night, they held a big party outside the Grand Hotel at Seraje in open air...Bollywood...   

**Q:**  At Princess?   

**A:**  No, there was another one near the Princess where lots of people gathered. One of the Bollywood actors who was Dashö Silön's friend was there. It was not Sheilah Mathon. It was much before that. So they arrived and one big feast was organised for them. Then they fought that night. Oh my goodness!   

**Q:**  Who and whom fought?   

**A:**  Tashi Rinpoche and Lim la's boyfriend Tsepak Rinpoche fought. Since there was a jealousy between Dashö Silön and Tsepak Rinpoche, there were lots of Indians on Tsepak's side. Then on Dashö's side, all the Tibetans were there including <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s two, three sons and Yuthok's sons were there too. A lot of others were there. Then they threw beer bottles at each other and fought. Then there was an Indian who was Tsepak's friend who squeezed Dashö's neck. So I pleaded with him saying on Mercy's ground, "release him". So he released him. Still Rinpoche was after him. So I told him why you are doing this Rinpoche, but he said I really liked the way you pleaded saying 'On mercy ground" as it was pretty much of a help for me. [Chuckles]...   

**Q:**  So did they come to know about loosing Lhasa from that night?   

**A:**  Yes, they came to know about it, but Silön had already left for Bhutan.   

**Q:**  Left for Bhutan or Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Bhutan. Then the marriage of Gyelse [son] was fixed you see, so you can't do anything.   

**Q:**  Whose marriage?   

**A:**  Hupku and Rinpoche. Gyalse Lamala's marriage.   

**Q:**  That was much later on.   

