# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0023.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Shatra Rimshi Ganden Paljor [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་རིམ་བཞི་དགའ་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Shatra Rimshi Ganden Paljor [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་རིམ་བཞི་དགའ་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 64  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Shatra [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] was a well-known aristocratic official from one of the highest and wealthiest families in Tibet. In this interview, he talks about the aftermath of the loss of Chamdo in Lhasa and the Dalai Lama's trip to Beijing in 1954. He discusses the resignation of the sitsab as well as the opposing sides of the 17-Point Agreement. Also, he describes the troubles that occurred on the way to Dartsedo to meet the Dalai Lama and the senriy lottery that decided whether or not the Dalai Lama would go to China. Finally, he mentions various political discussions such as ones regarding the Military Administrative Committee and the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0023_05/H_0023_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What were you doing in 1951?   

**A:**  I was in the third denshu delegation to welcome the Dalai Lama back to Lhasa [in 1951]. The head [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] of the third denshu was Jigyab Khembo Ngawang Namgyel [Tib. ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. We met the Dalai Lama at Sey Chöngor Yangtze [Tib. ཟས་ཆོས་འཁོར་ཡང་རྩེ] [monastery]. With me was the monk official Changtse Thubden Senge [Tib. བྱང་རྩེ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་སེང་གེ]. We were his staff. When the Dalai Lama came there we had an audience and gave khata scarves, etc. This was an extra job [Tib. འཕར་མ]. My real job was as the Payroll Officer in Dome (Kham) [Tib. མདོ་སྨད་ཕོགས་དཔོན]. I was one of the new staff [Tib. ལེཇ] of [Kalön] Ngabö [in Chamdo]. [Kalön] Lhalu had moved on to Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང] to block the communists [in 1950]. I was a new official under Ngabö, but I came a bit late, so by the time I went [to Chamdo] Lhalu was at Kongpo Giamda and Chamdo had been lost, so I was told to stay with Lhalu. In Giamda there was Lhalu and 70 or so monk volunteers (Tib. ཨཏྲུ [ཨ་ཕྲུག]) from the Big Three Monastic Seats and a few Kudrak with bren guns. The soldiers there had no money for salary. Everyone was afraid and worried that the communists were coming. Some of the rich Kongpo families had buried their gold underground. Because of this, we weren't able to borrow money to pay the soldiers from them, so I went back to Lhasa to ask what to do and get money for the soldiers' salary. At this time, there was an office in the Shöl Parkhang [Tib. ཞོལ་པར་ཁང] called the dugö legung [Tib. འདུ་བཀོད་ལས་ཁུངས] led by Surkhang Shape which was preparing barley and money for soldiers' salaries. So I asked them for the money and sent my servant to take the salary to Giamda. At that time, I didn't want to go back [to Giamda] and just stayed there [in Lhasa]. I went to the 2 sitsab, Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi, to ask them in their house to give me leave from having to return. I told them there was nothing to do there [Giamda], and it was just waiting around. In Lhasa there were not that many people since many had gone to India, so please let me remain here. So they said I could stay in Lhasa. So since I was in Lhasa, I became part of the denshu. Then at Tshakur Linga [Tib. ཚ་ཁུར་གླིང་ག], which was west of Lhasa in Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང] where the Leather Factory is now located [this was a Nechung tratsang's park], there was a sitting room [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང] for the Dalai Lama because of the close relationship of Nechung and the Dalai Lama. So the Dalai Lama stayed there on his way back [there were still two more stops before Lhasa]. So the 2 sitsab and all the Kudrak went there to welcome the Dalai Lama. This was a very elaborate welcome. Then about half an hour's distance from Tshakur Linga at Gyaritsel [Tib. རྒྱ་རི་ཚལ], the custom was for the Namgyel Tratsang to put up tents and have a big welcome celebration. But the Dalai Lama wasn't staying overnight there and he went to Gyetseluding where there was another big welcome with the 2 sitsab and all the officials. The Chinese government's representative, Zhang Jingwu, and [his aide] Alo Buzhang were planning to come to welcome the Dalai Lama, but there was an argument over the seating arrangement. The 2 sitsab said that Zhang Jingwu had to sit facing the 2 sitsab while Dalai Lama faced straight ahead. The Chinese, however, said no. Zhang had to sit facing the same direction as the Dalai Lama, but he didn't have to sit on a throne. If he sat on a western type chair it was okay. The sitsab, however, said no. So in the end Zhang didn't come and his number two, Alo Buzhang, came and sat facing the 2 sitsab. After this ceremony, the Dalai Lama went to Norbulinga where there was another celebration.   

**Q:**  At that time, Chamdo had been lost and the foreign countries implied that they were not going to help much. What did most of the government officials think about the 17-Point Agreement at this time?   

**A:**  From the beginning, everyone was really scared [Tib. ངངས་སྐྲག]. We wondered what the 17-Point Agreement meant. When I was at Giamda, we kept horses saddled by the house so that we could run away at once if the Chinese came. We all had the same thought - if the communists come we would run. The Badang Drongdrag [Tib. པ་དང་གྲོང་དྲག] Regiment was at Lharigo [Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ] and the Ngadang Gyantse Regiment was at Giamda. There also were about 70 volunteers fighters from the Big Three Monastic Seats. The sitsab said stay there so we did, but neither I nor Lhalu wanted to stay there at all. My whole family was already in India, my wife, kids, etc. There were no family members left in Lhasa. All were in India. I received many telegrams from my family from Yadong telling me to come to India. At this time Sambo Tendzin Thöndrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ] and Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན] had gone [via Chamdo] to China. We didn't believe they could make a treaty when they went to Chamdo. Then the 2 sitsab convened a Full Assembly [Tib. ཙོནདུ་གྱེནཛོམ] and I went. The sitsab liked the old ways and the old system. They said that this 17-Point Agreement that has been signed doesn't have the same points as the instructions given by the government. They do not agree [with the instructions] because they were in the other people's land [Tib. རང་ས་མི་ས་ཐུག་པ་ཡིན་ཙང], so Ngabö became powerless. This Agreement isn't what we wanted, so we must all now take control and in unity sign an agreement to make a deal again through bargaining [Tib. འགྲིག་འཛོམས་བྱེད]. This meeting was held at the Tse Potala. The Dalai Lama was still in Yadong and Ngabö was on his way back and Lhalu was in Giamda. There was no discussion at the meeting, the sitsab simply informed us.   

**Q:**  Did all the government officials attend the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. So we sent a petition to the Dalai Lama saying we want to discuss this treaty. Lhalu came two or three days after this meeting. At that time, the Agreement had been signed and Zhang Jingwu was on his way to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Do you remember what month it was?   

**A:**  I think it was the start of 3rd Tibetan month in 1951.   

**Q:**  This was after the Agreement was signed, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And the representatives were coming back by the sea route [via India].   

**Q:**  At that time, had the Agreement reached Lhasa?   

**A:**  No. Probably they reported it to Tromo.   

**Q:**  Later when Ngabö came, wasn't there another meeting?   

**A:**  After the Dalai Lama came there was no government meeting opposing the 17-Point Agreement, but there was opposition from the fake People's Association (Tib. mimang tsondu dzüma [mi dmangs tshogs 'du rdzus ma].   

**Q:**  Where did the People's Association hold its meeting?   

**A:**  They didn't hold a meeting. They selected some representatives such as Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར], Alo Chöndze, and a monk from Shelkar Chöde [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་ཆོས་སྡེ]] saying they were the representatives of the people. They met secretly, not openly. They never had a real meeting because they didn't have an organization. They presented a petition to the Kashag opposing the 17-Point Agreement. At this time, the two sitsab are said to have been leading them, although this was never open support/help. When the petition reached the Kashag, the sitsab told the Kashag that this was an issue of the people so you should listen to them. There were no government officials involved in this.   

**Q:**  What was in the petition?   

**A:**  I don't know. I think it said we oppose the liberation [Tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ] and we don't want reforms. Tibet is independent and it was a loss to sign the Agreement. I think this is what it said. However, I don't know in detail.   

**Q:**  Has this appeared in any books or articles?   

**A:**  I'm not sure, probably since a lot has appeared in newspapers and magazines.   

**Q:**  I heard that in 1951-52 the People's Association did all sorts of things criticizing the Chinese and they sang some strange songs ridiculing the Chinese and telling people not to sell them grain. Do you remember these?   

**A:**  It does appear as if the government blocked the sale of grain to the Chinese army. In the Agreement it said the local government had to sell the grain and that the Central Committee will pay for that, but they didn't sell the grain well. This also made it inconvenient for private individuals to sell grain to the Chinese. When the Chinese troops came they brought only a backpack and a mug - no grain - so they had a hard time at first. It is said that the sitsab said, "Than losing a war, starving is worse" [Tib. དམག་ཕམ་བ་ལས་གྲོད་ཁོག་ལྟོག་པ་སྡུག་གི་རེད]. No one openly said you can't sell to the Chinese, but private people saw the government's appearance of not wanting to sell and followed along. The Chinese had a clever strategy. They made private relations with people and asked them to sell grain directly. So people sold this way. For example, they came to our family and asked us to sell them grain and we sold them some.   

**Q:**  Eventually the 2 sitsab had their fight with the Chinese officers and had to resign. How did this happen?   

**A:**  At that time I wasn't there, so I don't know, but Lhalu and Ngabö were there. I do know a little though, since Lobsang Tashi and I were in prison in the same house so I heard some from conversations.   

**Q:**  What was the main issue?   

**A:**  They had a big contradiction at that time. Lukhangwa had great loyalty for the Tibetan government and liked the old customs. Lobsang Tashi was a bit different, since he had lived in China for 3 years in the Khendrönlosum [Office] so had more understanding of world affairs. But they were very friendly and trusted each other very much and whatever Lukhangwa said, Lobsang Tashi said, "Yes, that's right." At that time, the sitsab were between the Dalai Lama and the Kashag so that whatever the Kashag sent to the Dalai Lama went through the sitsab and they didn't pass everything the Kashag sent up [to the Dalai Lama]. Likewise, what came down from the Dalai Lama went through the sitsab and they didn't pass along all that the Dalai Lama said, which made the Chinese officials hard to handle [Tib. གནང་སྟབས་མ་བདེ་བ]. This is what people said. Lobsang Tashi told me that at that time Zhang Jingwu used to suddenly appear to see the Dalai Lama in his residence. At this time, the 2 sitsab would come into the Dalai Lama's room and stay there standing up. So Zhang Jingwu said to the sitsab that it is not good for them to stay like this. The sitsab responded saying, "The Dalai Lama is the supreme ruler and owner [Tib. དོན་གྱི་བདག་པོ] of Tibet, but he is young has not had experience in politics. He is still accumulating experience so it is not okay if we didn't serve him. This made it very inconvenient for the Chinese officials. Once in the Dalai Lama's room in the Jokhang called Labrangteng Simjung Nangsi [Tib. བླ་བྲང་སྟེང་གཟིམ་ཆུང་སྣང་སྲིད], there was a meeting with Zhang Jingwu, Fan Ming, Zhang Guohua, Wang Qimei, the 2 sitsab, and the Kashag. The point of the meeting was to discuss the gradual absorption of the Tibetan army into the People's Liberation Army and about the Tibetan flag. The Chinese said the Tibetan flag is an English flag, so the army should not be permitted to carry it. At this time Lukhangwa came out openly and said, "This flag is the Tibetan national flag. It was not given to us by the English. We didn't just pick it up. It was created during the 13th Dalai Lama's time for our use, so it is a flag with history. So we can not just throw it away." So because of this, later the soldiers carried both the Chinese flag and the Tibetan flag at ceremonies. Lukhangwa also said that "in the 17-Point Agreement it said that the Tibetan army will be absorbed gradually [Tib. རིམ་པས], so we can't do it now. This is not an appropriate time to do this since the blood of the Tibetan people from the Chamdo liberation is not yet dry." The sitsab and the Chinese had an argument over this and Fan Ming said, "You are someone who is stirring up trouble between the Chinese and Tibet governments and someone who is trying to destroy the 17-Point Agreement. You are not listening to us no matter how much we try to get along [Tib. བསྟུན་མཁས]. So we are going to ask the Dalai Lama to demote you." Then Lukhangwa said, "That's fine, ask him. If the Dalai Lama says jump into the river or jump into a fire, I will do it. But I can't yield to others. I am going to petition Mao Zedong regarding you. Your behavior is not appropriate in Tibet and you are always talking biased." Then Zhang Jingwu said, "You two shouldn't quarrel. I am Mao's representative, so I will think about giving a petition to the Dalai Lama and a petition to Mao." So he mediated between the two. Lukhangwa also said the saying, "Even though one says that one is not white, it is white to the snow" [Tib. མི་དཀར་བྱས་ཀྱང་གངས་ལ་དཀར] which means that even though Zhang Jingwu say that he will not be biased, he was biased on Fan Ming's side. Then Lukhangwa also said, "If one's head is broken with a golden statue, there is no blessing. One would not like it if one is insulted by one's relative" [Tib. མགོ་བསེར་སྐུས་བཅག་ན་བྱིན་རླབས་མེད། དམའ་ཉེ་བས་ཕབ་ན་དགའ་རྒྱུ་མེད]. This might be a quote from the Gesar Story. [He meant that since we are attacked in Chamdo, we wouldn't appreciate the Chinese coming and trying to act friendly]. So Zhang Jingwu didn't have anything to say and the meeting was over.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Kashag was also there, so did the Kashag stand in between the Chinese and the sitsab?   

**A:**  Basically, the Kashag didn't have any choice but to go along with the sitsab, but probably they didn't dare to come out openly like the 2 sitsab. So I heard they were staying there in an appropriate manner [Tib. སྤམ་པོ]. My paternal uncle was Shasur. He was the assistant kalön. I heard from others that Shasur once said, "We kalön should also talk a little bit, otherwise if we don't talk and always let the sitsab talk, it is becoming like we are handing over the sitsab" [not supporting what they say].   

**Q:**  Who were the other Shape?   

**A:**  Ramba [Tib. རམ་པ], Surkhang, Ngabö, Shasur, Thubden Rabyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས], and there was also Dombor [Tib. གདོང་པོར].   

**Q:**  I heard that some people in the People's Association surrounded Zhang Jingwu's house. And in one of the books it says that they shot a gun at Ngabö house and about 50 people were arrested. Can you explain about these?   

**A:**  At that time, Zhang Jingwu was living not in Yuthok House but in the [old] Sandutsang House [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཚང་རྙིང་པ]. At the time of the People's Association's disturbance, the 4 drunyichemmo and 4 tsipön were called to Zhang Jingwu's house and they were kept there saying that if they didn't stay there it is not going to be good because people causing a disturbance have surrounded the house. So they stayed there one night to kind of protect them. Nothing happened like stoning them. Zhang Jingwu also said at this time that there are people behind the scene directing the People's Association's disturbance [Tib. ཡོལ་བའི་རྒྱབ་ཀྱི་ཇུས་འགོད་བྱེད་མཁན].   

**Q:**  It seems to me that there were two paths. One was to regard the 17-Point Agreement as okay and act according to the Agreement and other path was to oppose it. Didn't they think that if they opposed it very strongly the Chinese would send more troops? They should have a plan thinking what benefit they could gain if they did this. I am not clear about this.   

**A:**  This is kind of secret [Tib. ལྐོག་གྱུར] to me also.   

**Q:**  Did they think that they would get foreign support?   

**A:**  They probably thought they were going to receive foreign help.   

**Q:**  At that time, Jenkhentsisum was there in Kalimpong, right?  

**A:**  The foreign countries actually supported them, but they couldn't stop the Chinese. However I think they definitely had a plan to stop the Chinese after their arrival. And there was the Tibet Welfare Association [Tib. Dedön Tshogpa] and probably they had support on all the aspects from foreign countries. Actually, they should have know that it was impossible to handle the Chinese by making war. The Communist Party regarded the people highly and the reforms were going to be done according to the wishes of the people. They said whenever the people want reforms we will do them and the Central Committee will not force the reforms. There was no set timetable. So when they [People's Association] took the name of the people it seemed that the people didn't want the reforms. So I think they were thinking about delaying or postponing the implementation of the reforms. Probably, the representatives of the People's Association were not selected by the people. They were people who were verbal and then got together and agreed to act.   

**Q:**  Could you officials go to India, etc. in the early 1950s?   

**A:**  Yes. We could go whenever we wanted. We Kudrak had to ask the [Tibetan] government for permission to leave, but other people just could go when they wished. There were no passports, etc. needed, and no customs [offices], etc.   

**Q:**  In 1952, the 2 sitsab were set aside and in 1954 the Dalai Lama went to Beijing. Were you part of his entourage?   

**A:**  No, I wasn't. But I was in the first denshu [welcoming delegations when he returned]. We went to Dartsedo to meet the Dalai Lama. The custom was to send three denshu.   

**Q:**  Was this the one with Bisu and Alo Chöndze?   

**A:**  Yes. We had a lot of troubles (Tib. ཉོགཏྲ [རྙོག་ཁྲ]).   

**Q:**  Please tell me about this.   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama went to attend the first National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན] in Beijing to approve the new constitution. So the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama were asked to attend. They sent an invitation. There were two opinions among the government officials regarding the Dalai Lama's going to China. One group was opposed and one in favor. Those who were against it said that if the Dalai Lama went the Chinese would keep him there. I thought that it would be good if he went. I had been on the first Gift-Giving Delegation (Tib. Tenbü Tshogpa [རྟེན་འབུལ་ཚོགས་པ]) led by Liushar Thubden Tharpa [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐར་པ]. He was the Tuanzhang and Dingja Dorje Gyentsen [Tib. ལྡིང་བྱ་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] was the Vice Tuanzhang. I thought that if the Dalai Lama went he would have a broader vision of the world. It is better to see something than to merely hear about it. From the lay officials [Tib. ཤོད་སྐོར] there were Shakabpa and Mentöpa [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད་པ]. From the monk officials there was Khenjung Thubden Samjola [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས]. From the Senampa [rank] there was Yabshi Jebula [Ch. jie fu] [brother-in law] Phüntso Tashi [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]), me, Shölkang Targyela [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་དར་རྒྱས་ལགས], and Phünkang Tsering Thöndrub [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་ཚེ་རིང་དོན་གྲུབ]. Then there also were 4 tsendrön: Dombor Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར་ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ], Gyentsen Tempel [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་བསྟན་འཕེལ] who was from Jigyab Khembo Gyambumgang's [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང] monk household [Tib. ཤགཙང].   

**Q:**  Is he still there [in Tibet]?   

**A:**  He is in the Municipal Political Consultative Conference [Tib. གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས]. And from the fifth rank letsemba [Tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] there was Yeshe Lhundrup [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ] who later went to India and took asylum and there was [the older] Driyü [Tib. འབྲི་ཡུལ་རྒན་པ]. There were also some people from Shigatse. And there were also some traders and some representatives of the Big Three Monastic Seats. There were also women such as Yabshi Tsering Drolma [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ]. There were actually two groups. The higher officials were called the Gift-giving Delegation and the other was the Tour Group (Tib. Tagor Tshogpa [ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ]). The first went via plane from India to Singapore to Hong Kong and Beijing and the other went over land by horse (and then by car from Derge Jomda Dzong [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་འཇོ་མདའ་རྫོང]). My wife Künsangla [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་ལགས] didn't feel safe staying in Lhasa alone with the communists just having arrived so she was very worried and asked me to take her with me and she was also crying. I was in the horse group, but Künsangla had a bad leg so couldn't ride like that. The staff of the two Thuanzhang had been already confirmed as follows: Jebula and his wife Tsering Drolma, Shölkang, Horkhang, Tsidrung Champa Nyendra [Tib. བྱམས་པ་སྙན་གྲགས], and Tsidrung Wöser Bumther [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་འབུམ་ཐེར]. So I couldn't go among the staff. At that time there was a Chinese office called Procurement Office [Tib. མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་ཁུངས] headed by a Chinese called Liu Buzhang. I was friendly with him, so I went to discuss this with him and asked him to get us among the staffs who are going by air. He at once called Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] house for Zhang Guohua. I got a message that it was all right soon after. So I went and saw the development in China. So when the Dalai Lama going was being discussed, the Kashag called those who had gone on the [earlier] tour: Kundeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང], Dzasa Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན], all the Drungtsi, the representatives of the Big Three Monastic Seats, and some monk and lay officials. They asked us if the Dalai Lama goes will it be good or bad, and is there a risk to the Dalai Lama's life. They all said if he went it would be good. We said we received good treatment and high officials met us at the railway station, so if he goes it would be good. There will be no risk. But still there were some people who did not fully trust us. The Kashag therefore recommended to the Dalai Lama that he go to Beijing. But at that time there was a group who were against the trip. Finally the order came that they would do a senriy [divine lottery] in front of the Maha Kala Chapel or Gömbokhang [Tib. མགོན་པོ་ཁང] in Norbulinga. At this time, the Central Committee said it would be great if you came to the meeting as it is very important. All the key Chinese officials will be there and you can meet them. And you can visit your home on the way. If you don't come, the Panchen Lama is definitely coming, so please think about this well [otherwise it may seem Panchen Lama is the representative of Tibet]. I was there in the Gömbokhang when the senriy lottery was done. I was one of the officials standing up. The two tutors [Tib. ཡོངཛིན] did the prayers for propitiating the deity by serving tea or chang [Tib. ལྗགས་སྐྱེམས] before the Maha Kala. The senriy was done by the Dalai Lama. The paper had to be the same size and the writing the same number of words -- it said, "if it is good for the Dalai Lama to go to China, please select this one" [Tib. ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ་རྒྱ་ནག་ལ་ཕེབས་པ་དགའ་ན་འདི་བབ་རོགས་གནང] or "if it is not good for him to go, please select this one" [Tib. མ་ཕེབས་པ་དགའ་ན་འདི་བབ་རོགས་གནང]. The strip of paper was then rolled up and put into a piece of bag [tsamba mixed with water and kneaded] and weighed on a jeweler's type of scale one, ball on each side to make sure they were exactly balanced. Then they were put in a porcelain cup called long handle [Tib. ཡུ་རིང]. Then Dalai Lama held it and did the prayer, and holding it in both hands turned it around and around quickly until one ball fell out. Drunyichemmo Jawdang picked this up and gave it to Dalai Lama. The Dalai lama then opened the "bag" and read the paper. It said go to China. Then the Dalai Lama took the other ball that hadn't fallen out and opened it to make sure no trick had been played. So it was decided the Dalai Lama should go. I wasn't among that group that went. The 17-Point Agreement said that Tibet should make reforms when ready and the Tibetan government established the Reform Office, Legjö Legung to examine and oversee this. The main head of this was Ngabö. Under him were the Drungtsigye. Then there were the representatives of the Big Three Monastic Seats. Tsögö [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] was one of the Reform Office members appointed from the ranks of the Senampa, and when he was sent with the Dalai Lama to China, I was sent in his place to that office.   

**Q:**  What year did it begin?   

**A:**  I think it was in the Wood-Horse Year (1954) [he may mean that was when he joined it]. I was sent as a member of the first Denshu to welcome back the Dalai Lama from China.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag send the denshu?   

**A:**  It was sent by the government itself and the Kashag made the arrangement for the lay officials. The Kashag took a name list of suitable members from the monk officials and the Kashag made the plan for it. My partner was Katsab Lama Thubden Rabyang. When the Dalai Lama was in Yadong, he and Shasur were left to run the Kashag. He was no longer kalön, but was an ex-kalön or Kasur. He was the representative of the monk officials and I was the representative of the lay officials. In rank he was higher than me, but on this job we were equal. With us were some of the fake representatives of the People's Association; Bisu, Alo Chöndze, Shelkar Chöde [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་ཆོས་སྡེ], Gelong and Amdo Gyetong. They had sent a petition to the Kashag asked to be part of the first denshu as the representatives of the People's Association. The Kashag then asked the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. bod las don u yön lhan khang] whether it was all right for them to go. They replied, "It is okay, but the Kashag has to take the responsibility that no misfortune occurs" [Tib. ཁ་ཆག་སྣ་རལ]. So the Kashag called us and told us that these 4 are going with you and you have to be responsible for them like the proverb, "the body should remain under the head" [Tib. མགོ་འོག་ལུས་བཅུག], and see that no trouble occurs. You must not allow them to do reckless things [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང]. So the Kashag called these four to the secretariat [Tib. འགག] of the Kashag and passed on instructions via the gadrung and gandrön. "You can't do wild things on this Denshu and whatever these two heads say you have to put that into practice. And after you return to Lhasa you must not cause trouble." When we left in trucks, there were two representatives of the government officials together with us as the staff (Tib. ལེཇ [ལས་བྱ]). One was the Yigtsang student [Tib. ཡིག་ཚང་སློབ་ཕྲུག] from my partner's shagtsang whose name was Thubden Ngawang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ངག་དབང]. Also the representative of Sera was the abbot Töba Khembo [Tib. སྟོད་པ་མཁན་པོ]. The representative of Ganden was the abbot Shartse Khembo [Tib. ཤར་རྩེ་མཁན་པོ] and the representative of Drepung was Tshükhang Lama Jambey Trinley [Tib. ཚུལ་ཁང་བླ་མ་འཇམ་དཔལ་འཕྲིན་ལས]. Nothing happened regarding the representatives of the People's Association along the trip [on the road]. When we reached Dartsedo, there was an earthquake and the road forward was cut. Cars couldn't go because the road was split. So we stayed at Dartsedo in a inn. At this time, the Dalai Lama had reached Yangen [Ch. ya an]. From Dartsedo we sent a telegram to Dalai Lama saying, "We are the first denshu and have reached Dartsedo. The Kashag's orders were to meet you at Dartsedo. but shall we wait here or come forward to meet you." The reply by telegram said, "Wait for us there. But check every day and let us know the conditions of the road around Dartsedo." So we waited there and checked each day on the roads and sent them a telegram. Then one day suddenly Alo Chöndze and Bisu Dorje Thöndrub [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་དོན་གྲུབ] came to us and said, "The Dalai Lama is in Yangen so our staying here is pointless. We have to go on to meet him. We don't know if the road is ahead finished or not [i.e., maybe it is finished]. We came to do the denshu for Dalai Lama, not sit in Dartsedo." My partner said, "We have received an order from the Dalai Lama to stay here, so we can not go forward. We also have work to do checking the roads around here every day and sending a telegram." Then the two representatives said, "If you two can't go, we will go." They wouldn't listen to our saying don't go. Finally my partner said, "Let's let them go. If there is trouble we can say that we instructed them not to go, but they refused to listen." So they went. They asked the head of the inn to send a car. [He said] "If the group's leaders agree I will send one." So they came to us and said, "They won't give us a car." So then we told the inn's head to give them a car. He did and the 4 representatives of the People's Association went ahead. When the Dalai Lama came there were tents set up at the Dartsedo airport and we gave the Dalai Lama the letter from the Kashag. When the Dalai Lama came, Phala Drönyerchemmo said to us in an angry way as we stood with heads bent over, "What is this? In the first denshu, there is a former one and a later one." Actually, we didn't have any choice, but to have two because they didn't listen to us. We had an audience with the Dalai Lama in the tent. The Central Committee had made elaborate preparations with all kinds of fried cookies (Tib. ཁབསེ [ཁ་ཟས]). The Dalai Lama said, "You have all had a difficult time coming here." We left with the Dalai Lama from Dartsedo to Dawu Nyamsogön [Tib. རྟའུ་ཉམས་གསོ་དགོན] Monastery. There everyone in the monasteries were inviting the Dalai Lama here and there asking for the dharma teachings along the way and the Dalai Lama gave the initiations and there were endless Khambas coming for audiences, so the plan was extended for a few days. So there the Dalai Lama told us we could go ahead and not wait for them, so we left with the Dalai Lama to follow soon. The 2nd Densu was waiting in Chamdo. It was headed by two fourth rank officials: Surkhang Khenjung and Tsarong Rimshi. The 3rd densu was at Giamda. It was headed by a Shape. We returned straight to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  In Alo Chöndze's book he said he made relations with Litang and Derge and planned and prepared for the revolt and they made a petition and said that if the petition didn't work, then you should launch the revolt. Did you notice any of this?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama didn't go to Litang, but the monks came to the Dalai Lama on a plain where tents were pitched. The Dalai Lama gave an initiation. There were many Khamba and Litang monks and Alo Chöndze was also there. The Dalai Lama couldn't visit all the areas and monasteries so he sent representatives to these, e.g. Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche and Tshurpu Karmapa [Tib. མཚུར་ཕུ་ཀར་མ་པ] and Mindröling Jung [Tib. གཅུང] Rimpoche. They gave some dharma teachings and at that time, there was such talk and they also gave the picture of Dalai Lama to the people in these areas. But there was no plan to incite revolt that I know of. But China probably suspected that they did discuss the revolt.   

**Q:**  Did Alo Chöndze and them discuss any politics with you?   

**A:**  No. We and they had really nothing normally to do with each other. They stayed together and we did also. One day in Dartsedo, Alo Chöndze came to us and said that he heard "good news" on the radio: "Premier Zhou almost died in an airplane crash in Kashmir today. In that Indian airplane there was the secretary of Nehru and some other staff and 2-3 people were injured. If Zhou had been in the first plane he would have been hurt." He was telling us this in very delighted manner. Bisu was also a bit crazy. Once when we were eating and the Khambas had piled up a lot of meat on the table, Bisu said seriously that he thinks that may be human flesh. Other than this time we had no discussion with Alo Chöndze.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was in Beijing, Mao told him about the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region [TAR]. What did you officials think about this?   

**A:**  Mao said we don't have to do the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. dmag srid u yön lhan khang] and we can go right to the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. We can do a jump right to this without the intermediate step. When the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa there a big meeting called at the Tsidrung Linga [Tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིང་ག] park. The moderator of the meeting was Ngabö. All the Kudrak were there, even the military rupön and gyagpön. It told all about the trip to China and the Dalai Lama's new title of Vice Chairman of the National People's Congress [Tib. u yön krang gshon pa] and the Panchen Lama's title of the Vice Chairman [Ch. fu zhuxi] of the National Political Consultative Conference [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཆབ་གྲོས]. And they announced that we didn't have to do the Military Administrative Committee and Tibetan troops would be gradually absorbed into the People's Liberation Army and that they were giving livelihood for the future [Tib. འཚོ་བའི་མདུན་ལམ] old retired soldiers and that the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region would be started. And that we have to look after the old officials without work. All sorts of things like that, they said.   

**Q:**  Was there any discussion like some said that it is not good?   

**A:**  No. It was solely to tell us what was happening, not ask our opinions. Later there was a lot of opposition. Later there was a Large Abbreviated Assembly [Tib. ཙོནདུ་ཧྲགདུ་གྱེཔ] meeting in Norbulinga's Shabden Lhagang [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལྷ་ཁང]. I was there. There was discussion about the replacement of the Military Administrative Committee with Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. At this time, the representative of Ganden nicknamed "pika" (Tib. ཨབྲ [ཨ་བྲ]) said, "I don't know what a "Military Administrative Committee is. [Trying to understand what you are talking about] is like fumbling around in the dark." He said all kinds of disparaging things like this. There was a very capable and verbal Dzasa called Gyetagba [Tib. རྒྱས་རྟགས་པ] (who had a Chinese wife) and knew a little Chinese. He said, "There is a big difference between the TAR and the Military Administrative Committee. The former is called Junzheng Weiyuan Hui in Chinese. And this is a great jump ahead by skipping one step in Tibet's development." Then the representative of Ganden said, "Now mister Dzasa has said that in Tibetan it is called Magsi Uyön Lhengang [Tib. dmag srid u yön lhan khang] [Military Administrative Committee] and in Chinese it is called Junzheng Weiyuan Hui, but we don't know Chinese so all this is like arriving in the dark. It is like groping in the dark. It's like being in the dark all this" [This is sarcastic in Tibetan]. At this meeting almost everyone was against this idea and expressed this in various ways.   

**Q:**  I heard that some people liked the idea since it would reunite Chamdo and Shigatse. At that time, on average, how many people liked it and how many people disliked it?   

**A:**  Lukhangwa and the Chinese representative talked and Lukhangwa said to him, "You have stolen Chamdo from us." Then there was an argument. The Chinese representative said, "If you start an Autonomous Region, we will give you back Chamdo." So in the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region [PCTAR] there were the people from the Tibetan government, Tashilhunpo, and Kham [Tib. གཞུང་བླ་ཁམས་གསུམ], although the Tibetan government had the most representatives and officials.   

**Q:**  As for the foreigners like me, it seems like the Tibetan government would no longer be there. At this time, did the Kashag support the setting up of the PCTAR?   

**A:**  They approved the decision to go ahead with this. Without their approval, it couldn't be installed.   

**Q:**  So the Kashag thought that it is good, right?   

**A:**  There were various opinions in the Kashag about this, some positive, some negative.   

**Q:**  Most people were suspicious, right?   

**A:**  The main one opposing it was the Big Three Monastic Seats. They said the monastic estates will be lost and the monastery's donggo [religious rituals] will deteriorate, etc. And they didn't have any experience and they remained in a chaotic manner.   

