# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0023.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Shatra Rimshi Ganden Paljor [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་རིམ་བཞི་དགའ་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 21 August 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Shatra Rimshi Ganden Paljor [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་རིམ་བཞི་དགའ་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 53  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Shatra [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] was a well-known aristocratic official from one of the highest and wealthiest families in Tibet. In this interview, he discusses details of the Pandatsang incident and Trimön's resignation, as well as details of the Dalai Lama's initial admittance as a monk. Also included are details of Tsarong shooting movies and of taking photographs of the Chöshug ceremony and how he was demoted because of this. He also speaks about the delegation sent to the Asian Relations Conference in India [in 1947] and the Trade Mission and the Italian, G. Tucci's coming to Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0023_04/H_0023_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Regarding Panda Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས], after the 13th Dalai Lama passed away for the benefit of others [Tib. དགོངས་པ་གཞན་དོན་དུ་གཤེགས], his personal attendant Kujar Kumbela [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར་ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས] got punished. It was said that this was the root cause of the Panda incident. In the beginning, the 13th Dalai Lama appointed Panda Tobgye as the rupön of a Militia Regiment for guarding Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས]. The main regiment guarding Markham was the Chadang Regiment and its depön was Norgye Nangpa [Tib. ནོར་རྒྱས་ནང་པ]. He and his soldiers were also stationed in Markham. Panda Tobgye and Kumbela had great affection [Tib. མཛའ་བརྩེ] for each other and Kumbela was regarded highly by the Dalai Lama. When Kumbela's incident occurred in Lhasa, Panda was disappointed and thought that Kumbela's getting punished just after the death of the Dalai Lama was a serious breach of the law. Therefore, Panda thought that the way the government was governing was bad and got the idea of rebelling against the Chadang Depön so he led his Militia Battalion and attacked the Chadang Regiment at night. At that time, if the depön had been there, probably he planned to arrest him and make some destruction to the regiment. But at that time the depön had gone to the Tshawa Butog [Tib. ཚ་བ་བུ་ཐོག] area to make offerings for the deceased Dalai Lama according to the order from the Doji. So probably he [Panda] killed several gyagpön and several soldiers and also stole all the guns, cannons, and ammunition in the regiment as well as the private wealth of the depön, rupön, and the gyagpön. At that time there was a monk official who was the salt tax collector in Sog [Tib. སོག་ཙཤོ] whose name was Thubden Dawa [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཟླ་བ]. He was living near the Chadang Regiment and was also captured. They didn't even let him wear his boots. He was brought barefooted and shut up in a prison. As soon as the government heard about this incident, since [his brother] Panda Yamphel [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཡར་འཕེལ] was in Lhasa, the Assembly decided to seal the Panda House, so they sent soldiers to surround Panda's House. The officials who went to seal the house were planning to enter the house, but Panda [Yamphel] closed the gate and didn't let them in. If they had opened the gate, the officials might have entered the house right away. Therefore, the officials were left outside and the soldiers also surrounded the house. There were many people standing around watching. Right at that time, a shot was fired from a window of Panda's house and they thought that Panda was challenging [Tib. ཡ་བཟུང] them and was not going to abide by the law, so the officials had to return home. After that, Panda also thought that it wasn't okay to remain in that situation so while they kept the main gate closed, they went out from the back side through a ladder and made an appeal about the matter to some important government officials. Panda told the officials, "We had to stop the officials from entering and sealing the house. We thought that if we let them in, we wouldn't get a chance to report about the matter. Basically, it seems the cause of the incident is because Panda Tobgye attacked the Chadang Regiment at night. However, although we are brothers, we didn't hear a single word about the incident and we didn't have any relations with him nor did we consort with him [Tib. ཕྱི་ལག་ནང་འབྲེལ]. So if you seal our house because of the incident that happened in Kham, we don't have any choice but to make an appeal about this matter. Please allow us to prove the truth [Tib. མཐའ་གསལ་བའི་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན]. Please do not do like the proverb, 'The leather rope is dragged along with the [woolen] rope [Tib. ཐག་ཞོར་འདྲེང་འདྲུད] and seal the house in Lhasa because of the incident that happened in Kham. We will make full compensation for the weapons and ammunition and the private belongings of the depön, rupön, gyagpön, and the soldiers." At the same time, Panda also got in touch with important officials through the monastic officials of the tratsang and khamtsen (residence halls) in Sera and Drepung monasteries to which Panda was affiliated as a sponsor funding rites [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས]. Panda also submitted a petition to the Assembly. After that, when they investigated the matter, the members of the Assembly said, "If Panda Yamphel didn't have relations with Tobgye and Raga [Tib. རབ་དགའ] [a third brother], it would not be okay to seal the Panda House in Lhasa. Panda said that he was going to appeal and prove the truth, so we can leave it like this. Temporarily, we will not seal his house, but as they reported, they have to hand over all the weapons and ammunitions and make compensations for the loss of the private belongings of the depön, rupön, gyagpön, and soldiers. Also the monastic tratsang and the khamtsen should act as the guarantor for this." That is how it was settled. In Kham, Panda Tobgye caused the disturbance and he also collaborated with his brother Raga and made the matter wider as they made much publicity in the Kham area saying, "After the death of the 13th Dalai Lama, the government is not acting the way the Dalai Lama governed the state. The most conspicuous thing is that Kujar Kumbela was a well known personal attendant of the Dalai Lama, but right after the death of the Dalai Lama, they accused and interrogated Kujar and finally imprisoned and issued the verdict and banished him. Such bad things happened. Therefore, there is nothing to hope for with the Tibetan government. So we, the people in Kham, should have solidarity." Probably they publicized and mobilized this very strongly. Some of them had placed their hopes on Panda, but the majority were just wondering what would the situation become and they had two minds about this [Tib. བློ་རྩེ་གཉིས]. Some people were just inattentive. They [Panda Tobgye and Raga] also said, "In the three great monasteries, Sera, Drepung, and Ganden, the majority of the monks are from Kham. So if we, the people of Kham, would withdraw from the Tibetan government, there will be many monks supporting us and the government would not be able to stop them and they will lose control." They had the motive of opposing the Tibetan government, but they couldn't put it into action. At that time, the Doji [Tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] was the Katsab (Acting Kalön) Trendong [Tib. བཀའ་ཚབ་བཀྲས་མཐོང]. When he heard about this, he sent troops and attacked [Tib. མཐའ་སྐྲོད] Panda Tobgye and Raga so the two brothers could no longer stay in Markham and ran away to China with the militias who felt guilty [Tib. གནོང་ཡོད་པ]. After that, the Tibetan government talked with the Guomindang through the Khendrönlosum (the Tibetan representatives in Beijing). The government told them about Panda Tobgye's serious rebellion against the government and about how he destroyed the security in the regiment and about how they [the government] therefore didn't have any choice but to attack them. They [the brothers] wouldn't dare to stay in Kham (in Tibet) because they were guilty and ran away to China. This is a critical point for the friendship between Tibet and China, so please hand over Panda and the militia to us. If you don't hand them over, in the future the friendship between Tibet and China will be unstable [Tib. ལྷིང་མ་འཇགས་པ]. Please think about this from the broader perspective." At that time, the Guomindang government neither handed them over as the Tibetan government requested, nor did they support them [the brothers] to challenge the troops of the Doji. Anyway, Panda's followers kind of surrendered [to the Chinese] and they were kept in the Chinese territories in the Kham area (in Sichuan). Probably the Chinese might have thought of using them in the future if it would be beneficial. Like this, the Panda incident was concluded. I forgot to tell you something. In the past, the father of Panda was called Nyijang [Tib. ཉི་བྱམས] and his son was called Nyima. From their time Pandatsang was working as the government's trader [Tib. གཞུང་ཚོང] and all of the wool trade was controlled by them. Only Panda was allowed to do the wool trade. I am not sure how much profit they got from doing this government trade. Later, the elder son of Panda died, and Yamphel succeeded in doing the government trade. So when Panda's house was going to be sealed, Panda reported to the government, "We still haven't concluded the accounting of the government trade." At that time, Panda used an effective method when they didn't let the officials who came to seal up the house go inside. As for the gunshot, they said that their servant was nervous and the gun went off accidentally. They didn't confess that they fired the gun. They didn't have any choice but to confess that they had to close the main gate. Regarding the resignation of the Shape Trimön, at that time he was the Senior Shape [Tib. ཁྲི་པ] and it had been a long time since he had become a Shape. So he was the one most familiar with the work of the Kashag and he was also the most powerful Shape. Reting [on the other hand] had just became the Regent and he was not familiar with government affairs. The Ex-Prime Minister Langdün [Tib. སྲིད་ཟུར་གླང་མདུན] didn't have much responsibility. Trimön had rich experience in all external and internal affairs so he was very powerful in the Kashag. In 1935, the Wood-Hog Year, Reting, Trimön, Drunyichemmo Dombor, etc., went to look for visions in the holy lake called Chöngor Gyal [Tib. ཆོས་འཁོར་རྒྱལ] with regard to the search for the reincarnation of the 13th Dalai Lama. When they were looking for the vision, Reting and Trimön talked for a long time about the vision every night. At that time, Reting and Trimön seemed very friendly and Reting had high appreciation for Trimön, but Trimön was telling Reting that he was old and he would not be able to serve Reting for a long time. This was what people from outside [heard]. At that time, Reting was young, but he could think from a very broad perspective. Since Trimön was very powerful in the Kashag, it might inconvenience Reting and the Ex-Prime Minister when they wanted to make some decisions. So Reting had the idea of granting the resignation of Trimön, so right at that time Reting told Trimön, "Since I am young and not familiar with the affairs, I feel at ease because you are taking the main responsibility. If you were not in the Kashag, it would be difficult for me to manage the responsibilities because I don't have experience. And the Ex-Prime Minister also doesn't have much experience." Therefore, Trimön thought that Reting was evaluating me so highly so if he would resign as Shape, Reting might give me a promotion to the post of Silön. This is what I heard [he thought]. So right at that time Trimön asked for permission to resign. Now, I will tell you about the things that happened since the Dalai Lama was ordained as a monk [Tib. chüshug]. It was in the Fire-Hog Year, in 1947, that the Dalai Lama went to Sera and Drepung Monastery to get ordained into the monk's order. According to tradition, he went to Drepung with an elaborate procession (Tib. ཆིབགྱུར་ཆེམམོ [ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་ཆེན་མོ]) that consisted of a line of all the government officials on horseback. Just after he went to Drepung, the Reting incident occurred. Therefore, all people felt kind of the uneasy and worried about whether his admission ceremony would be successful or not. But actually there wasn't any problem during this ceremony. First he went to Drepung. The ceremony was held according to tradition and fried cookies were served to the monks. The formal ceremony for starting his study of dialectics [Tib. མཚན་ཉིད་དབུ་འཛུགས] was held in the dharma grove of Drepung Küngarawa [Tib. kun dga ra ba]. At that time, it started from the Pargya Parimita Pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན]. At the beginning, the Regent Taktra gave the teaching from the Pharchin. After that, the Dalai Lama and the lamas assisting the Dalai Lama in the dialectics debate [Tib. ཙེནཤབ] repeated it again. After that, the Dalai Lama sat down to answer questions in the debate [Tib. ཐམཇ] and the 7 tsenshab started to debate on the Pharchin by turns. The ceremony was successful. After that, he also attended the tshogchen [the largest prayer assembly] which included the four tratsang: Gomang, Deyang, Loseling, and Ngagpa. At that time, the different tratsang served the Dalai Lama food and did their services and they also served fried cookies to all the officials according to their ranks. The ceremony was held in an elaborate way and all the tratsang did their best and they also served the monks rice gruel. All of the tratsang invited the Dalai Lama one after another and at first they invited the Dalai Lama to his room. They also arranged the accommodations for all the government officials according to their rank. After the ceremonies in the tratsang were over, the Dalai Lama went to the Namgyal Tratsang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང][in the Potala]. They also served food and fried cookies to all the government officials. Then the Dalai Lama also went to Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་གསར] which was belonged to Namgyal Tratsang and held a similar ceremony. At that time the government also made very elaborate offerings to the prayer assembly. When the ceremony in Drepung was almost over, according to tradition, the Dalai Lama went to the hermitage on the mountain above Drepung (Tib. gemphel ritrö [དགེ་འཕེལ་རི་ཁྲོད]) where there was the 5th Dalai Lama's room. Before the Dalai Lama arrived, the room was renovated and a ceremony was also held there. After that, the Dalai Lama went to Sera and on the way he stopped at Nechung Jog [Tib. གནས་ཆུང་ལྕོག] where they also served fried cookies and snacks like the other tratsang. When the Dalai Lama came there, the Nechung oracle also went into trance and all of the government officials were also invited into the deities chapel and served tea. There was a very sacred mask called Senbag Mugchung [Tib. བསེ་འབག་སྨུག་ཆུང] which usually was not allowed to be shown to anybody, but at that time they showed it to the Dalai Lama. We just heard about this since we were not allowed in the temple. We saw that Nechung Deity received and saw off the Dalai Lama while the oracle was still in trance. During the Drepung ceremony, one day all of a sudden a poster was stuck up. Probably this was done by Reting's followers. The poster said, "The Dalai Lama has to go to Sera to get ordained as a monk so all of the tratsang in Sera will do their best to serve the Dalai Lama because of our gratitude. This is done mainly because of the ceremony of getting ordained as a monk. However, in case some reckless [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང] people would come, something strange might happen." This poster implied that since the Regent Taktra was with the Dalai Lama, it would not be okay if he would come and probably they were threatening him. But the regent was not suspicious of that poster and he went to Sera with the Dalai Lama from Nechung via Parikhug [Tib. བྲག་རི་ཁུག] and then directly to Sera. The Dalai Lama stayed in the room above the assembly hall and Taktra also stayed in a room with a large windows on the assembly hall. At that time, since it was just after the Sera war had calmed down, the security was quite strict. Guards were stationed near the doors and soldiers were patrolling everywhere near the room where the Dalai Lama stayed. When people were granted an audience with the Dalai Lama, he was protected by his Bodyguard Regiment. Some of the trustworthy rupön and gyagpön of the Trapchi Regiment were standing on guard on the left and right side of Taktra's throne. At that time, there wasn't any appearance of any challenge [Tib. ཡ་བཟུང] to him, but they were on high alert. The Dalai Lama also went to the three tratsang in Sera, Jey, Mey, and Ngagpa, and the tratsang served elaborated food for the two tutors to the Dalai Lama and all the government officials. In particular, Sera Jey had just had the misfortune, but they were not reluctant and they did their best in terms of service. They also gave rice gruel to the people who came for pilgrimage in Sera. The government also offered alms and other things very elaborately. After the ceremonies in the tratsang were over, the Dalai Lama went to the chöra (debating grove) and watched the monks doing dialectics debate though he didn't participate in the debates. The abbots of the tratsang were answering the questions in the debate. When the Dalai Lama came to Sera Jey, the monks performed prayers in the chöra. When they recited the longevity prayer for the Dalai Lama, probably they were only paying attention [Tib. དོ་སྣང] to the longevity prayer composed by the Reting and were not attentive for the longevity prayer composed by Taktra. So when they prayed the longevity prayer, it was kind of silent because only the prayer leader and the prayer chanting monks (Tib. སུངསང [གསུང་བཟང་བ]) recited the prayer and the other monks didn't recite much. They didn't do that to disrespect the Dalai Lama, but it was because it was not okay to recite the longevity prayer composed by Reting, but they had to recite the longevity prayer composed by the Taktra. They could recite the old one by heart, but they didn't want to recite the new one composed by Taktra and didn't recite it. One particular thing that happened at that time was that the government had not made preparations to shoot movies and take photos of the ceremony to remember it in the future. It was also prohibited for individuals to shoot movies and take photos. However, at that time there were a few people taking photos and Tsarong shot some movies which we could watch later. At that time, Shölkang Jedrung [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] was the Lhasa Nyertsang. When the Dalai Lama was going for the circumambulation around Drepung and did the consecration and baptism [Tib. ཁྲུད་གསོལ་རབ་གནས] in the four directions, Shölkang Jedrung probably took a photo. The Drönyerchemmo and those people saw him taking the photo and they inquired about this and he was severely criticized and was demoted to the rank of ordinary monk official. At that time, everything was done according to tradition and if someone did something new, it was regarded as inappropriate to the situation then. Whoever did something like that, all people disliked them and the government itself also prohibited it. This is what I saw at that time. Right at the time of the Dalai Lama's Ordaining Ceremony in Drepung, it was confirmed that the trade mission for buying gold and silver that consisted of Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ], Trekhang Khenjung [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང་མཁན་ཆུང], and other officials were to depart from Lhasa so they held the departure audience with the [Kashag] [Tib. thönja]. I will tell you a little bit about the sending of a delegation to the Asian Relations Conference [Tib. ཤར་ཕྱོགས་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་མཉམ་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་འདུ]. This was held on the 23rd of March in the Fire-Hog Year in 1947 [23 March-2 April]. At that time, India was about to gain its independence and the above mentioned meeting was convened in India. The Indian government sent the invitation to the Tibetan government requesting it to send a delegation. The government sent a delegation led by Sambo Theiji Tsewang Rinzin [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་ཐའི་ཇི་ཚེ་དབང་རིག་འཛིན] and included Khenjung Lobsang Wangyal [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དབང་རྒྱལ] and Rimshi Kyibu [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྦུག], etc. I heard that they attended the meeting and hoisted the flag of the Tibetan government and gave lectures saying that, "We are glad to be able to attend the meeting. India and Tibet have had religious and cultural relations through our long history and we, Tibet, would like to request the Asian Countries to cooperate and have unity and solidarity with us and safeguard peace." At that time, the delegation of the Guomindang had also arrived and I heard they caused a little bit of trouble and said that, "Tibet was a part of China. Since we are here as the delegation of the Guomindang, the Tibetans should attend as part of our delegation and they don't need to attend under a separate name. If the Tibetan delegation wants to take the name of the Tibetan government, there is no use for the Guomindang delegation to attend the meeting, so we are going to withdraw." To this the Indian government said, "We happily invited all the delegations and we are glad to have all of you attending the meeting, so we request that the delegation of the Guomindang attend the meeting. As for the Tibetan government, we invited them because we have relations in religion, culture and all respects, so we also request them to attend the meeting. If you are unable to attend the meeting, then we can't do anything." Later the Guomindang delegation also attended the meeting. Regarding the departure of the trade mission for buying gold and silver, they went via India to Hong Kong, China, America, and London. At that time they took passports with the seal of the [Tibetan] Foreign Office [Tib. ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཁུངས] and the countries where they traveled accepted their passports and they didn't have any hindrances. I heard that the purpose of sending them was because previously Tibet couldn't sell wool and other things directly to the foreign countries. They were sold to the Indian traders who acted as middlemen and we suffered a great loss regarding prices. So in order to sell wool directly to countries like America and get the U.S. dollars and British Pounds, they were sent as a trade mission to talk about those matters. Also at that time, the Trapchi Legung [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་ལས་ཁུངས] had printed Tibetan paper money, so it wasn't okay if we didn't have something that supported [Tib. རྒྱབ་རྟེན] that. So they were also sent to buy some gold. This was what they announced outwardly. I didn't know what internal political tasks they had. The main leader was Shakabpa who was a tsipön and also the one in charge [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ] of the Trapchi Legung. On the other hand, he also had some experience doing private trade. Trekhang was his younger brother. I also heard that Shakabpa and Taktra had a close relationship. Anyway, they were sent as the trade mission. As for the interpreter, the depön of the Trapchi Regiment [Tib. དབུས་མདའ], Surkhang Rimshi [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་རིམ་བཞི], was sent because he knew a little bit of English, however, his standard was not enough to interpret talks in foreign countries so Surkhang himself hired another interpreter and took him [the interpreter] with him. One of the members was Panda Yamphel who was experienced in trade. They went to the above mentioned countries and discussed how they had to receive Indian Rupees [not dollars or pounds] if we make the bales of wool [for export] in India [they were made in Kalimpong]. Detailed information was in the documents, but I didn't know what they said in detail. They bought a quite a lot of gold and imported it and handed it over to the government. I don't remember the amount. At that time, they also talked about setting up a trade mission [Tib. ཚོང་དོན་དོན་གཅོད] office and finally the Trade Mission in Kalimpong was set up. I heard that when Shakabpa and those people came back, they made a statement about what they did and what they discussed with the countries and they reported this to the Assembly. In short, they handed over the gold to the Inner Treasury [Tib. མཛོད་སྦུག] of the Dalai Lama. Shakabpa also imported some farm machines to be used as an experiment. At that time, the two Germans, Heinrich Harrer and Aufschnaiter, were in Lhasa and these [machines] were handed over to them. They were given the responsibility to train people to use the machines. I don't have any details about the results. They also bought some medicines for veterinary care and for preventing cattle sicknesses. Since we didn't have modern hospitals at that time, the medicines were handed over to the Tibetan Medical and Astrological Institute (Tib. མེ [སྨན་རྩིས་ཁང]). I will tell you little bit about the Italians who came to Tibet. It was in the Earth-Mouse Year in 1948. The Italian Tucci asked permission to come to Tibet through the Sikkim Political Officer and the permit was granted. At that time foreigners were not allowed come to Lhasa indiscriminately. In case some foreigners wanted to come, they had to ask for the permission for the entry through the Sikkim Political Officer. Tucci was granted a permit and he came to Lhasa and went everywhere visiting the ancient temples.   

