# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0005.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Tashi Sonam [Tib. bkra shis bsod nams]  


**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 13 October 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Unknown  
**Name:** Tashi Sonam [Tib. bkra shis bsod nams]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
---  
## Abstract  

Tashi Sonam was a Drepung monk from Gomang College. In this interview he discusses in detail the conflict/competition between Central Tibetan (böba) and Amdo monks and the fight between the common monks (lagyüba) and the scholar (pechawa) monks, and the arguments about giving salary to the monks in the debate-grove (chöra). There is also a discussion on how these conflicts were resolved.
  
---
### Tape 3  
**Q:**  If the Khampas go, the Amdos will go together, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were some Khambas going with the Amdos. The one who got hurt with a penknife called Demjo [Tib. bde mchog] was from my homeland. But he looks like a böba.   

**Q:**  How did they use the penknife?   

**A:**  When the other tukpa server was rushing over, he used the penknife thinking that the other thukpa server would lose the thukpa container sola [Tib. zo lag] and then he could take over the sola and go ahead. There were some big fighting in the tsog.   

**Q:**  When they fight in the tsog would they hit each other with ladles?   

**A:**  In general it was kind of chaos [Tib. zang ngi zing gni], but there was not that much fighting in the tsog where they hit each other and there couldn't be much fighting because 3/4th the monks in the tsog were from the long distance and 1/4th are böba because there was a big difference on the number, they didn't fight much. In the past, there was a fight where the shengo came to arrest them. The reason for the fighting was that they [Amdo] were saying that they will kill such and such person. At that time, Khampa Demchog's hand got hurt with a penknife and he was sick. Some Amdo therefore went to Demchog's shag. They told him "we don't have anything to tell you, but please tell us where is the assistant of the gegö, Geyog Mama [Tib. dge g.yog ma ma] is" But he stood on the böba side and didn't tell him where Geyog Mama is. He said "I don't know where he has gone". Actually he knew where Geyog Mama is. On that night, Geyog Mama fled to Phembo [Tib. 'phan po] and stayed in the house because he was afraid that he knew he is going to be killed and Thusö [Tib. thub bzod] also fled. Because Demchog didn't tell them the where about of Geyog Mama, so the Amdo beat him up badly hitting him with knife or shabshag [?] on his head and his head was torn up [Tib. dbral] and the Amdos got blood on their hands and they washed their hands in his pot which had left over tea, then they left. They [Amdo] couldn't catch Mama and Thusö and they didn't return to Drepung until after several years during 2 gegö and shengo were changed. Then some of these Amdo had gone to India and some died and the organization of the Amdo had sort of dispersed though there were few of them left who returned to the monastery. Then they abolished the running and rushing when serving thukpa and they served the thukba slowly.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  This was made by the abbot just after that incident.   

**Q:**  What year was that according to the western calandar?   

**A:**  I am not sure since in old days we didn't really have these western years and dates. I think it was about 1936-1837.   

**Q:**  You must be young at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, we only count the elements and animal years such as the Iron Sheep [Tib. lcags lug] year.   

**Q:**  You count the 60 years cycle, rabchung [Tib. rab byung], right?   

**A:**  We don't talk much about rabchung also, but we can see the rabchung in some old agreeements.   

**Q:**  Was this during the Reting Regency?   

**A:**  It was during Reting's Regency. Then after few years they eliminated the custom of rushing and competing in thukpa serving and it was said that it harms the tratsang and makes the tratsang to decline. For example, the number of sponsors making offerings also reduced. The pechawa had more misfortunes [Tib. gegs dbang bar chad] and the tratsang itself had more difficulties and misfortunes. So we said that it is not okay to elinimate it because it seems that it had a nessecity [Tib. dgos pa]. There were lot of discussions back and forth and then the tratsang reinstated it. This way to serve thukpa was really good and without it, the tsog seems to be dull that there is nothing to think about and pay attention when the tsog was held. [laughter]   

**Q:**  It was more bustling [Tib. 'khrugs po] when there is the rushing, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was very bustling.   

**Q:**  The böba had the dobdo tobtsang and the jump [Tib. mchong rgyag] and the monks from the long distance didn't have that. So didn't they think that they should also have one? Was there any rule on this?   

**A:**  This was upto one's own choice and they didn't do that. There was no official rule prohibiting Khambas and Amdos from joining tobtsang and whoever is allowed to join it. There were a few of them joined the tobtsang I think though I don't remember clearly.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any tobtsang set up by the long distance monks, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They would not.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  As to why the Amdo and Khamba didn't have tobtsang, it was because if we did so, it would have harmed the tratsang on studying tsenyi pecha. We would have become spoiled and ignore the study and discipline [Tib. khreb to]. If we did that, the majority of the monks were from the long distance and if they become kind of powerful, they might bully each other, so we would not join the tobtsang. At first, they didn't have tsampa to eat and then after a year or so they start going to villages to do some trade and work as servant for kudrak and then they could make their living and become kind of the traders.  And the better ones from the long distance would devote themselves to study and most of the geshe who are knowledgeable and famous are from long distance. From when I joined the monastery there was only one böba from Hamdong called Gen Ngawangla [Tib. rgan ngag dbang lags] who got the first or the second place among the geshe lharampa [Tib. lha rams pa] and became a famous geshe and particularly he was skillful on poltics. At that time, people were not attentive of the politics and we haven't heard about politics then. In the past, Ngawang La had told the lama gyüba [Tib. bla ma rgyud pa], "you should not leave your most valuable things like carpets here. I will take them to India and I will tell somebody to keep them. I don't know about this chaos situation." He didn't say Chinese will take it. But the monks said. "no, these are precious things of monastery and it is regarded as a bad omen to take them out of the threshhold. Later, when the situation was just like what Gen Nagwang La said, the lama gyüpa were saying "it was too bad that we didn't listent to what Gen Nagwang La said." At that time, people only praised him on religion, but nobody praised him that he was skillful on politician.   

**Q:**  Is he still alive?   

**A:**  He died in Mongode in India. He set the Gyüme Tratsang and also help the tratsang here. He was fortunate on doing everything. After that, there were 1-2 geshe who got the second place. Otherwise, all the geshe were Mongols and Amdo. In the past, there was only one Mongolia and there were many famous Monglian and Amdo geshe and there were two from the north, Hor among the ones who took the first and second geshe lharampa. But after that the Soviet Union made the Outter Mongolia which is located near by and Inner Mongolia became part of China. Among the Mongolians, there was only 5-6% who doesn't learn pecha. There were many Khampas, Amdos and böba, but there were just a few who study pecha.   

**Q:**  When did the lagyüba and pechawa got into trouble?   

**A:**  It was in 1958.   

**Q:**  What was the cause of the trouble from the beginning?   

**A:**  You've probably heard about this already, so it must be similar and I don't need to tell you. This wasn't a trouble between the monks from long distances and the short distances.   

**Q:**  Who do you think was wrong?   

**A:**  Later, gradually when I was awaken from unawareness [Tib. rmongs gnyid sad], I think in fact, the pechawa had little bit reason because the tratsang need people to study pecha. But at that time, a fewer people got more benefit and more people got less benefit and it was not convenient for them. Normally, the salary was paid in front of the main gate, gomchor [Tib. sgo mchor]. At this time, they didn't need to hold the tsog for paying the salary. The officials paying the salary would be seated in a row and when the early miday, gungtsig [Tib. dgung tshigs] chöra was over, the monks would come and file by and get the salary and then do a circuit of tratsang and go back to their shag. It was very convenient. At this time, the abbot said you should pay the salary in the chöra. If it was paid there, then all have to go and sit and wear the cloak and carry the hat and go to the tsog and there is no time for the debate. And the pechawa who have finished geshe don't have to go to the chöra so they too would not get the salary if they didn't go to the chöra. So this was disagreed by the majority of the monks, but the pechawa seems to have agreed because it was suggested by the abbot.   

**Q:**  Did the abbot make the plan at first?   

**A:**  It doesn't seem that the abbot made the plan. Later when we asked around, it seems it started in Hor Mitsen. The main one was the late Geshe Dorje Wönbar[Tib. rdor rje 'od 'bar]. Then there was the late karam kyorpön from Chushü [Tib. chu shur]. Then there was the Gendün Thönden [Tib. dge 'dun don ldan] who was nicknamed the old man, chari porto [? spor to] who is now a teacher in the Cadre's School [Tib. zang gan xue]. He was also quite old then. These people weren't good in their work and whatever they did had a bad luck. Some of these were geshe and some were not yet and they were saying in the Hor Mitsen "we pechawa have become poor, we need some benefit and convenience. If we do this, then the number of pechawa in Gomang will become more. They discussed this and made the plan and this was the bad cause and they behave kind of stubborn [Tib. mkhregs po] and then they went to the abbot and reported this matter and the abbot thought that if it is to help the pechawa studies, it is good and they had already reported the government about this. And the government said, "if this is beneficial for the monks who are content with inferior robe, housing and almls and liked renouncing and meditation [Tib. 'phags pa'i rigs bzhi], you can do as the abbot had reported." And they had given a seal. [Note: he is wrong, this was the divination done by the Dalai lama].  And then the chabu and the tratsang umdze who wee from Hor Mitsen instigated and group of monks said, "those officials aren't acting honestly and we have a hope to get the grain salary increased and there are also other works to do, but they might make obsticle [Tib. 'gog rkyen] for these. So now, it is better to make the matter more wide or expand the scope [Tib. rgya che ru btang] because the matter wouldn't be settled here even by the laji".  So they went to the tratsang chabu office and tied those officials to the pillar. Then the laji and other officials came and said "it is rediculese [Tib. dpe srid kyi ma red] to do like this. You are not allowed to do this" Then after it became conspicuose the leaders [Tib. dpon po] petitioned the government. The government settled it honestly. The government proclaimed "all the people who got tied and the people who tied them and all the people who were there and yelled would be expelled from monastery no matter they are abbot or geshe or whatever". The Dalai Lama himself made this decision. For one month the government interrogated and invetigated. Then one day they called about 17-18 people from both sides to Norbulinga. I attended a meeting for a short time, so I was made to do prostration from among the lagyüba side. I went to 2 lagyüba meetings in chöra. For this reason, I had to do the prostration for 5-6 days. I had to start the prostration from the time when they start the trungja to the end. It was very hard as it was winter just before the New Year and there wasn't sunshine in that place. The place where we had to prostrate was stone floor. And we were not allowed to wear garments with sleeves. We would go home after the trungja was over. Two tsidrung were put in charge of our prostration. They would check from a list to make sure all were there. We would wait outside till trungja started then the tsidrung would call us and then put us in there and we had to do prostration facing the tsidrung. The monks above us were all expelled.   

**Q:**  What was the aim of tying them up to the pillars.   

**A:**  Before this, there was unity in the Gomang, but later it almost became like there were 2 households when they pulled the pechawa apart. So we were saying that it is not good to have two households. It is better to have one household. In the tratsang, the people in the the shiga, the miser, the nomads, granary, ngünyer must have been talking about specially helping the pechawa. And some chabu had relations with the pechawa in the Hor Mitsen and some people didn't know what was going on. Before that, the lagyüba wanted more grain salary and they told Kündeling and got some from Kündeling but it didn't reach the majority of the monks well though the tratsang got it. This was our goal to stop happening these things.   

**Q:**  How did they decide? Where was the salary paid?   

**A:**  It was decided to pay in the same place in gomchor and it was said this time, we have implemented a lenient policy. But the government gave 3,000 dotse as the donation endowment for the pechawa who go to Jang günchö and it was told to establish a new ngünyer which will be the ngünyer of Jang günchö. But then the revolt took place. In the early times, regarding the income from the shiga, the miser, the nomads, money and grain, the way for reciting perayers in the tsog and the chapel of the protective deities, the politics of the tratsang and the expenditures were not clear in the tratsang and they were doing whatever is convenient for them. Later, all these new rules and regularities were fixed by Gungru Khenchen Temba Chönbe [Tib. gung ru mkhan chen bstan pa chos 'phel] during 13th Dalai lama 's time. He fixed the number of different tsog held in a day and about the chöra and about the rituals performed in the chapel of the protective deities and how the incomes of the shiga and the nomads should be delivered to the tratsang nyertsang and how the tonggo should be given to the monks. And he gave some titles and paid little bit wages to the workers and allowed them to wear some special clothes.   

**Q:**  I heard that the pechawa used money from the tratsang's dayang storage for bribing people like Kündeling Wöse Gyentsen [Tib. 'od zer rgyal mtshan] and the lagyüba didn't know about that. I heard that this was later exposed in the struggle sessions. Was it true?   

**A:**  Yes, all the matters were exposed in the Hor Mitsen after the revolt. But I am not sure about the money. I did hear from many monks that they gave about 3,000 dayang to the monks.   

**Q:**  Trindor: I heard that they gave one dayang to each monks.   

**A:**  Yes. They used the remaining money and internally lent about 7,000-8,000 dayang to Hor Mitsen with a low interest through secret relations [Tib. gsang thabs]. There was a lot of talk about this from the monks. Later, I heard that when people took out the things from the tratsang, there was not much dayang left there though there were some other silver wares. The main backers were Kündeling Dzasa and he was asking Tsipön Namseling. Later, Tsipön Namseling, Trekhang Khenjung [Tib. bkras khang] and Gyerong [Tib. rgyal rong] abbot were sent to negotiate between the Chinese and Chushigandru in the 12th luar month of 1958 to lessen the trouble with khamba. Before they left, Namseling told them not to have a big dispute over the salary issue. For the time, be careful and stay there and leave it quite. It is not worthy to make a shape [Tib. bzo ta bzo] for this. The best is to adhere to the order from the Dalai lama. If you cannot adhere to it, then at least don't disturb his mind.   

**Q:**  Did he say this to the pechawa or lagyüba?   

**A:**  Namseling told this to Kündeling Dzasa. Once I was brought to the lagyüba tsondu at Namseling's house and at that time he said this. He was about to cry. He was about to go to Chushigandru and he said I have to go in 2-3 days to them to try to "apologize the zhongyang and have the Khampa's disturbance ceased" [Tib. khams pa'i zing cha 'jags thabs dang krung dbyang dgongs pa dwangs thabs]. He went taking all of his money and never came back to Tibet, they all fled to India and didn't come back. At that time, he held up his thumb and said at that meeting, "please don't do it. It is not worthy of doing it [Tib. byed rin mi 'dug]. I am a layman with wife and a father of children, but you people are single. We have a thought for the future, but now it is not worthy of working. So try to get along well."   

**Q:**  Were there both the pechawa and the lagyüba?   

**A:**  There were many pechawa, so they were afraid and they probably were meeting in some corners. This meeting in Namseling were all lagyüba and the pechawa were not there, but they delivered the messages to them.   

**Q:**  How many lagyüba were there?   

**A:**  There were about 10 lagyüba. The head [Tib. om tor] of the lagyüba was Wöser Chökyong [Tib. 'od zer chos skyong] He was short but very eloquent. He is now at Sera, he knows it all. In about 1980 he came to Drepung to ask to be readmitted. But they didn't at once agree and told him to wait awhile. So he was sad and therefore went to Sera and said I am an old monk and Drepung won't admit me so can I join Sera? They let him. There are also a few Sera monks in Drepung. In Drepung, there is a monk from Chamdo and a monk from the Shang Ganen Chönkhor [Tib. shangs dga' ldan chos 'khor], and a monk from the Dagpo Ngari [Tib. dwags po mnga' ris Tratsang who are not the monks of Drepung.   

**Q:**  I heard that you stayed with the Jayang Kyil Jigyab khembo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There is Ngawang Chöthar [Tib. ngag dbang chos dar] who was Gomang Nyertsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Is he still alive?   

**A:**  I heard that he is still alive. I am not sure he is a monk or not. He was the tsidrung of the Jigyab Khenpo Shagtsang and was related to him and there was one who did the west nyertsang for about one year just before the revolt. The east nyertsang was a monk from the Hor who died.   

