# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0005.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 13 October 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tashi Sonam was a Drepung monk from Gomang College. In this interview he first discusses his trip to collect offerings and donations (Büdü) in the northern nomad area in Tibet. He explains how he was selected and that the main duties were doing rituals and collecting butter payment from the nomads' animals. He provides details on the death customs and rituals, including sky burial, corpse cutters (tomden) and divination. He then describes the lord (pönpo) of Sangshung [Tib. བསང་གཞུང] and how the Gungru Khamtsen got involved in Sangshung, specifically dealing with animals. He details the amount of animals a household would have owned, slaughtered, and sold in a year and the organization of the pastures. He also discusses giving a prayer ceremony or Donggo after completing the Büdü job. Finally, he discusses the revolt when aristocrats hired monks to protect their homes, and the Khamtsen sent the monks to guard the mountaintop behind Drepung. [Note: In this tape, there is a long note on the funeral customs in Lhasa and some notes by Goldstein's research assistant Trindor La that were not in the tape, but were added during the initial translation]   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0005_04/M_0005_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Can you tell us about when you went to collect offerings and donations, büdü [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] and stayed there for 4 years and how did you get this job from the beginning?   

**A:**  The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> both send büdü. The tratsang goes to Amdo. I went for the khamtsen. The khamtsen and tratsang's way of sending the büdü was kind of similar. The tratsang büdü is very hard because the distance is far and the northern route is dangerous. When the khamtsen asks someone to go, they say, "one person have to go for the büdü to be beneficial for the khamtsen's capital for giving the tonggo. If the khamtsen just tells somebody to go, he would say I am not going and another one would also say the same." So the khamtsen picks three candidates who they think are suitable and would call them to the khamtsen one day. They would say "if we tell you to go, you will refuse to go. Threfore, three of you have been selected and now we will do the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</span> in front of deity for the final choice. It is not okay for you to say no when whoever is chosen by the deity because it is the deity to whom we have faith and ask for advises." They would imply if some one violates it, it would be a different matter. At this time, I didn't want to go at all. The reason for this was that people who had gone to our place of büdü is Sangshung [Tib. བསང་གཞུང] nomad region which is a very cold place. Then I went downstairs where the deity is and I told the deity, "I am not going. Please do not send me"   

**Q:**  Which deity was it?   

**A:**  It was Tenma [Tib. བསྟན་མ]. But since it was decided by my karmic result [Tib. ལས] it was useless to ask the deity. Then they told us to wait a minute and while we were waited, they wrote our names on three pieces of paper with same size and they put them in three dough balls and then weighed them to make sure they are same weight and then rolled them before the deity. One ball would fall out and they would keep the other two.   

**Q:**  So your name came out, right?   

**A:**  Yes. My name came out.   

**Q:**  Did they send one person for the büdü?   

**A:**  Yes. Only one was to be sent. One had already been sent before. I was the older of the two. They opened the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</span> in front of all the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> members and showed all the names and asked whether it was correct and then we said it is correct and then they send back the two others. Then the tsondu members told me, "your name came out from the senriy, so please prepare to go". At that time, the nomad called Garyog [Tib. གར་ཡོག] who was like the lodging inn keeper [Tib. གནས་ཚང] in Sangshung had come and was staying in the monastery. His job was to make fire and tea in Sangshung, but we didn't have much time to stay in because we have to go to perform rituals. The tsondu told me,"please go as soon as possible with Garyog since he has finished doing his trade and had brought yaks and they have a hard time not having a good pasture for the yaks". My youngest brother at this time was a kind of servant for a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</span> in Lhasa, now he is 63. He went out in 1959 and now he is abroad. I made preparations to leave at once and asked the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> to give the key of my <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> to him. The khamtsen said, "no problem, we will keep it for you". I didn't have to do much preparations as the khamtsen had already prepared the tea and butter for the trip and even the clothes I would need to wear. It seems that I left after 2 days. Mainly, it was to perform rituals and we didn't have any thing collet.   

**Q:**  You didn't have butter lease [Tib. ཤེ] to collect, right?   

**A:**  The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> had a number of yaks in this area on lease [Tib. ཤེ] which was originally offered by the people there. I had to look after the animals and collect the butter lease from the nomads for holding these. The nomads would bring the butter lease and I would weigh the amount of butter due by <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཉ་ག] A weight measurement unit. About 10 nyaga was equal to one gyama, which weighed 1.1 lbs.).">nyaga</span> and issue a receipt for that and then put it in skin bag and there would be like 4 loads which they would transport to Lhasa. There was no embezzling [Tib. ཟ] in this for me and we just have to work on that. Whatever was due was sent on to Lhasa. I would send a letter to the khamtsen with them saying there is such and such amount of butter.   

**Q:**  Was the lease system kyeyö chiyö [Tib. སྐྱེ་ཡོད་འཆི་ཡོད] where if the animals increased they were the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>'s, and if they died it was the khamtsen's loss or what?   

**A:**  Yes. It was the popular kyeyö chiyö system and there was also some other system with higher lease. But my main work was to perform rituals for the nomads. In the nomad custom, every month they do the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ལྷ་གསོལ] A religious offering to the gods that usually involves burning incense.">lhapsö</span> on a specific day. I did this. There were regular rituals such as Tara ritual, drölchog [Tib. སྒྲོལ་ཆོག] and the prayers for propetiating the protective deities, kangso [Tib. བསྐང་གསོ] and Neden Chagchö [Tib. གནས་བརྟན་ཕྱག་མཆོད] which is the ritual for 16 Arahats. And Menla [Tib. སྨན་བླ] the ritual for the Medicine Buddha. These were all small. And if someone dies, I have to go to do the rituals for the deceased. If it is a well-to-do household then we do the rituals for seven weeks [Tib. བདུན་ཚིགས] [The following is a long note on the funeral custom in Lhasa which is not in the tape] In Lhasa this means there are 3 days of ritual before the body is taken out, then after the body was taken out, they do 1 day of ritual, then after 1 week has passed, then there is a ritual at the 4th week [Tib. བདུན་ཚིགས་བཞི་པ], then there is a ritual at 49 days [Tib. བཞི་བཅུ་ཞེ་དགུ]. In Lhasa, there was the custom when they visit the household of the deceased before the body is taken out--you bring a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</span> and put it on the body, then on a brick, there put the cup of the deceased with tea, this you throw out and pour your own tea--giving tea to the body. If the deceased liked <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</span> a lot, some give chang instead---and we give money to the household person. Then the custom is that from the day of body being taken away no one can visit for 1 week--its considered very bad if someone shows up during that time to visit. The household would be angry, then there is first week and 4th week and 49th day, you go with khata and money [don't bring tea]. We put the khata on the deity that is made to commemorate the deceased [Tib. འཁྲུངས་རྟགས]. If the new status ?? isn't finished yet, they would put another one there. The khata is put on it and the money would be given to the household's main person. And the household goes on the first week to throw the surkhog [Tib. གསུར་ཁོག] which is the clay pot with <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</span>, sugar, honey, which is set afire by putting little bits of this on the fire outside their household door. After the one week of this, then they go and throw the pot into the river. The skyburial carrier takes the pot with some helpers. The others who have come for the first week have to leave at this time. They can't stay in the house. They there is the offering after a year, lomchö [Tib. ལོ་མཆོད] This is actually done after 11 months not one year. This involves 1-2 days of ritual. At this time people give khata draped on rope and money and the household gives a party. They also give food on 49th and the 4th week and one 1st week give food but not much is given and people eat little. Most people don't stay long-leave right away since the household is crying etc. Family of deceaced can't wash until the first week] [the long note ends here and the interview continues]   

**A:**  . If a nomad household does the elaborate rites, they give me 3 yak and 3-4 sheep. In general if you go to perform a ritual for 3 days, you would be given one sheep.   

**Q:**  These were the common [Tib. སྤྱིར་བཏང] nomads, right?   

**A:**  Yes. These were the better off ones. Usually, they give poorer quality ones like sick or old or with bad eyes and these would not live long and die after a year passed. We would generally exchange these sheep with some healthy yaks after we got a bunch of them. About 10-12 sheep would be exchanged for 1 yak. When people die, they would give us skin <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</span>, [Tib. སློག་པ] clothes and bowls and we barter them with a few <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཉ་ག] A weight measurement unit. About 10 nyaga was equal to one gyama, which weighed 1.1 lbs.).">nyaga</span> of butter and we use these for the expenditure while staying there. We had to pay yearly wages for Garyog who is the lodging inn keeper and also helped us. When we were ready to return, the three of us would do the accounting with the Garyog. At this time, we added the good animals, sheep and goat onto the lease animals we had before and we sell the weaker ones. They would not pay much money, but we barter them with butter, cheese and skins for making leather sheets [Tib. ཀོ་བཅར] and yak hair cloth to be used as curtain outside the main gate, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མཆོར] The area outside of the monastic assembly hall that is supported by tall pillars.">gomchor</span> [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར] of the assembly hall. We also did accounting every year. Then at the end of the 3rd year, there is a big accounting and mostly we exchange the things into money and bring it back.   

**Q:**  In addition to the rituals, did you do the divination?   

**A:**  Yes and I also give initiations [Tib.དབང་བསྐུར].   

**Q:**  When you gave the initations, there might be many nomads coming?   

**A:**  This wasn't with all the nomads coming to hear but was for each family who invited us and perform the rituals. I would give some longevity initiations [Tib. ཚེ་དབང] if there were some patients.   

**Q:**  How did you do the divination? Did you do it according to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</span>?   

**A:**  Yes, according to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</span> with all different numbers of the dices.   

**Q:**  How did you learn that?   

**A:**  You need three dices. There are 18 numbers altogether for three dices since each dice's highest number is 6. Before you can do the divination, you have to get a kind of transmission [Tib. ལུང] from a lama. First the lama would read the entire pecha. Then the lama would explain his experience with the divination system. He would say if this number occurs, it shows such and such result and you have to pray and the think carefully. Most of the requests were about sickness and ask what ritual would be the best to do. There were also a lot of requests about where to go to find lost animals. After 5-6 days lost they would come to us and ask which direction we should search for. A third activity like this was to determine which date would be the best to move the camp and the animals in summer and move to the bigger tent in winter. This was done with a calendar and astrology [Tib. རྩིས]. And there would be many people asking the dates for sparing lives of animals etc. But the main thing we did was ritual like reading the texts in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བཀའ་འགྱུར] One of the main Buddhist religious texts. It consists of 108 volumes.">kangyur</span> like Sungdü [Tib. གཟུངས་འདུས], Gyetong [Tib. བརྒྱད་སྟོང] and Dode Kesang [Tib. མདོ་སྡེ་བསྐལ་བཟང] and Kadang Denga [Tib. བཀའ་ཐང་སྡེ་ལྔ] and Serwö [Tib. གསེར་འོད]. A very few household would ask us to read the whole text of Pangya Paramita, Bum [Tib. འབུམ] and we also do the rituals like Tara Ritual, Drölchog [Tib. སྒྲོལ་ཆོག]. If a person died, if their house was poor they would do the rites for 2 weeks, if it was a middle family they would do for 4 weeks.   

**Q:**  How would they dispose the body? Would they do the skyburial?   

**A:**  They would do sky burial. It is very hard to go there because we have to act as skyburial carrier, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན] The name of the corpse-cutters at Sky Burials.">tomden</span> [Tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན] there. There was no other tomden. They would call us lama but when someone died we had to act as tomden. Here it is easier to do tomden since there is rocks on which to dismemble the body and pulverize bones, but there aren't. Each household has his only cemetery where there would be 5-6 slates carved with Mani prayers which was the place where they had brought the bodies of their grandparents. Rocks were rare where we would smaks the bones.   

**Q:**  Who would carry the body?   

**A:**  When someone dies the body would be carried to the cemetery on a yak's back or horse back. The yak had it's nose poked and they lead the yak there. We have to pick up the body and load it on the yak and tie it. And when we reach the cemetery we take the body down and do all the activities of the skyburial. This region has very few rocks so we have to cut the body on the earth. The household of deceased would send a helper person with us. He would lead the horse or yak for carrying the body. He would make a fire a little ways down from where we would make tea and watch us. There are much more vultures than here in Lhasa, so we don't have to actually cut up the body, we just cut lines with knife on the flesh, tramgyag [Tib. ཁྲམ་རྒྱག]. This is enough to get the vultures to eat the flesh. So the flesh part is easy, but disposing of the bones is difficult because there is no big rocks and even small rocks are scarce. When the vultures are about to finish with eating the flesh, we have to scatter the vultures away. If we didn't do this, the vultures would take off some ribs and there is a danger they would leave them in a place where it would be found. If they are found, the nomads consider this very bad taboo [Tib. རྣམ་རྟོག] and they would say we didn't do our work well etc. So after scaring off the vultures, we check to see if all the ribs are there. We have carried with us an axe and then using the axe we pulverize the bones on a small rock. We don't have to pulverize as in Lhasa [where the bones are mixed with brain and tsamba and fed to the vultures], as there are many vultures who eat the pieces. Then we go down where the helper had boiled tea and then we wash our hands and have tea. When we return home, there is a cow dung fire burning and you have to walk over that when entering or leaving the tent which is to purify. This is called Gabsang [Tib. འགབ་བཟང]. The helper would lead the horse or yak and go back to his home, but he doesn't go into the tent of the deceased. Then we stay and do the ritual for 2 or more weeks during this, we do the prayers of 13 Yaman Taka [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད་ལྷ་བཅུ་གསུམ], the Medicine Buddha Menla [Tib. སྨན་བླ] and the Mitrugpa [Tib. མི་འཁྲུགས་པ] and also the ritual called Jangwa [Tib. བྱང་བ]. [Note: not in the tape] You put thin wood in the iron pan or langa [Tib. སླ་ང] where there is fire burning].   

**A:**  After this, they give us an item of clothes of the deceased. Some give a skin <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</span> with the fleece on inside [Tib. སློག་པ], some give rings, some give a knife, bowls etc. We keep these and sell these to the nomads with low prices. As for the wages for doing this, the custom is that if you do a ritual of death for a week, you get a yak, but they don't give this much. The better families would give 3 yaks and 5-6 sheep/goats if you stay for the 49 days. Then after this, there would be a ritual for another household, we didn't have much time to stay in the logding inn [Tib. གནས་ཚང] much.   

**Q:**  How many households were there in the areas where you go?   

**A:**  About over 20.   

**Q:**  What did your partner do?   

**A:**  He did the same. Sometimes we worked together for a ritual, but sometimes we were in different areas and didn't see each other for long times.   

**Q:**  Did these nomads live in tents and what did you do?   

**A:**  They lived in tents. And so did we.   

**Q:**  They had quite a lot of sheep and goats, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They had big sheep and goats. It was very cold.   

**Q:**  Where is this Sangshung located?   

**A:**  It is located just before you reach Nagchu [Tib. ནག་ཆུ].   

**Q:**  Did these nomads have their own herd separate from the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>'s lease animals?   

**A:**  The households where we go to perform rituals had their own herds and the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</span> and they didn't have <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>'s animals. These weren't our miser.   

**Q:**  Where were the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>'s animals?   

**A:**  There were two household who had all of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>'s animals. These two had to bring the butter lease to the monastery.   

**Q:**  Then who was their <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</span>?   

**A:**  The place where we stayed, most of them were under Hor Khangsar, [Tib. ཧོར་ཁང་གསར] but the whole area of Sangshung was belonged to the government, shungde [Tib. གཞུང་སྡེ]. [The nomads from this area used to come to Lhasa to trade]. During the time of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</span> Regent, some of the nomads who were belonged to goverment were given to him as his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</span>. And Kündleing also had a group of miser who used to the miser of a monastery called Trenjong [Tib. བཀྲས་ལྗོངས] Monastery in those very early times. Our <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> got involved in this area because a long time ago a Gungru Khamtsen's monk went there and he was humble and did well and stayed for many years doing ritual for them. He was very friendly with these nomad. He got very good income and the nomads got benefit of having monk there. Later when he became old he returned to the monastery and gave suggestion to khamtsen saying, "I am old now and have returned but if the khamtsen sends two monks to perform rituals, the income is good which is beneficial for the khamtsen. So from then on, the khamtsen sent two monks sometimes for 3 or 4 year periods. That initial old monk assessed for himself 40 milch female yaks plus many other animals. These he left as lease there for himself. His <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་ཕྲུག] 1. Student. 2. Disciple. 3. Commonly the name for monks living with a gegen or teacher. These are more like wards than real disciples.">gidru</span> who was from that place went to this area in summer to oversee the milking etc. As for our animals, two nomads wanted us to leave with them for lease and they would grab and insist to get this lease animals.   

**Q:**  How many animals did the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> have there?   

**A:**  There were about 40 milch female yaks. The nomad households had as average about 13-14-16-17 milch female yaks and sheep and goat and plus other animals. One big advantage for these nomads of having the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>'s female yaks was that they mix and churn the milk of sheep/goat with the yak milk and make butter, so with the addition of the khamtsen's herds, if there were many milch female yaks, the quality of the butter was better. If it is only sheep the milk is kind of white and you don't get a good price when you sell them.   

**Q:**  How many ngaga of butter do you get for the lease in a year?   

**A:**  The yearly lease fee for a female yak who gave birth in this year, kyema [Tib. སྐྱེས་མ] it was 4 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</span> and for the ones who gave birth in the last year was 2 khe of butter. Actually, they calculate that the female yak giving birth in this year would produce 6 khe of butter in a year, so the leasee gets 2 khe of butter profit.   

**Q:**  What happens if the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>'s animals die?   

**A:**  They have to show us the horn with the seal [Tib.ར་དམ] on it. That's it. Then we would write off this in the list of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> animals.   

**Q:**  I heard that in some other ares, when their own calf dies, they would cheat and say the calf of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> died. Was there anything like this in your area?   

**A:**  I can't say it never happened because the Hor people in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</span> do many kind of things [Tib. བྱེད་རྒྱུ་འབེལ་པོ], but it wasn't conspicuous. When the household's brought the butter to the monastery, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> gave them food and sometimes some clothes and some sweets [Tib. མངར་ཆ]. The monastery also would give them about 6 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</span> of grain for every 20 calves [Tib. བེ་འུ] to feed the calves with <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</span> in spring. But they wouldn't feed the calves and if the calf died, they just say the calf died and keep the skin and show us later and no one says anything and it would be written off from the list. Some nomads who kept many lease animals wouldn't pay the khamtsen the due lease butter they owed. They would say that they didn't have enough to pay this year, so it gets added to next year and the debt piled up to over 100 khe of butter. And they would sell the animals and lived as a very poor condition and when we tell them to pay the lease, they don't have butter to pay even when we go to their homes. Then the owner had to go to the changji. The changji would give him a permit which said, "he only has a few animals, so it isn't permitted to take animals since he has to stay there as <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</span> of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</span> and thus has to have animals. But the owner could take certain amount of things from him to repay the debt, but not allowed to take clothes". So one could take the yak saddles, or saddle cushions, or woolen sacks [Tib. སྒྱེ་མོ] and leather with holes.   

**Q:**  Did they really do these to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>?   

**A:**  Yes. They did to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> and it was very disgusting. So leaving animals as lease isn't safe unless you leave them to some stable households. If you leave it right away without thinking, in the future there will not be even an single animal.   

**Q:**  How many sheep and the goats did the middle level families have in this area?   

**A:**  Middle families had about over 100 sheep and goats. From these there would be 60-70 milch sheep and goats. And the sheep and goats belong to themselves and there just 1-2 leaving sheep and goats for lease. The pasture was very good in summer there. The middle standard would have about 13, 14, 15 cattle. They might also have about 20 animals on lease.   

**Q:**  How many animals would the middle family slaughter for food and for sale a year?   

**A:**  They would slaughter about 40 sheep and goats. They would only slaughter the very old cattles and usually they would not slighter many cattles. Some would slaughter only one or two cattle for meat. Big households might slaughter 100 sheep and goats. There is a saying in this area that if you slaughter many sheep the herd increases well because of committing negativity [Tib. སྡིག་པའི་འཕྲུལ].   

**Q:**  They sell the meat when they slaughter many sheep, right?   

**A:**  Most of the meat was sold. They drive the sheep to central Tibet and they load their yak with salt and also some butter and cheese to sell and come to central Tibet to trade. They also bring sheep which they intend for selling. They go to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</span>, [Tib. འབྲི་གུང] Metro Gungkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]] <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</span> [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] etc. They have there lodging inns where they go and stay each year. If there are buyers for live sheep they sell, if not they slaughter the sheep and sell the meat. They barter sheep and salt with grain. Also their yaks also work in threshing the harvest for the villagers and bring grain to chang. So although they slaughter many animals, they don't eat that much.   

**Q:**  In summer do they eat meat?   

**A:**  In summer they eat meat, but only 20% of them had meat to eat in summer. Those who eat meat had frozen and dried meat from the previous Fall. These better household would build a round wall of fresh dung and in this they put a yak skin on ground and on the slaughtering days they cut the meat and it get frozen like wood and then they put them in the dung container and then cover this with a yak skin. It's so cold there that this meat freeze and splits into cracks. This is what they eat starting from the 1st till 5th lunar month. From then on they slaughter one or two better sheep. These are the better families. The poor households didn't have much meat to eat in winter. But they get some fresh meat when the animals stuck and kill each other with their horns and sometimes when animals are sick all of a sudden and die and when some animals get sick, they know the sickness and say this animals can't survive and they slaughter it and eat the meat.   

**Q:**  What would they put on the floor in the yak hair tent?   

**A:**  In their tents on the floor they have a layer of sheep dropping which is a fertilizer and it also keeps the tent warm until midnight. In winter after mid night, it is little bit cold and in day time when there is sunshine, it is too hot to stay inside the tent .   

**Q:**  Do they have carpets?   

**A:**  They mainly use the old cushions they put under saddled and skins, etc. Not carpets.   

**Q:**  Did they use bellows in the stove?   

**A:**  No. they use yak dung in the high stove. It's abundant. There was no custom of selling dung until the Chinese arrived and built the motor road. They keep a fire going on all day till people go to bed. The ritual performer monks sit in the back side on a felt cushion. There are people who are 100 years old in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</span> and if you ask them did you ever hear about selling yak dung, they would say no. They make fire in the big iron stove for all day long and boil radish, yak hooves and heads for all day long and the elderly would sit around the stove carding and spinning wool while reciting the prayers like Drölma and the Mani. And they would put some leather cushion or some other cushions on the eartern stage [Tib. ས་ཁྲི] where we would sit.   

**Q:**  How was their pasture system? I heard that in some nomad areas, they would divide the pastures by counting the number of animals once every three years and give more pastures. Would they do that in their place?   

**A:**  I think that there is no system like this in the past. It might by made later on.   

**Q:**  It was in the past in the old society. I heard and I also saw that there was a wealthy chief's household, Pöntsang [Tib. དཔོན་ཚང] who had an area that seems it did not fully belong to him. Thy have a good pasture in the upper part of the valley which was belonged to this household. If someone went to use the pasture, he would not let them use, except they were his friends. Even he let them use it, he would charge a pasture fee and water fee [Tib. རྩྭ་རིན་ཆུ་རིན] though it was a small amount. Then Losempa [Tib. ལོ་སེམས་དཔའ] Labrang also had a large area of pasture that was fully belonged to them. There was also a saying "earth Sempa and water Sempa" [Tib. ས་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆུ་སེམས་དཔའ] which means all the earth and water were belonged to the Sempa Labrang. If the nomads move there, they had to pay for the pasture and water. In the area I was in, they didn't have animals and people could go wherever they wanted and there was no such system like you said. There was no custom of storing up hay for winter because there was not many avalanches. In the Fire Hare Year [Tib. མེ་ཡོས] (1927) around the time when there was the first British War in Tibet, there was a terrible avalanche where people had to sacrifice the animals and only tried to save their own lives. And even in the yak hair tent, there was soft ice and the yak dung looks like dry but it wouldn't burn when used for making fire. There was no grass for the yaks and they were eating the tails of each other. Only the stronger ones survive and all the weaker ones die. So their tails looked like mouse tails. They just let the animals go loose. And after this period the nomads went out to search for their animals. When I was there people in their 80 remembers this. At this time, even the wild asses died. Normally no matter how much snowfall and cold weather, the wild asses don't die. When they rounded up their remaining animals, some had only 1 or 2 left, some had 4-5 milch animals and a little bit yaks left. In the past, the milk from 15 milch yaks would fill their milk container, but after the avalanche, the milk from 4-5 milch yaks would fill their milk container. This was because there was much more grass per animals. Usually, in winter, there is no grass left, the wind blows it away. So the yaks without teeth lick the earth "dust" where there used to be grass grown and they become stronger in winter and their dung was also kind of heavy ones. But in summer, when there is lot of grass, they die because they didn't have teeth and couldn't chew the grass.   

**Q:**  Can these nomads go and use grass in the areas other than Sangshung?   

**A:**  I am not sure about when the nomads really move, but the poorer households when they become poor and have a few animals and had to pay loans and when the household almost get scattered, they would move away and go wherever they want and even they move to Lhoka, Phenpo or <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</span>, nobody bothers them. Later when the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བྱང་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet in the traditional era.">changji</span> comes to the place, they would make them work for the general taxes [Tib. སྤྱིར་བཏང] and if they were lucky, they could also work hard and keep some leased animals and maybe they become okay.   

**Q:**  So after 4 years, you do the accounting and return to the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And then we bring back money, butter, cheese, skin, wool and the things like beads made from glass [Tib. སྔོ་ནི] that the nomads used for head ornaments. We would return in fall with the Hor and the next spring they would send the other two new monks. So we would tell them how to perform the rituals and how to make the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</span> etc. And if a person dies, how to do the astrologial calcualtion. And we hand over the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</span> for the divination and for astrologial calcualtion and the dices for the divination to the new monks. When we return, we were not allowed to go home and we would first stay in Lhasa for a few days at Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ] where there is Gungru <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>'s house and the Hor would do some selling and buying there. Then we come to the khamtsen in Drepung with the Garyog and we unloaded the yaks where the Garyog and all were there. In Lhasa we change back into monks robes and wrapped up the clothes the khamtsen gave us and loaded them on the yak. We hand over the old clothes to the khamtsen. Then we do the accounting for 5-6 days with khamtsen and tell the khamtsen how many animals we left there by adding them as lease to the household who have less animals and how much money and butter, cheese etc we have brought with us. And also how many kind of turquose and beads made from glass and bowl lids we have brought. Then we use 2/3rd of income to be given to the monks for the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</span> like <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོམ་ཇ] The name of the khamtsen&#x27;s prayer assembly meetings at which tea was served.">tsomja</span> and alms and if we have enough money we also serve <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</span> and 1/3rd would be given to the khamtsen's treasury [Tib. སྦུག་ཁང]. The khamtsen would give us 4 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</span> each as the reward or wages or alms and salary, since we lost our alms on Mönlam, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</span> and tratsang. We did, however, get the khamtsen's alms and the salary. But it wasn't very much. While we were gone, the khamtsen in summer would go into our <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> and shake our things so that the bugs wouldn't eat them. Also since we had no <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</span> or flour, the khamtsen would give us each about 2 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</span> of tsampa and about 1 khe of flour and 1 khe of butter and 2 tea bricks and some salt and soda. And we would be seated on the same place where we used to sit in the tsog.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you went for the büdü?   

**A:**  I was about 40-41.   

**Q:**  Was it before the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  At that time, the Chinese were arriving. Just after I left, the Dalai Lama went to China [i.e., 1954]. At the end of my term I barted the poor animals for wool with the nomads, and this wool I took to Nagchuka and sold to the Chinese as we heard they were buying. They paid 7 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 毛] A Chinese currency unit. 10 maotse = 1 yuan. 10 fen = one maotse.">maotse</span> per <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱ་མ] A unit of weight equal to one jin [ch. 斤] (1.1 lbs).">gyama</span> of wool. They subtracted a bit due to the sheep droppings and things the nomads had added into the wool to increase the weight. So we took the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</span> back to the monastery. At that time, I first saw the square scale on which we put the things to be weighed. Before that, we only had the scale weighing in seers.   

**Q:**  You might have a large amount of wool, right?   

**A:**  I had a quite alot. We were talking that we can take back the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</span> and offer them to the monks.   

**Q:**  What did you do after this.   

**A:**  I didn't have much time and then they fired the cannons.   

**Q:**  Where were you when the revolt started.   

**A:**  I was in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Tell us about what transpired there at the time of revolt? When they fired the cannons in Lhasa, nothing happened in Drepung, right?   

**A:**  It seemed like nothing happened in Drepung. Just before the revolt, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</span> and other wealthy people in Lhasa talked that there would a danger of thieves would come with the pretext of the disturbance [Tib. ཟང་ངི་ཟང་ངི] to try to loot houses. So for each kudrak and rich people's house, 5-6 monks were hired to stay and protect the house though I myself didn't go. I think about 12 monks were sent to Kündeling to protect from theft - these weren't hired, these were sent by the tratsang. I also think that over 100 monks were sent to guard Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Were they volunteers?   

**A:**  They were not sent to make war because <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> was surrounded by soldiers. Since there were many valuable things in Norbulinga, they were sent to protect from thieves who might loot in the pretext of the disturbance. They didn't need monks to fight at Norbulinga since there were <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</span> soldiers, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐུ་སྲུང] 1. Bodyguard. 2. The &quot;Bodyguard&quot; Regiment of the Dalai Lama that was also known as the Kadang (tib. ཀ་དང) Regiment. 2. The Bodyguard Regiment of the Panchen Lama.">gusung</span> soldiers, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> and the volunteers from Lhasa. All of them had guns and went to Norbulinga, there was no way to go to Norbulinga. [Trindor la [not in the tape] At this time almost all of the Lhasa men who had weapons had gone there.-there was also a contingent of volunteers from the three great monastic seats].   

**A:**  Our monks were stationed at the doors of the temples and the rooms of the Dalai Lama to protect the things because there were lot of goldware and silverware items in there. About 6 days after these monks went to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span>, the revolt started on the 9th of the 2nd lunar month. Trindor la: It is on the 10th.   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama left on the evening of the 8th of the 2nd lunar month through the south gate. On the evening of 10th people were sure that the Dalai Lama was there. In the morning at about 6 a.m I first heard the cannon firing when I was in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> which later became ruins. My brother was with me then. As soon as I heard the artillery, my heart started to beat fast. Usually, my heart wouldn't beat fast when hearing the artillery. So I thought this is a kind of bad sign. After they fired 2-3 cannons, I called my brother and told him my heart is beating fast since I heard the artillery. He replied, probably that wasn't artillery, it was explosions for splitting rocks. At that time, we called it <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མདོ་སྨད] Eastern Tibet, Kham.">dome</span> [Tib. རྡོ་མེ] but now they call it dzeme [Tib. རྫས་མེ]. I told him that this is not explosion. Then after about 15 minutes, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> sent the message telling those monks who are supposed to go to Utse [Tib. དབུ་རྩེ], the mountain peak behind Drepung, to come. The Khamtsen had prepared and made a list in advance of all the monks over 18 and under 60 years of age. My brother and 2 others from khamtsen were sent to guard the Utse. Each person had a 305 English carbine and 150 bullets in a cloth bag. They told them, "go quickly, when it gets dawn we will send <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</span> with food and bedding.   

**Q:**  Did the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> give the guns or the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span>?   

**A:**  The government had given the guns to the monastery earlier. And the monastery had given them to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> based on their size. The khamtsen's made the list for giving the guns to the monks who were kind of capable and they had kept the guns in the hall [Tib. ཚོམས]. There were many monks from the different khamtsen going up there at this time and they all went to the Utse. As for the leaders, there were two leaders; <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> each appointed one monk. I didn't see my brother again after this and he ended up in India. I could have fled then from Drepung, but I didn't want to because of my karmic result.   

**Q:**  Did you have the thought of fleeing abroad?   

