# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0005.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 13 October 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tashi Sonam was a Drepung monk from Gomang College. In this interview, he continues the description of the 1959 revolt and the consequences for the monks who participated, as well as the reactions of the Chinese to the monks. He also tells about what happened at Drepung after the 1959 uporising in Lhasa, e.g., how the Chinese met with Drepung officials and told them they will not shell the monastery, and how the Chinese came to Drepung and held meetings and study sessions. [Note: Some of the Goldstein's assistant Trindor's comments were not on the tape, but added during the initial translation]   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0005_05/M_0005_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I didn't want to go because my mother was in Lhasa and I was her only son, so I shouldn't leave her. I thought it doesn't matter whatever happened to my things. Otherwise, I would have gone.   

**Q:**  At that time, was your mother in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. She was in living one of the inferior shelters like caverns [Tib. ས་ཕུག] located under Drepung where some people like blacksmiths, etc., would live. Then I got up before dawn and I made a fire and made tea and drank some. Then it became dawn. When I looked out towards Lhasa, normally, I could see clearly, but on that day it was unclear due to the dust. Some monks went to the east hill to see what was happening [Tib. ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ] [in Lhasa]. Even after the sun rose, we could see the flashes of the shells as the cannons were fired and they were also firing endlessly the guns with the sounds "to to to". [Note: not in the tape. There was an artillery unit a ways beyond today's road---another was west of Norbulinga, and the one that fired at the Potala was in Trib [Tib. གྲིབ]].   

**A:**  Then I heard that some monks looked out with binoculars from Drepung and they could see 14 large cannons facing Drepung. They said they thought there were about 7-9 cannons firing on <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> and we could hear the sound of the cannons making "ding ding." I heard that they couldn't see individual soldiers, but could see the flashes [Tib. མེ] of the artillery and couldn't see the artilleries itself because it might have been placed like low on the ground [Tib. ས་ལ་སྦྱར]. Then they [Chinese] stopped the monastic officials like the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span> and lamas from going out, saying that they were not permitted to go out. Then a small car drove up to the monastery. They said the monastery should send 2-3 capable [Tib. གོ་ཆོད་པ] monks and the 2 sheyngo to a meeting.   

**Q:**  Was there a motor road then?   

**A:**  It was a poor track that was built when the Dalai Lama came for his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</span> exam [1958] and the trucks couldn't pass the road. So the 2 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span> went to the meeting.   

**Q:**  Were they Chinese who came in the car?   

**A:**  They were Chinese leaders [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] When they arrved at the meeting, probably there wasn't much business to hold the meeting, but the officials said, "It's good that two of you came today. Go back soon and get all the monks together, nothing will happen. We won't shell the monastery. Stay happy and don't worry. If you stay in the monastery, nothing will happen. Tell the monks not to scatter away. If the monks get scattred hither and the thither [Tib. ཕར་ཚུར་གྲམ་མ་འགྲོ], we don't know if the soldiers would shoot them. We will not do anything to you. We won't shell the monastery." When the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span> returned, they got all the monks together and told them this.   

**Q:**  Did they hold a real meeting?   

**A:**  On that day, they couldn't hold the meeting. When we looked down (from Drepung), they were firing the cannons from Pelding [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡིང] and Trip and they really bombarded <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> very severely. A lot of people were killed in Norbulinga when the shells knocked over trees which fell on people's heads. So the people in the Norbuliga could no longer stay there because of the shellings. So all the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> made the decision and got out of Norbulinga and crossed the river [the Kyichu River]. At this time and we could see them going one after another in a line. Then the Chinese fired a lot on the people fleeing and it seemed that a single person did not survive.   

**A:**  Trindor: At first they (Chushigandru) had been grabbing to get horses.   

**A:**  They killed many of them. After they crossed the river, they didn't fire a single shot. They bombarded very severely the ones who were on this side of the river. [Note: not in the tape. That is where most people were killed. They fired on this side of the river, but once some (500-600) were able to get to other side of the river on horseback--the river wasn't big then since it was spring-- they didn't fire at them].   

**A:**  The monks then said among ourselves, now it's no good as <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> has fled. Chushigandru seems to be the rearguard force [Tib. མཇུག་ལ་སྡོད་མཁན] [to protect the Dalai Lama's rear] and there might be about 500-600 of them. [Note: not in the tape. Norbulinga was lost on the 11th, on the 12th, Ramoche was lost (it had been guarded by police and Lama gyüba monks; and on the 13th, the Tsuglakhang was taken.]   

**A:**  Then they [<span class "tooltip" data-text "[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span>] returned and then the next morning [11th--really the 12th] the sheyngo put all the monks in their own <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> (college) assembly hall or <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འདུ་ཁང] An assembly hall in a monastery.">dukhang</span> [Tib. འདུ་ཁང], and then, not long after that, Chinese officials, but not many Chinese, but there were many Tibetan cadres like <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</span> who arrived at the monastery and they placed guards at the dukhang doors and didn't let us out. For one complete day, we got no food or water [being locked in the dukhang]. The soldiers in the meantime broke into all the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> (apartments) and searched for guns and the swords and they also searched the college (tratsang) for weapons. Then on that evening they gave us food. After this, they asked us to return to our shag and bring all the weapons we had, even small knives like this. So the monks handed over cleavers, the knives for hair cutting and small knives kept in the waist, etc. These were piled up near the main door of monastery. They might have filled about 2-3 trucks. There were also spears. Then they told us to come for a meeting [on the 13th]. They told us, "keep yourself mentally happy. Nothing will happen. We are here to protect the monastery, so don't worry, we are here to help. We have not shelled you and we won't shell the monastery. There will be religious freedom, so you will be able to practice religion and there will be no change forever on this policy." Then there was a meeting for three days [14, 15,16th]. They said at this meeting again, "don't be afraid, we will help the monastery. We haven't come here to harm you. That's why we came here from China to help you not to hurt you".   

**Q:**  What did they do after this?   

**Q:**  After they held 3 days of meetings and said we will help you on religion and on everything, and that we came from China to help you, and you will see whether we help or not, then they differentiated the monks. They made a list of all the leaders [Tib. འགོ་འཁྲིད] of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> (college), <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> (residence halls) and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</span> (sub-residence halls) and those who were not leaders but were in charge of nomads and farmers and dealing with grain and money and the rich ones who had gotten the title of ex-officials, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐོན] In monasteries, a title for monks who have finished their monastic job obligations (tib. ཐོན་ཟིན).">thön</span> [Tib. ཐོན] like tratsang chöndze. and they were told, "Bring 3 days worth of tsamba. You have to go to the Drepung Phodrang for a study session [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱོང]. They will boil the tea there".   

**Q:**  Were you in this group?   

**A:**  Yes. I was arrested on the 20th of the 3rd lunar month and released from the Phodrang in the 8th lunar month. before the October 1st Chinese National Day [Ch. shi yi]. There was a double 6th lunar month in that year.   

**Q:**  Did they shut you up in the Phodrang all the time for 4-5 months?   

**A:**  I was shut in there for 6 months. While we were kept in the Phodrang, it was very hard since there was only one toilet there for all of those people. Later, from our <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> (apartments) we had to take the containers like the container for the grease and the tiffins for urinating and we urinated and took it under our monks shawls and threw it out. There were Chinese soldiers carrying guns and bombs surrounding the Phodrang. The rest of the monks who were not monastic officials and didn't have titles were also gathered and kept in a separate place in the monastery. They were also made to study and they were told, "you have to help us and we will help you. We have to make the monastery good and clean [Tib. གཙང་མ]." They gave them a lot of relief at this time such things as brocade vests, töngga [Tib. སྟོད་འགག] and sleeveless <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</span>, shamjug [Tib. ཤ་འཇུག] and woolen shawls [Tib. གཟན] and good boots.   

**Q:**  These were given to the poor monks, right?   

**A:** . Yes.   

**Q:**  The reason for you to get shut up in Phodrang was because you went for the büdü collection, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was supposed to be for that. When I was released, a Chinese told me, "we were wrong in classifying you as a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span> (class enemy) though there were ones called trerim in the monastery. But in this, there are too many trerim shut up in here. When we look at your history, you were not a trerim, but now the work was already been done. Even though you aren't a trerim, we can't change it because for changing one person classification we have to change the whole thing. So there is no way for use to change it. [Tib. ཐབས་ཤེས་ཡོད་མ་རེད]   

**Q:**  Were there any <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> (prayer assemblies) during this 5-6 month time for you and for the poor monks?   

**A:**  None for us and none for the poor monks also. In Gungru <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>, e.g., the officials were all in Phodrang. They told the poor monks to take whatever you want from there and from among rest of the monks in Gungru they appointed <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch.] The head/leader of an office.">dütrang</span> (low level officials) and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 组长] Team leader.">tsugdrang</span> (low level officials) and they were told, "two of you have to watch over the monks so they do not do reckless things and don't let others steal things. You can take meat, flour, tea and butter, etc. from the khamtsen and you can make fire and boil tea and make <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</span> (guel soup) until the stuff runs out. When these things ran out, we will try to find you other stuff." So they did not need to make fire in their <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> (apartments). In the morning they would eat bag (kneaded tsamba) and tea. Then they would go for a "study sesssion." They would leave 2 cooks and there were 2-3 dütrang as the stewards who gave the cooks the stuff for making thukpa for the dinner. Then they locked the doors and went to the study session. The key to the khamtsen's storerooms were now kept by the dütrang and tsugdrang. The cooks of Gungru would make the thugba while the others were at the afternoon study session.   

**Q:**  At this time, how many monks were there?   

**A:**  I think there were a little more than 7,000. On the day, the first cannons were fired. The monks on the east side met for study sessions in the east <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</span> (debating grove) and those in the west at the west chöra. This was basically <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> and Gomang. The two smaller <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> were merged with with one of these big tratsang. There were also about 800 young monks that were separated. They made a list of them and they were considered as a group [this is while the officials were in the phodrang]. They were organized and they were called students. Then there was a group who were called vehicle drivers and a list of them was made. Then there were also ones doing things like showing movies, cement workers, rock breakers, house builders and road workers. They were told "you will be treated very nicely and will be paid good wages and clothing." They all went to work and received wages for this.   

**Q:**  Was this in 1959?   

**A:**  Yes. Therefore during this period a lot of monks left the monastery in groups of 30-40-50-60 to do this work. So the monks became less but there were also many who didn't go. Then they did a classification of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span> (class enemies). They also said "all the goldware, silverware and the precious stones of all the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span>, and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</span> should be collected and put in one building, otherwise some may get lost and it will be a great waste." So this was done and stored in the Drepung Küngara [Tib. ཀུན་ག་ར་བ] [behind the phodrang] where they piled the trunks of goldware, silverware and precious gems. The guards of this were Chinese soldiers. Then every week one monk had to go as the representative of the other monks to check whether it was still there or not there. Then the Chinese said, "we should also collect all the statues", but the monks said, "no one will take the statues." Actually, at that time, nobody would take statues like they do nowadays even when they knew it was gilded. So they didn't collect the statues. They only collected the goldware and the precious stones like coral and turquiose. They had already taken away the stored things of the tratsang that were silver [Tib. dgnul gyi bkar 'jug] in trucks. And we were told that the policy will not change.   

**Q:**  At that time, you could do your prayers in your <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We could do prayers in your own <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span>, but there weren't any <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> (prayer assembly meetings). Then in 1961, we were told we could have a little bit of tsog. Then in 1962, the first Mönlam Festival started again.   

**Q:**  This was when the Panchen Lama came, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In 1961, when the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> started again, how many monks were there?   

**A:**  In 1961, the number of monks had become much less. At this time, I was the cook with another monk. When they had <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> at <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> there were 1019 monks. At this time, we were using all the monastery's grain, tea and butter and other things and they ground <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</span> and all the monks were eating together without any grain quota [Tib. འདུར་མ]. There were a lot of foodstuffs then. Then there was a small tsog in this temple where there were little less than 100 monks. Then in Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] Khamtsen there were also about 100 young monks who met in a tsog. [so all total about 1219 monks were left] One group of monks had returned to their villages voluntarily. They took the things in their <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> and left. Another group had been sent to work in work units. When they first categorized the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span> in Drepung, there were 160 trerim. Then gradually, the Cultural Revolution started. They said, "Until now, you have been staying in the monastery, but now we have to change it and do the Cultural Revolution completely. You will not be admitted in the work unit, because they won't trust you. If you want to go to be farmers, we will send you." So at this time, there were quite a lot of monks who returned to the villages to be farmers. Except for a few of the trerim who had back door relations, they were not sent to the city. In either late 1989 or early 1990 the committee [Tib. ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] gave each of the monks who had been in the monastery since 1959 a ball of butter. At that time, there were 69 celibate monks. There were also 5-6 monks who had lost celibacy but were still in the monastery. In 1982, some of the monks who had been in work units returned to the monastery. There were about 40 odd monks who returned in that year. Almost the half of the monks died. During the Cultural Revolution so many monks died.   

