# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0005.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** October 13 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tashi Sonam was a Drepung monk from Gomang College. In this interview, he relates he became a monk, and how he first came to Lhasa and Tibet. There are also details of his shigön including membership, salary and alms received. There is also discussion of the relationship with teachers and details of the studies he undertook. There is a description of the shampthotre and the work done in Gungru Khamtsen and some personal history during the year of Chinese invasion, as he was working as a servant. There are also descriptions of working as a tönyog to supplement his salary and alms as a monk, and details of how this was done by monks. There are also descriptions of the attendance of tsog and chöra and mention of the shigön of Gungru.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0005_01/M_0005_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How old were you when you first became a monk?   

**A:**  I first became a monk at the age of 9 in 1927.   

**Q:**  Where are you from?   

**A:**  I'm from Pemba Dzong [Tib. དཔལ་འབར] in Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ].   

**Q:**  Did you come as a tragyün?   

**A:**  Yes. I joined in Gomang Tratsang Gungru [Tib. གུང་རུ] Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Which mitsen?   

**A:**  There is no mitsen.   

**Q:**  Did you first become a monk in the monastery in your homeland?   

**A:**  Yes. We call that monastery shigön [Tib.གཞིས་དགོན]. I stayed as a monk there for 3 three years, then I came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us about how you came to Tibet? Did you come with some partners?   

**A:**  I came with 2 partners at the age of 12 in (1930). At that time, there was no vehicle. We came on foot carrying a backpack [Tib. རྒྱུག་ཁུག]. We carried mainly tsamba, bedding, cushion and monk's clothes. We came via the main road and crossed the mountain pass called Shargongla [Tib. ཤར་གོང་ལ]. There were lots of people at that time going up and down on that road like traders, etc. We carried our own food and things so wherever we ended up at night we stayed. We put three rocks into a fireplace and made tea and ate tsamba. We would get up in the morning before dawn and leave. At about 10 a.m, we would stop at a place that had firewood and make fire and tea. That's how we came-it took us 21 days like this from Pemba Dzong to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was it located between Chamdo and Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང].   

**A:**  Lhodzong is located below Pemba Dzong. When we came up we reach Shopado [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ] which is a dzong and then we reach Pemba, where there is a monastery.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am now 73.   

**Q:**  When you came to Lhasa was the Regent Reting?   

**A:**  I think he had just started.   

**Q:**  Is it true that if the tragyün come to the three great monastic seats and when they return to the shigön they have a higher title?   

**A:**  Tragyün who come and study tsenyi and pass the geshe exam, or even if they didn't pass geshe but are good in tshenyi, then when they return to shigön, they would not get any title and there is no extra alms or salary. But they would put them at the head of the row [Tib. གྲལ་འགོ] and would have a higher esteem [Tib. མཐོང་ཆེན་པོ] and be regarded as precious or holy [Tib. རྩ་བ་ཆེན་པོ]. But for those like us who haven't study much tsenyi, we won't be considered as esteemed as the geshe, but will be regarded as more holy in terms religious faith than those monks who stayed there.   

**Q:**  Is there a custom as in Treu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] Khamba of coming for 3 years and then leaving?   

**A:**  The Treu Khamba come for 3 years and then return and the monastery in Treu sends three replacements. We have no custom such as this. We can stay as long as possible.   

**Q:**  How many monks were there in your shigön?   

**A:**  It is called Jara Pemba [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར]. It had 2 tratsang and little more than 200 monks.   

**Q:**  Trindor: It fought a lot against the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When they did they fight?   

**Q:**  Trindor: They fought in 1960-61, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In 1959, it was finished in one morning and when they were implementing the reforms in Lhasa and they were studying and arresting and killing people, in our homeland, they were fighting and at that time, the lama was there and a plane came from Taiwan and dropped guns and the bombs.   

**Q:**  Trindor: The plane was from Tailand and it was American plane.   

**Q:**  MCG. It might be our plane which was sent from Taiwan because we had a strong relation with them and was opposing the communists.   

**A:**  Yes, the plane came from Taiwan and in the beginning, they made severe war here where there were high mountains.   

**Q:**  At that time, where were you? You were here [Lhasa] or there?   

**A:**  I was here. I never returned to the shigön. I lived in Gomang since I came at age 12. My shigön was old it was built by Drogön Chögye Phagpa [Tib.འགྲོ་མགོན་ཆོས་རྒལ་འཕགས་པ] who was also called Phamo Drupa [Tib. ཕག་མོ་གྲུ་པ] who became the president [Tib. སྲིད་འཛིན] of Tibet. [Sakya [Tib. ས་སྐྱ] lama] It was before Tsongkhapa came.   

**Q:**  Did your shigön have alms and salary like Drepung on which the monks live on or their household supplys them?   

**A:**  It had a little bit grain salary but there was no alms and salary like Drepung because it was located in the countryside. We didn't use Tibetan currency much. For example, I had never seen the 100 sang note, gyalor [Tib. བརྒྱ་ལོར]. I saw a little bit the note of 7 sang and the 5 sho.   

**Q:**  How do you use money?   

**A:**  We wouldn't use much money and do trade. Money was very rare. We would try to find musk and pilose antler of the young stag [Tib. ཁྲག་རྭ]. We would exchange these for tea. And we would also barter our grain for meat and butter. And people would weave their own woolen cloth, nambu [Tib. སྣམ་བུ] and make clothes out of it. We didn't use money for buying things much. And when trader came through from Dartsedo [Tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ], we would barter copper pots and ladles with grain which they would use for fodder for their pack animals.   

**Q:**  How would you manage yoyr tsampa and those stuffs?   

**A:**  In the shigön, the monastery gave us about 4 khe of grain a year. So most of my other needs in grain etc were given to me by my family. They would make it into tsamba and bring it to me. The monastery hold quite a lot of tsog like for 7 days as it had good endowments. Sometimes there would be a tshog for one whole week.   

**Q:**  How did you decide to come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I had a great desire to go to Lhasa and my friend asked me if I wanted to go to Lhasa with him. I said "yes but I'm not ready to go immediately". The friend said "I am making tsamba preparations." I said, "I will think about it". We didn't need fancy traveling clothes, a chuba from white woolen nambu was fine. I heard that in Lhasa you need two pairs of boots with good soles and I also heard that you need a good backpack frame. I wore one boots and put the other in my pack. In the evening the boots served as a pillow. But I had to get some tsamba. This area was abundant in tsamba as it was a farm area.   

**Q:**  Did you have to ask your gegen and parents that you are going to Lhasa?   

**A:**  There is the custom to ask the tratsang and gegen, etc., but the monastery won't let monks leave easily. Normally you give the monastery a khata and a khe of grain when asking permission but the monastery didn't let people go easily, maybe it was because they feared loosing too many monks to Lhasa, in any case it wasn't easy. [and he didn't ask anyone]. My family was situated right near the monastery. It was a poor family. But I had a relative in the monastery who was very rich. I went to him and told lie and said "I have to go some where on a trip and have no boots, so could you lend me yours and I will come back soon". He agreed. So I went to Lhasa with tsamba, boots and money of only 2 sang and 4 sho, it is equal to 12 fen Chinese currency, but at that time this was a fair amount. One of my monk accompany was young like me but the other was about 40 years old. The night we were leaving I stayed at the shag of my accompany and we drank tea and ate pag. It was a very big and heavy load of tsampa to carry. Then we changed from monk's robe to layman clothes and left at about midnight. We wore our hats to cover our faces as much as possible and left. We did three prostrations towards the monastery and said some prayers as we left the monastery through the road below the circumambulation road and then we were on our way and stayed overnight to the stations. Our tsamba lasted for about 17 days and then it was exhausted. Then we had to beg for food the rest of the days. It took us longer, but it was okay. Then we arrived in Lhasa at the Lhedong Shenkha [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ] ferry site. The ferryman said the fare to take us across was 1 sho. But we didn't pay. We told the ferryman we didn't have money, and he said wait at the dock awhile. Then a trader with about 20 or so horses and mule loads came and he paid our fare. The trader said to the ferryman these are monks, so you should send them across. [The ferryman must have been reluctant because then] the trader said I'll pay their fare. Then we were in Lhasa and were very happy. We went straight to Drepung where we had our khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Did you go to Drepung directly or stayed in Lhasa for awhile?   

**A:**  We could have stayed awhile in Lhasa if we knew someone, but we didn't and we spoke Khamba's dialect which local people found hard to understand. But even if we new someone's name it would have been hard to find them, especially given our dialect. So we went to Drepung directly to find our khamtsen and asked where is Gungru Khamtsen. Whether you are from the Amdo region of eastern Tibet Dotö [Tib. མདོ་སྟོད] or Kham region eastern Tibet the Domey [Tib. མདོ་སྟོད], once you reach your khamtsen where you belonged to, there are always people from your land.   

**Q:**  When you get there, you look for the khamtsen gegen who will ask where are you from?   

**A:**  We will say we are from Pemba Dzong and have come to become monks. And then he would send his gidru to different monks who will provide shag for a few days. The next day we are taken to the abbot by the khamtsen gegen to do first audience [Tib. གསར་མཇལ] At this time we give a khata and do prostration. And the abbot would ask us what is your name?" and are you a gelong or getsül? He will make a list of these. After all of these are done then you can go to tsog and collect gye/phog. After 2-3 days you would be registered as a monk. The khamtsen gegen would try to arrange for someone from our homeland to be our gegen.   

**Q:**  Is this gegen your food giving gegen, toter gegen [Tib. ལྟོ་སྟེར་དགེ་རྒན]?   

**A:**  No. He isn't responsible for providing us food. Usually we don't have relatives to join their shag, so we are given a gegen or find one from the monks who were from same land. Then the gegen and gidru both put their seals and after having the meeting with abbot we are monks. We go to get gye/phog from the tshogchen, tratsang and khamtsen. Each of us tragyün are responsible for our own livelihood. Then it is up to us whether we will study pecha or memmorize the prayers recited in the tsog. No one tells us what to do. We live on the alms/ salary. There is no one who helps us with food or money. The monastery can't help since there are so many monks. The saying is that there are 7700 monks but at the ceremony of Dalai Lama's ordination [Tib.ཆོས་ཞུགས] there were over 10,000 in Drepung [collecting gye]. At that time, the dewashung was estimating that probably there would not be 10,000 monks in Drepung. And then in Sera, they found there was even more than Drepung, so they were suspucious and thinking that how could there be more than Drepung. There were so many monks, therefore, they couldn't manage their livelihood. So because of one's own karmic result, we lived poorly [at first]. Sometimes we drank water and sometimes black tea. We only ate as little tsamba as possible. So it was hard at first. There were many monks who were really making their living according to religion and studying pecha. The majority of those came from long distance. But all the 1st, 2nd and 3rd places of Lharamba geshe and the tsogramba were all from the long distance like Mongolian and Dotö is khamba and Domey is Amdo.   

**Q:**  Were you regarded as long distance?   

**A:**  We were considered Dotö and we were called long distance.   

**Q:**  Was there any custom giving gidru to a gegen as a kind of tax in rotation if they were tragyün?   

**A:**  In our khamtsen usually a tragyün would find a monk from the same homeland and give the monk to him, but if this wasn't possible, then the khamtsen gegen had to act as the gegen for these tragyün monks. Sometimes, some khamtsen gegen would have 7-8 gidru in one year.   

**Q:**  Do these monks stay in the same shag as the khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  No. They live separately. The shag we got were bad. If there were 4 of us from kham and asked to live together, they would put all four in a shag, or if we wanted two to live together, they would put two in a shag, but the shag were bad ones. Some khamtsen had plentiful of shag, but not many monks and others were scarce of shag. Our khamtsen had about 600 monks. It was one of the 4 bigger ones, khamtsen chekha [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག] like Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ] Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང], Gungru [Tib. གུང་རུ] and Bati [Tib. པྲ་ཏི]. There are the ones from which the tratsang chabu come. There are many lamas also in Gungru. Kündeling Tatsha [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་རྟ་ཚགས] Rimpoche belongs to Gungru. We are medium for the number of pechawa In the past Gungru had provided many abbots and scholars and Ganden Tripa, but later it became less which was really the fluctuation of the Buddism [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ཕར་ཆག] and finally, it became the like geshe and the scholars were exhausted. In the past, before the document of Gungru Chöngjung, [Tib. གུང་རུ་ཆོས་འབྱུང] witten by the famous lama. There is meditation cave of this lama where he stayed in a poor condition and this was the old document and there were few of these documents left. Later, Jayang Sheba Ngawang Tsöndrü [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ་ངག་དབང་བརྩོན་འགྲུས] wrote the new document.   

**Q:**  Who paid for your monks' robes?   

**A:**  We, ourselves have to pay for it. We carried used robes from homeland because we heard this was the best way to do it. But we had to make new boots because Gomang only allows the kind of boots called shasuma [Tib. ཤ་གཟུགས་མ] and we were not allowed to wear this kind of boots. So for the first few years life is very hard for the tragyün. There was a saying in our land about Tibet the everything is expensive. Like eating gold and drinking silver [Tib. གསེར་ཟ་དངུལ་འཐུང] This is because you have to pay for everything except water.   

**Q:**  When you came to Drepung could you read?   

**A:**  Yes I could read. In my own land I had already took some pecha test.   

**Q:**  In what grade did you study?   

**A:**  In my homeland, we didn't have special kind of grade, but here it is like the grade just after the khatog garmar. But I could read pecha pretty well. This is because the way we studied pecha in my monastery was different from the way in [central] Tibet. We had to read a long and thick book of hand writing form, umey [Tib. དབུ་མེད]. We had to read this everyday and finish it. And I heard that some were made to read three or five times. So when I came to Drepung I could read well. After I came to Drepung I stayed as a carefree dobdo and just passed my time. I was a dobdo for 9 years.   

**Q:**  Were you in the jumping tobtsang?   

**A:**  No. I didn't do jumping but I went to watch and gave some donations for them to buy tea and butter. I wasn't able to practice much dharma. But I also didn't do any bad acts. I stayed as a dobdo being carefree and passing my time [Tib. ཉི་མ་གང་འཁྱོལ].   

**Q:**  Did you study tsenyi?   

**A:**  No. But I studied a little bit prayers recited in the tsog [Tib. འདོན་ཁ་ཁྲལ]. Then I joined the monks called gonpog [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བ] in the tratsang who dose prayers for propretiating the protective deities like Maha Kala [Tib. མགོན་པོ] and the Deity of Wealth, Namse [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས] etc. Each deity has different prayers. And I got the training in making the torma offerings etc. And in the gönkhang there is a senior monk. I was the gidru of him and I was the umdze. I did this for quite awhile and came to know the rituals well. Then I went to north to do the büdü [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] for giving initiation, doing divinations, performing rituals and doing things for the deceaced and collecting offerings and donations for the khamtsen. I did this for 4 years.   

**Q:**  Where did you go in the north?   

**A:**  I went to Sangshung [Tib. གསང་གཞུང] located just before we reach Nagchu. I was not a geshe, but I had this yellow vest to wear because when we were in the protective deitys chapel, gönkhang [Tib. མགོན་ཁང] we could wear this yellow vest which is the rule of the Gyüme and all the rituals were also done according to the Gyüme tradition. Even if the geshe didn't join the Gyüme, they would not wear the yellow vest.   

**Q:**  In the khamtsen, what kind of monk's obligation called shamthotre [Tib. ཤམ་ཐབས་ཁྲལ] did you have to do?   

**A:**  I didn't have to do that because I went to the north. I would have had to do khamsten gegen, but since we have many monks in the khamtsen, so I didn't reach the turn for doing khamtsen gegen. After the revolt I was classified as trerim because I went as büdü. I thought it was unfair to classify me as a trerim because of this. But later I thought it was okay and I stayed quiet as a trerim. I didn't have anything real bad happened to me. That was fortunate. If I had become an poor class [Tib. དབུལ་པོངས] and if I had become an activist, I would have received some free things, but it would have shortened my life and these things would not last long. By staying as trerim, I didn't harm anyone else and didn't take other people's property, so that was good.   

**Q:**  Usually, what work do you have to do in Gungru Khamtsen?   

**A:**  The first job is that you have to do 1 year as khamtsen gegen who is the master of laws and rules [Tib. ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ].   

**Q:**  Is this one person?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, you have to do nyerpa in khamtsen for 2 years. Then there is a gap of some years and if your name comes up you have to be the loan collector, drudeyba [Tib. འབྲུ་འདེད་པ] for 3 years.   

**Q:**  When would you come to the tsondu?   

**A:**  You are in the tsondu as soon as you finish the khamtsen gegen. Whoever is not allowed to go to the tsondu unless you finished the khamtsen gegen. Every 4 years, there is the selection of tratsang chabu. In the past, this was done mainly by wealth and backdoor. Later, when there was more and more controversy [Tib. ལབ་རྒྱུ་གླེང་རྒྱུ] it changed and a new system was instituted whereby the tsondu would come up with a list of candidates and these would be taken to Tenma Deity [Tib. བསྟན་མ] for selection (while in trance). She will put her seal on two names. These two names are given to the tratsang and there is no back door. It takes the two names and puts them into balls of dough (measured to be equal) and then does the senriy before the statue of Maha Kala. One ball of dough would fall out. This is taken to the tratsang's chabu office, chabukhang [Tib. ཆ་བུ་ཁང]. There it is opened and read who is selected. The chabu's clerk will then write a note saying so and so has been selected as the senior, dreba [Tib. བགྲེས་པ] and put a seal on it. Then the khamtsen is told to send the two candidates to the chabukhang. There the clerk says so and so has been selected as Drepa [chabu], so please give this letter to the khamtsen. To be chabu, the term is 4 years and takes some expenses but there is also income. The income and the expense would barely get balanced and they didn't have much to embezzle [Tib. ཟ].   

**Q:**  When did the new system begin?   

**A:**  It began before the Chinese entered Tibet.   

**Q:**  Was it before the Gomang trouble?   

**A:**  It was long before the trouble. Maybe in 1946, the khamtsen set up the new rule.   

**Q:**  It was just before the Sera War, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In 1949 there was an additional Mönlam Festival, Mönlam pharma [Tib. འཕར་མ] on the 13th, 14th and 15th day of the 6th lunar month. At this time, Jiang Kaishek controlled Beijing. He sent money to Tibet requesting to do something through religion to repulse [Tib. ཟློག་པ] the communist. So an additionnal Mönlam was held. [Trindor: [not in the tape] thinks they had lots of figures of Chinese that were burned in this Mönlam].   

**A:**  The new rule was made before this Mönlam pharma. Just before that, the Sera War took place and I was at Tsongjö Festival and we heard that on the 24th of the third lunar month all the Sera monks went back at night.   

**Q:**  Was this in the year they expelled the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes. it was 1949 in autumn. I was in Potala at that time. I was working as a servant in Potala for making a living like working as a caretaker [Tib. སྐུ་གཉེར] and working as a servant for the kudrak like carrying firewood. The monks were allowed to do that. I had gone from Potala to Lhasa, but at the eastern and western gates of Potala, there were soldiers posted. I went back inside and asked what is going on and they said today we are expelling the Chinese from Lhasa and they were deportd to India and they were going back through sea route. The soldiers were posted to protect Norbulinga and Potala in case there was trouble from the Chinese. The additional Mönlam was held in the 6th month and in 8th or 9th lunar month, Jiang Kaishek fled to Taiwan. When the time came it was hard to do anything.   

**Q:**  When you were young, was your gegen in Drepung a relative of yours?   

**A:**  No, he was from the same homeland.   

**Q:**  Did you stay in his shag?   

**A:**  I didn't live with him. I lived separately. I had to make and eat my own food. My gegen didn't give me food.   

**Q:**  How did you generate the income?   

**A:**  I got alms like 1 fen or half fen from the tratsang and tsogchen. And if one was out of tsamba, other monks would give you some. If you go to some friends and say now I am out of tsamba, can you give me some,they would give it.   

**Q:**  You mean the monks in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes and I would also go to the Labrang and big shagtang to beg for tsamba, they would give me. Then also for 7 years, I went to Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ] for doing harvesting which was called tönyog [Tib. སྟོན་གཡོག]. I was very healthy and strong and I knew well how to do the works and this pays a good wage. You normally get 5 khe and 5 dre of grain for the wages and you get another 1 khe if you stay working until Ganden Ngamjö. This work starts in 24th -25th -26th of the 7th lunar month and goes on until the 16th or 17th of 9th lunar month. While we were there, there is no kind of dishes, but we could get as much tsamba and black tea as we wanted. They also give some weak chang when there is hot sunshine and I also drank chang and ate pag. I was a hard worker so the villagers liked me.   

**Q:**  How did you first work as tönyog? Did the older monks tell you?   

**A:**  Other monks who have gone told me, "you are healthy and you have a hard time with your livelihood, so if you go to do this work, there is good wages and they give you good food. And the weather is good at this time".   

**Q:**  Who told you this?   

**A:**  The other older monks who have been there told me. They would go for the tönyog and grind the barley into tsamba and bring it to the monastery and eat the tsamba and save the alms. One type of monks don't do this but instead go to Lhasa to work as servant and get some wages. After I started doing this, my livelihood improved and I got to know more people.   

**Q:**  How did you make contact with the villagers in Phembo? Did you have to go to the households and ask them whether they need you to work?   

**A:**  Every year, there were monks going for the tönyog and one type of us would sell snuff and incense and matches to villagers. So the villagers would ask us, "dose any of you want to work as tönyog? We would say yes, and they would say okay then work here with my household. We would ask the wage, and they would tell us.   

**Q:**  What work did you have to do?   

**A:**  All this work was for harvesting.   

**Q:**  Did you have to do the threshing?   

**A:**  We didn't do any threshing. After bringing the grain stalks to the threshing ground, then they would pay the wages and they would grind the tsampa and deliver it to Lhasa and you don't need to pay the fee for that. Some household would make the monks work from before dawn to after dark, but I didn't work for such persons. There were many monks doing this in Phembo from Sera, Ganden and Drepung.   

**Q:**  Were there like 100-500 or 1,000 monks doing this?   

**A:**  In general, there were a great number of monks doing that. In Fall the gegen and gidru would go to one's home to do harvest. If the gegen is older and can't do harvesting he would help with cooking etc. If the gegen is a like kudrak he would send his gidru home to help his family. So there were lots of monks in the villages at this time and there were also quite a lot of monks from the long distance who know harvesting well. So all total I think maybe there were 400-500 monks from Drepung going to harvest. Another 400-500 monks would go to Tsöna [Tib. མཚོ་སྣ] to get wooden bowls and greeen pepper [Tib. སོ་ལོ་སྔོན་པོ] and bring back and sell them in Lhasa though they didn't have much money to do the trade. Others would do other kind of trade while the day is long and the weather is good. When it gets cold with short days in winter, they would return to the monastery. In winter I would live from alms and salary and from the profit from summer, so my livelihood improved.   

**Q:**  Do they mostly go to Phenpo?   

**Q:**  The tönyog monks go every where like Phembo, Drigung, [Tib. འབྲི་གུང] Metro Gungkar, [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] Chushü [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]. Some even go as far as Lhoka if a neighbor says come to my home for the tönyog, the wages are good, so some monks go there also.   

**Q:**  When you go do the work, do you wear monks robes?   

**A:**  No. We change them in Lhasa and leave it with someone and go in laymen clothes.   

**Q:**  Then what else did you do?   

**A:**  Then I worked in Potala as a care taker for a little less than 3 years.   

**Q:**  How did you get this job?   

**A:**  I knew an monk from Hamdong who was working as cook for the late Jayangkyil jigyab khenpo] [Tib.འཇམ་དབྱང་དཀྱིལ]. When jigyab khenpo moved to Potala because he was one of the attendants [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར] [of the Dalai Lama], he went with him. At this time, the cook didn't need to carry water, but for other things like carrying firewood and other things from their house in Lhasa, he said he needs a helper. So, he said, "I need a helper who wouldn't steal". He then asked me if I would do this. There was no special wages accept some treats [Tib. རྔན་པ] and we had free food and there wasn't too much work. Mostly carrying things up and down. I stayed doing this work for a little more than one year. Then in Potala there is a temple [Tib. ལྷ་ཁང] in the tratsang where each khamtsen in turn have to send 4 monks to do the prayers for the Dalai Lama 's long life [Tib. སྐུ་ཚེ་ཚེ་སྒྲུབ]. I did this for about 1 year. So all total I stayed about 2 years in Potala.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you gelong or getsül?   

**A:**  I was getsü. If best you should take the gelong vow early, but in the old society they would not take this vow early because if you take it early, then you have to do all kinds of things to earn your livelihood which will cause you to commit severe negativity [Tib. ཉེས་པ་ཆེ་རོགས]. I later took the gelong vow just before Talungdra left office (1950).   

**Q:**  If you did not work at all when you were young, could the monks subsist in the monastery depending on gye and phog?   

**A:**  The monks didn't have special works, but they could do sales of incense, snuff, soaps, matches, adhesive tape commonly used on face for headache etc [Tib. ཀོ་ཡོལ], tobacco, etc to villagers and get in return tsamba. We would say like this costs 1-2 assembly bowl of tsamba. We also take money like 1-2 sho when they didn't pay tsampa. Sometimes, there would be works like demolishing old houses and rebuilding new houses in the khamtsen for two or three months. During this time, we would get monthly tsamba phog and the wages was also pays well.   

**Q:**  If you wanted to stay reading pecha and didn't work, would the alms and the salary be enough for your living?   

**A:**  It would be very hard to live on alms/ salary. But there was one type of monk [pechawa] who lived like this. These weren't many of these though. They ate only a little pag a day. After about a year of doing this, other monks would realize that the monk ate a little bit tsampa in the morning and didn't have tsampa to eat at midday, they would start giving him some tsamba or butter like half or one gyama to help. The givers would say, "look after your health. Please recieve this little amount of tsampa" If some people in Lhasa knew about this, they would give tsampa to be enough for ten some days.   

**Q:**  Most of these were pechawa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They had no good clothes and no desire to wear nice clothes. They only were interested in pecha. They worked very hard under difficult conditions and later if they were good in studying pecha, they would have to ask the abbot for the name of the geshe [Tib. མིང་བཏགས] and would be picked by abbot as geshe lharamba or tsoramba [Tib. ཚོགས་རམས་པ]. After he got the geshe name, he would tell his friends, "I got geshe degree so I have to give a tonggo, so what is best to do" There was a little bit endowment funds available from the government for this tonggo. I think it was something like 70 dotse from the government regardless of the geshe degree. Then another 6-7 dotse from laji and maybe 4-5 dotse from the tratsang. And the khamtsen would give 1-2 dotse. But everything was expensive, so this wasn't near enough, so he would beg for some donation and he would often sell all their furniture. They only keep the clothes they were wearing, the cloak, bedding and a cushion. After they passed the geshe exam, then the geshe would join the gyüdö or gyüme. There the alms and salary were much better and the tratsang would give them the begging bowl [Tib. ལྷུང་བཟེད]. The other type of the lama gyüpa would have to memmorize the texts for 2-3 years and then become lama gyüpa called Kyerimpa [Tib. སྐྱེད་རིམ་པ]. You could live on the grain salary and the rich families also often helped these monks. The geshe from the three great monastic seats would be automatically enrolled in gyüdö or gyüme.   

**Q:**  When you were young did you go to tsog/chöra?   

**A:**  I would go to tsog all the time. If you don't go to tsog you won't get alms/ salary. I go to chöra for sometime though I didn't study pecha. Then I go a lot to Lhasa to read the pecha like Sungdü [Tib. གཟུངས་བསྡུས] and Gyetong [Tib. བརྒྱད་སྟོང]. This was very good for the livelihood because it takes many days.   

**Q:**  How did you get this job ?   

**A:**  The household would hire monks to read the pecha. Some one from the household tells a monk they knows in the monastery to hire some monks who can read the pecha well and that monk would ask people like me if you want to go for 15 days to read pecha. I would say yes. During this time, you get free food though you cannot keep the left over and you get quite a good wages that are not bad. So this way you can avoid using your one's own tsamba and make some side income because the place was a place where dharma is flourished. This was very helpful for my livelihood.   

**Q:**  At that time, you didn't have any worriness [Tib. སེམས་ཁྲལ] of not getting enough food, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At this time, I had no possessions and no money but also no worries or wishes for "things."   

**Q:**  Were you alone in your shag?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I never used to even think I wish I could buy this or that and didn't have money. I didn't even have a nice table to put my bowl on. I just had a small wooden poor quality table . If my tsamba was about to finish, I would think that I don't have enough money to tsampa, but otherwise I didn't worry about livelihood.   

**Q:**  How do you get money then?   

**A:**  If the tsamba was about finish, I would use some of the money I had saved from reading pecha and the alms and salary and buy some. And as for butter, I would buy 1 tranka which is equal to 1 and half fen of butter at a time which is wrapped in some kind of leaf. I use this make a butter tea.   

**Q:**  Was there any grain salary or butter salary in Gungru Khamtsen?   

**A:**  No. None at all.   

**Q:**  You don't get much from Gomang also, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many khe of grain did Gomang pay when you first came?   

**A:**  We originally got 1 khe of grain from Gomang for a year. Later it was increased to two khe and then three. The jiso gave two small bo [Tib. འབོ] of mixed grain; wheat, barley and beans. This bo had only 13-14 dre [regular khe have 20 dre]. We grind this mixed tsamba and it was tasty and nutricious. When we buy stuffs like meat and butter, we use like 1 fen or 1 and half fen. But a small load of tsamba cost 7 sang which is equal to 3 maotse and 5 fen. It was expensive.   

**Q:**  Did Gungru Khamtsen have chöshi?   

**A:**  It had a one small chöshi but it's yield was used for the khamtsen performing rituals and making tshog etc. None went to the monks.   

**Q:**  When did the Gomang salary increase?   

**A:**  First it went from 1 to 2 khe a year. This was in about 1949. Then in 1955 or 56, we got another increase to 3 khe of grain a year. Later, there was talk of increasing one more khe but this never occurred before revolt   

**Q:**  What are the places that belonged [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས] to Gungru?   

**A:**  The main ones were Shota Lhosum [Tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ]; Shopado, Pemba and Lhodzong, then Drigung Chetsang Rimpoche [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་ཆེ་ཚང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] who was the son of Tsarong was also belonged to Gungru though he wouild not stay in Drepung because of his sect. Also Gojog Rimpioche [Tib.?] who died in the year before last year was also belonged to Gungru Khamtsen. Also some miser from Lharigo [Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ] were belonged to Gungru. And Kündeling's miser in Riwoche, [Tib. རི་བོ་ཆེ] and Jagsamkha [Tib. ལྕག་ཟམ་ཁ] were also Gungru. This is because Kündling is belonged to Gungru.   

**Q:**  To whom your homeland belong to?   

**A:**  We were under the government. Lhodzong and Pemba are belonged to the government. Shodado was belonegd to Kündeling and Shobado's Dzong is appointed by Kündeling. And Kündeling appoints the abbot of the monastery there from Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད]. Pemba Monastery's abbot was appointed by the government. Lhodzong's Siwö [Tib. gzi 'od ?] Monastery is a very big monastery which used to be under Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] then it was confiscated by the government so it became under government. And in Lhokha, Wön Thagpo Ngari Tratsang [Tib. འོན་དྭགས་པོ་མངའ་རིས] was also belonged to Gungru. There was a large area that belonged to Gungru and there were also many monks.   

**Q:**  Gungru was mostly Khamba, but could the monks from Drigung be in the tsondu if they come to Gungru Khamtsen?   

**A:**  No, because they were belonged to böba, so they couldn't be in the tsondu or khamtsen gegen. There were different ways of admission between Khamba and böba in the monastery. The khampa's admission was called khamshug [Tib. ཁམས་ཞུགས] and böpa's admission was called böshug [Tib. བོད་ཞུགས]. After they get admitted, the khambas become khamtsen gegen and the böbas become khamtsen jama who make fire and tea. These two would get the same extra one share in gye/phog and also get one contaier called chapdra [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ] of tea equally. When they take over the khamtsen rungkhang, they take it together and also hand over it together. If there is a shortage of money, both jointly have to make it up.   

**A:**  Is jama a monk's obligation, shamthotre [Tib. ཤམ་ཐབས་ཁྲལ] or do they have to ask for it?   

**A:**  They don't need to ask for it, it was a shamthotre. Both khamtsen gegen and jama are shamthotre. If one didn't do these when his turn comes, he will be expelled from the monastery. Even if you go to another place when you think you are due for khamtsen gegen, you will still be expelled as it is your obligation to be available.   

**Q:**  For the other positions like the grain collector, drudepa [Tib. འབྲུ་འདེད་པ] do they send them from among the tsondu members ?   

**A:**  Yes they were sent from tsondu members and they send one partner with him. Sometimes, both were from non-tsondu members because there were only 7-8 monks in Gungru's tsondu and only one person comes to the tsondu in a year. Some of them died and some returned to kham.   

**Q:**  What percent of tragyün stay in Drepung during their life time and what percent would return?   

**A:**  When I came to Drepung, there were 76 tragyün in Gungru who came along together. We had to do khamtsen shöndre for 6 years. We had to do whitewashing, sweeping and carrying loads from Lhasa. Then after 6 years, they wouldn't send us around any more. Carrying loads is imposed like a tax from the tratsang. These were divided among the 16 khamtsen and the khamtsen itself would also make us to work. At the end of the 6 years of shöndre, at the Mönlam of the 6th year we had to carry the cooking equipments and those things to Lhasa, but we didn't have to take them back and then the shöndre would be over. At this Mönlam, there were only 24 left. The rest had returned to kham, or lost their celibacy and doing trading to India etc. Then we pooled a little bit money and we went to the households of the rich monks to beg for money in Lhasa and we bought a copper water container as a rememberance on which we engraved the letters, "we, the monks who have finished our shöndre in this year have donated this to the khamtsen as the common gift [Tib. སྤྱི་འཇོག]". Actually, of these 24, only 19 were still living in the monastery at the time of revolt.   

**Q:**  Was there also the custom, where the Khambas didn't become a monk in their shigön and came to Drepung directly and became a monk?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. Normally, they would promote about 5 grades for the tragyün and they start studying in the 5th grade. But as for the newly joining monks though they were from the long distance, they leave them in the grade as they were in the khatog garmar like the böba. Also these Khamba become monks here so take the name of the abbot. The tragyün keep their name they got from their monastery in Kham. I think in Gomang most monks were from the long distance. Of the 3,300 monks, probably 2,300 were long distance monks. And in Gungru of the 600 monks, probably about 100 were from near by. Later, there were some boys mixed with Khampas and Böba came through Kündeling's [relation]. When we came, there were not many monks who came from near by. The monks from near by were not allowed to be the khamtsen gegen. In Loseling, if a boy was born in Lhasa and both of his parents were from kham and Amdo, he was not allowed to be the khamtsen gegen. In Gomang, we don't have that kind of rule, if one is khampa, he would become the khamtsen gegen.   

