# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0005.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 13 October 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tashi Sonam was a Drepung monk from Gomang College. He remained in the monastery after 1959 and in this interview he discusses the details of the work that monks were made to do berfore, during and after the Cultural Revolution.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0005_07/M_0005_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Were the masses offering alms at this time?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were they allowed to do this?   

**A:**  Yes. Until the Culture Revolution they could. It was said, "even if it is a single person you can pratice religion and we will not bother you [Tib. ཡ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མ་རེད], and if you don't pratice religion, we will not tell you to pratctice religion.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there people going for the circumambulation around the town, the Lingkor [Tib. གླིང་སྐོར] and the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</span>?   

**A:**  Yes there were. It was said you can go for <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</span> and Lingkor clockwise or counter clockwise whatever you like and we will not bother you because these are religious activities. You have freedom to do or not do these, and there is no change. [Note: Trindor: not in the tape] Though there weren't abbots, but they (people) hired monks to do rituals. My father died in 1964, in December, however and we couldn't get monks to do the rituals. It was not allowed in Lhasa at this time. This was a time of PRC's control [Tib. དམ་འཛིན].   

**Q:**  Did they make most of the monks work in 1962- 63, etc.?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did they plant the apple trees?   

**A:**  It was in 1965 when they planted apples, built the house in the Jiri, planted trees and brok stones. The strongest were sent to break stones, the older and weaker monks pulverize stones and they made piles of the stones which later were sold and they were taken away in trucks. [Trindor: not in the tape: This was about 1964--all of Lhasa did this--they paid us by the basketful of these small stones to use for the main road beds. The apples were planted by two groups with about 100 monks in one days's rotation. First, the lines were laid where to plant the trees in rows and they dig the earth. Probably, it took about 3-4 years. It was said that there were 10,000 apple trees and pear trees, but I don't think there were so many.]   

**Q:**  Was there a difference in working time between the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span> and the poor monks (the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དབུལ་ཕོངས] The communist term for the &quot;poor&quot; class.">üpong</span> [Tib. དབུལ་ཕོངས])?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there was not much difference in the time. When they held the Cultural Revolution very severely, there was work on Sundays with no pay and in the evening there was work [Tib. དགོང་ལས] for 2 hrs with no pay. For the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span> there was no rest. Most of the work was done by the trerim. [Trindor: not in the tape: It was better if there was work for trerim, since there would be no struggle sessions.]   

**Q:**  How long did the monks eat together in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span>? Did you do that till the Cultural Revolution? What did you do after the monastery's grain ran out?   

**A:**  This organization lasted for a short time even after the Cultural Revolution. Then they made the work assignments in the morning telling the monks to work here and go there.   

**Q:**  Before this, the food was supplied by the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You get a little bit wages, right? Did you use that for yourself?   

**A:**  We didn't have much wages for our work, just a little bit which we kept for ourselves.   

**Q:**  Did you make tea in one's <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> (apartments) in these years?   

**A:**  Only in the evening did we make a little tea. Otherwise, it was okay for us eating and drinking there. Then in the Cultural Revolution, they mobilized the monks and started destroying the statues and they held many meetings.   

**Q:**  Usually, they held the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</span> in the evening, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did the Cultural Revolution start?   

**A:**  It started in 1965 in the 5-6th month.   

**Q:**  Before that, in 1962, they held the Mönlam Festival, right?   

**A:**  Yes, The Mönlam was held twice. Once in 1962 when I was the cook, and once in 1963, when I was sick and resigned as the cook.   

**Q:**  Was there a Mönlam in 1964?   

**A:**  Probably not in 1964. [Trindor: 1964 was when they toppled the Panchen Lama.]   

**Q:**  How about in 1965?   

**A:**  There was no Mönlam. Leave alone having the Mönlam, after the Cultural Revolution (began) even when they saw rosaries they would ask at once "what is this? What is your goal?"   

**Q:**  Did the Red Guards come to the monastery?   

**A:**  The real Red Guards didn't come to the monastery, but there were many monks in the monastery and they did the work. When they destroyed the monastery, it took about 4 months. I am not sure, but I guess it was like they couldn't finish destroying it, because there were too many things to destroy.   

**Q:**  The monks in the monastery destroyed it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the beginning, it was not easy to destroy it because at that time it was very complicated outside, though we couldn't hear about these things. They almost destroyed it for three times, but they couldn't. Then they left it for a while and then all of a sudden, they said "tommorow, we are going to start destroying. Shall we start it from the east or from the west? On that evening, the decision was made, but in the next morning, they couldn't destroy it and they left it for 4 days and then they started destroying. At first, they destroyed the Dalai Lama's room in the Ganden Potrang. Most of the statues were not that big and were not made from mud but were made from gilded copper [Tib. གསེར་ཟངས]. They threw the statues out of the windows. Then they threw off the roof decoration made from gilded copper on the monastery called Gyentsen [Tib. རྒྱན་མཚན]. Then they took off the red top of the wall at the east side of the monastery that was made from Tamarisk stalks [Tib. སྤེན་རྒྱན]. I am not sure what happened, but they kept it secret when they destroyed the red top of the walls and took off the back part, the west and south part. Three or four parts of the east side is still there. At that time, though people couldn't see it clearly with human eyes, but I heard that a very different thing happened [Tib. མི་འདྲ་བ་ཞེད་པོ་ཅིག་བྱས་སོང]. So they stopped it right away saying, "leave it, it is not good if people fall down". [Trindor la: not in the tape: I saw when they destroyed Ramoche. We were classified as middle traders [Tib. ཙོང་པ་འབྲིང་བ] so we didn't partake because they didn't trust us. The poor (üpong) did it. I went to see it. There was a big fight among the cadres as to whether they should destroy Drepung and other big monasteries or not. Some said should destroy them and others said its better to leave a few big monasteries.] When we were destroying, there were several teams. They made a team of 20-30-40 stronger people for doing heavy work. They held hammers, pincers and screw drivers. Another team took off the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐང་ཀ] A Tibetan scroll painting.">thanka</span> paintings and brocade religious decorations [Tib. ཆོས་རྫས] and carried them on their backs and they appointed the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 组长] Team leader.">tsugdrang</span> for these teams. Then a group of people collected the stuffings [Tib. གཟུངས] of statues [the thigs inside) and like tea leaves and grain, fed the pigs with these.]   

**Q:**  When they started the Cultural Revolution, how many monks were there in the monastery?   

**A:**  There were over 1,000. There were 1019 when I was the cook in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> and here there were 70 adult monks in Tayön and about 100 young monks in Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  That was in 1961-62, right? Did they remain there in 1963-64?   

**A:**  Yes, they did.   

**Q:**  When they started the Cultural Revolution, did they expel most of the monks?   

**A:**  For about one year, the situation was very chaotic when they destroyed the statues in the monastery. Then they called a meeting and said, "it is not enough to only destroy the statues and burn the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</span> (religious texts). You came to the monastery to be "monsters and demons" [Tib. ལྷ་འདྲེ་གདོན་བགེགས]. We should also change it. Now you don't have anything to get attached to in the monastery and the monastery has become merely a term [Tib. ཐ་སྙད]. Therefore, you should leave the monastery and go to work. If you do that, it is appropiate [Tib. འཚམས] with the work.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you still stay in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> as <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span> ?   

**A:**  I was still a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span>. They would not sent us to the city or the offices; we could only go to be farmers and nomads, but the rules among the farmers and nomads for trerim were stricter than in the monastery as they hated the trerim very much. So I decided to stay in the monastery. I was a trerim until 1980 when the government eliminated the classification of trerim at the time when the 11th National Party Congress [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན་བཅུ་གཅིག་པ] was held.   

**Q:**  Then the number of monks became less than 1,000?   

**A:**  Yes, it became much less. Many of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དབུལ་ཕོངས] The communist term for the &quot;poor&quot; class.">üpong</span> (monks) went to the offices in the city.   

**Q:**  How many monks were there in 1966-67 in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span>?   

**A:**  In 1968-69 most of the monks had left. After almost all the monks had gone, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 主任] Director of a unit or office.">zhuren</span> (director) of the monastery announced that 360 have left the monastery, leaving 360 here. Since half have left, probably it is okay for you to stay in the monastery. The Communist Party probably needed some monks to look after the monastery. Then none of them left except those who died and were arrested and jailed. In 1978, they held the 11th National Party Congress and since then the policy changed. Mao Zedong died on the 9th of September in 1976. Trindor la: In 1978, Deng Xiaoping stood up when the 11th National Party Congress was held.   

**Q:**  How did you make your living from 1965-78? Did you get the work points like the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</span>?   

**A:**  By that time, the foodstuff that we had collected in the monastery had almost run out. I think that at the end of 1962 they started giving food by quota allotments, weighing it in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱ་མ] A unit of weight equal to one jin [ch. 斤] (1.1 lbs).">gyama</span> [1.1 lb units] saying that it will not be fair if we didn't make a grain quota. From the end of 1962, they started weighing the grain in gyama and it was not easy-going [Tib. འདུར་མ] like before when we could eat as much as we wanted. At that time, we had a little bit of grain. They didn't have trucks to transport rice from China, so it didn't help us. Each monk in the Old People's Home [Tib. རྒས་གསོ་ཁང] who didn't work received 19 gyama a month. This wasn't enough, so I sold a new imported aluminum pot for the amount of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</span> it held. We had to eat 1 gyama a day no matter how we tried to use it economically, so we had to spend 11 days without tsampa. And for the working people, of course, 19 gyama was not enough. And we didn't have tea leaves except 1-2 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</span> of loose tea which was only enough to boil twice. So we mostly dug the roots of the rosa fericea [Tib. སེ་བ] for boiling tea which had a good color.   

**Q:**  Did you boil the tea in your <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> or did you have a kind of the eating commune [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང]?   

**A:**  We boiled tea in the shag. At that time, there was no Old People's Home and the organization [of the eating commune] was still there, but they only boiled tea and didn't have any grain. The workers got some tea and each worker got about 28-29 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱ་མ] A unit of weight equal to one jin [ch. 斤] (1.1 lbs).">gyama</span> as the grain quota per month. First, it was 27 gyama, then 28 or 29. When the Cultural Revolution started and there were many people, they couldn't manage the eating commune. So in order to dismantle this organization, they made separate groups like carpenters, masons and a construction <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རུག; རུ་ཁག; ch. 队] A large administrative unit in Tibetan communes that consisted of several villages. The full name for brigade was &quot;production brigade&quot; (tib. ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཁང; ch. 生产队), although most Tibetans just used the abbreviation &quot;ruga.&quot; In Tibet, communes/brigades were initiated primarily in the late 1960s.">brigade</span> [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན; Ch. dui]. [Note: Trindor la: not in the tape] We got 25 gyama when we were digging borax and that wasn't enough at all.   

**Q:**  When they made the grain quota 19 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱ་མ] A unit of weight equal to one jin [ch. 斤] (1.1 lbs).">gyama</span>, was it before the Cultural Revolution or during the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  It was before the Cultural Revolution. During the Cultural Revolution, they were still doing that. In 1966, in the Old Person's Home they raised us to 21 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱ་མ] A unit of weight equal to one jin [ch. 斤] (1.1 lbs).">gyama</span>, and then the next year they again increased it to 22 gyama. The last increase was in 1967-68 up to 25 gyama. Then in 1978, we got 26 for those not working, and it remained there.   

**Q:**  During Cultural revolution could you do religious practices in your <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span>?   

**A:**  No way.   

**Q:**  Until what time were you not allowed to do that?   

**A:**  From the Cultural Revolution until the 11th National Party Congress, it was a dark period [Tib. ནག་ཁུང]. Even if we wear some red <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</span> (dress/robe) and go to Lhasa, when you returned, they would say, "today, you were going to Lhasa in a red chuba."   

**Q:**  In your <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> could you wear red?   

**A:**  No. We were not allowed to wear it. We dyed all our monks robes into black color and then remade them into <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</span>, skirts and garments etc. Trindor la: Once I saw some old Drepung monks breaking stones who were wearing worn out black chubas. They didn't look like monks. At that time, we were poor like beggars wearing torn up chupas.   

**Q:**  When did you get the order saying you could admit new monks?   

**A:**  The announcement came on the 27th of the 5th lunar month in 1981.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did they say?   

**A:**  Before that, they started allowing people to come for pigrimages to the (monastery's) temples.   

**Q:**  When did they start this?   

**A:**  It was about a year after the 11th Party Congress was held. After the 1978 meeting in Beijing, people started going for pilgrimages, but there was no <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> (prayer assembly of monks) allowed. We could also wear some monk's robes. No one was saying anything if we wore the lower garment or shamthab [Tib. ཤམ་ཐབས] and a garment on it. They also didn't say that it is okay to wear monk's robes. On the 27th of the 5th lunar month in 1981 they held a big meeting and they announced the 12 points <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 中央] 1. The Central Committee of the CCP. 2. The Central Government of China. 3. Sometimes it also conveys &quot;China.&quot;">zhongyang</span> (Central Committee) document which said, "from today onwards, you are allowed to hold tsog in the monastery and do religious activities, and in the future we will admit additional monks. And the old monks who had scattered in the countrysides can return. So you have to get prepared well for this. So on the 28th and 29th, we built the stoves back in shape and tried to have tea on the 30th. But we couldn't get the stoves to burn because it was too wet. So they said, "we wont be able to hold the tsog, but we will hold the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་སློང] A monk who has taken the full set of vows.">gelong</span>'s confessional assembly, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གསོ་སྦྱོང] The confessional assembly of gelong monks that usually met once a month on the 15th of the lunar month.">sojong</span> [Tib. གསོ་སྦྱོང], on the 15th of the 5th lunar month. Then on the 4th of 6 lunar month commemorating the Buddha's first teaching of the Four Noble Truths [Tib. ཏྲུག་པ་ཚེས་བཞི] we had our first tsog prayer assembly. On this day the the Democratic Management Committee offered us a tea and made the tsog offering and gave each monk one tshog. But we had no butter lamp cups, leave alone silver butter lamp cups, we didn't even have a brass butter lamp cups because the individuals were not allowed to keep butter lamp cups and the copper and brass butter lamp cups that belonged to the commons were bought by the Chinese when they bought the gold and silver. They paid a litle more for the copper and the brass didn't cost much. So we used the reddish porcelain cups which we usually use for eating and drinking chang. We stuck a piece of bag (barley balls) in the bottom of the cup and stuck the cotton wick in it and offered the butter lamps. In 1981, there were no new monks. In 1982, some new monks came, maybe 15-20 new monks came. In 1983, my <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་ཕྲུག] 1. Student. 2. Disciple. 3. Commonly the name for monks living with a gegen or teacher. These are more like wards than real disciples.">gidru</span> (disciple/young monk dependent) came and more joined in that year. At that time, the organization of the eating commune was ended and and all the cooking utensils were given to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> and the monks were told to work in such and such khamtsen.   

