# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0005.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 14 October 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tashi Sonam was a Drepung monk from Gomang College. This interview includes a discussion of the relationship between the khekhyag gegen (legal teacher) and monks and how Tashi Sonam supported himself during this time, including details of subsistence issues such as the acquisition of firewood, food, and meat. There are also details on the dobdo (punk monks) who came from long distances and the differences in income between the Amdo and Khamba monks. There is also discussion of the competition when the monks rush to serve thukpa (porridge) in the prayer assembly hall. There are also precise details reegarding the serving of food and tea at specific ceremonies within the monastery, and finally, there is a discussion of a fight in the dukhang (prayer assembly hall).   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0005_02/M_0005_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  They have set up a school and they would teach some hand writing.   

**Q:**  When you first became a monk, what did your gegen do for you since he didn't give food and you didn't live with him? Was he just namely a gegen?   

**A:**  He was my guarantor gegen, khekhyag [Tib. ཁས་འཁྱག] gegen which was the main gegen. If the monks did bad things in the monastery, the tratsang would call his khekhyag gegen and say, "Your gidru is doing these bad things. When you became the khekhyag gegen, you and your gidru have put your seals" When they settle the matter, the gegen would be fined though they wouldn't beat him with switches and imprison him.   

**Q:**  How would you do if you need a pechai gegen? Would the khekhyag gegen help you?   

**A:**  We have to look for our own pechai gegen carefully. The pechai gegen should be an older monk who is good in pecha and new monks were not allowed to be the pechai gegen. But when a tragyün first comes, his livelihood would be hard and doesn't know anyone, so for 1 or 2 years he wouldn't start studying pecha. After 2 years you become familiar to the area and have friends and if there were some asking him "aren't you going to study pecha? If you say yes, they would look for a pechai gegen. At this time, there were many pechai gegen. There were great geshe still alive who can teach you düdra, Namdren [Tib. རྣམ་འདྲེན], dzö [Tib. མཛོད], uma [Tib. དབུ་མ] etc. You would find a appropiate pechai gegen according to your standard and if you say "I would like to study pecha with you", he would say okay. Then you start studying pecha and also work for your livelihood. For a few years the tragyün would not study pecha since they only have few monks they know in the monastery and in the society. After that, when they become familiar to the place, they take off a day and go to work for the day. Sometimes, the bigger shagtsang would hire you for carrying something into Lhasa for them, or bring something back from Lhasa for them. They wouldn't pay any special wages, but they would give you a lot of food. If you do that well then they would call you for other jobs. So in this way you can study and work for three years and then because of the blessing from the pecha you would get engrossed and have a real interest in pecha and you would become more enthusiastic. And would continually study pecha and you would be okay. But if you compare the monks who study pecha and the ones who don't study pecha, the pechawa have more difficulty because they don't go anywhere except going to the tsog and chöra [Tib. ཆོས་ར]. These pechawa would not go for harvesting, tönyog [Tib. སྟོན་གཡོག], construction and delivering messages etc.   

**Q:**  At this time, were you in your shag alone?   

**A:**  When I first became the monk for about 4 years I lived alone. Then my younger brother from the same parents came from Kham and we lived together.   

**Q:**  Did your brother come from Kham as a tragyün?   

**A:**  Yes. Later, he worked as a half servant and half member of the household, ngomayog [Tib. ངོ་མ་གཡོག] in a kudrak household. They paid him food and a little bit wages and some clothes and he would bring me the wages. In the beginning, when I became a monk, for about 7 years, I didn't know many people and I had to go to work on contructions and doing other hard works like harvesting. If I did some light works, I didn't get much income during this period. Then I knew some people in the monastery and in Lhasa and started going to perform rituals and to read scriptures [Tib. ཆོས་ཀློག]. Then my income became okay [Tib. འགྲིགས་ཙམ]. First, I came by carrying a backpack and I didn't expect to get a lot of things from the monastery, but by the grace of the Three Jewels [Tib. མཆོག་གསུམ] and the monastery I became okay though most of the monks didn't have a fixed income on which they could depend on for certain months. About the half of the monks who came from near by were okay on their livelihood because their family and relatives were near by, but one third of the böba who didn't get such help were even poorer than the monks coming from the long distance and they were called böba khampa.   

**Q:**  Why were they so poor?   

**A:**  Who knows! Maybe because of their karmic result, their households were poor and they weren't capable themselves, so they had to live poor in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did your household help you?   

**A:**  No. My household got heavily in debt after I went to Drepung and it was kind of dispersed .I held no hatred [Tib. ཁོན་སེམས] and I also didn't have any attachments towards my homeland and I didn't think about what is going on in my homeland. As far as I am concerned, my homeland is here and my relative is also here. It is like the saying "wherever it is happy, that is my homeland, whoever is kind to me, they are my parents" [Tib.གང་སྐྱིད་ཕ་ཡུལ། སུ་བྱམས་ཕ་མ]. So I thought that this is right and I was attached to this place. After 1959 revolt, at the end of the Culture Revolution, the monastery made announcement of the policy that the trerim are not allowed to go to the city to live but they could return to the countrysides. But I had no thought of going back home. I thought whatever happens, the monastery would be better for me. Now things are bad, but later it will improve because regardless of the religion and the politics, everything will change. In 1961-62, we had some hardship when we got 19 gyama tsampa for a month and had to share a pack of matches with another monk. So we sold the things in our shag with low price for tsamba. [not in the tape] Trindorla remembers standing in line for long time when the tsampa grinders announced they were selling tsampa tomorrow]   

**Q:**  Did you ever go back to your homeland?   

**Q:**  I never went back to Kham and I was always staying in Drepung Monastery and I was also not capable of doing religious practice. I also didn't serve on politics for the monastery. And after they fired cannons, it was over.   

**Q:**  You said there might be 400-500 monks going for tönyog, is this the figure just in Phembo?   

**A:**  No, it was the figure for all over like Phembo, Drigung [Tib. འབྲི་གུང] Metro [Tib. མལ་གྲོ] Chushü [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང] Lhoka, the areas around the airport. Some people we know would tell us go to those place for the tönyog.   

**Q:**  After you came to Drepung, in those first few years, how much tsampa, tea and those stuffs do you need to consume in a month?   

**A:**  Sometimes, if I work as a servant, I get food to be full and I get food to be full and also get wages if I work on constructions when they build new houses for the monastery, I could save some tsamba from the monthly tsampa salary. When I couldn't get a job, I wouldn't think of having butter tea, but I couldn't survive without tsampa. Usually I eat bag and drink black tea. Actually, I eat about 1 khe and half of tsampa in a month if it was available. If not I would have to manage with 1 khe of tsampa or even less than 1 khe.   

**Q:**  Do you eat one and half khe when you were working?   

**A:**  If you have something to eat, it doesn't make much difference between working or not working.   

**Q:**  Trindor: If you eat one and half khe, it is equal to 42 gyama, right?   

**A:**  Yes. If our tsamba ran out and we have some money, we would buy some bread [Tib. bag lep]. [probably 2 bread weigh 1 gyama].   

**Q:**  What kind of tea do you buy? Do you buy tea bricks?   

**A:**  We buy loose tea either in the monastery or from Lhasa. The tea seller would smash the brick tea and pile it on some kind of sheets and I would buy tea measuring in bowls. There were two size of bowls. At that time, the bigger one was 1 tranka and later it was 3 sho. Just before the revolt, it might be about 5 sho. If you buy tea in Lhasa it was little cheaper. In the monastery there was only one size bowl which cost 1 sho. We buy butter cut in slices. There was also radish and vegetable in the morning market at the monastery everyday. We also could buy boiled hoof of yak [Tib. སུག་མཐིལ] for 1 fen or half fen. We didn't cook meals in our shag. We also by boiled coagulated blood [Tib. ཁྲག་ཤ] which is a real poor person's food. [In the old society, the butchers feed dogs with this].   

**Q:**  In a month, how many times did you eat meat?   

**A:**  Not at all when we just arrived. If there is a particularly good gye/phog I might buy a tranka worth of meat and some radish and cook these together, but this was very seldom. Usually, I had to save money to buy tsamba and clothes.   

**Q:**  Where did your firewood come from?   

**A:**  I had to buy it.   

**Q:**  Was it cow dung or sheep droppings?   

**A:**  We use cow dung in the stove and use sheep droppings in the clay fire pot [Tib. མེ་ཁོག] to keep the tea warm. For about 1-2 years we wouldn't buy cow dungs. Mostly I go to the mountain to collect cow dung and cut a kind of grass called khenpa [Tib. འཁན་པ] then we dry them in winter and use it as fuel. At that time, there was thurmos in Lhasa, but we couldn't afford to buy it.   

**Q:**  When you were first in monastery, after you got up, did you have to make fire?   

**A:**  Yes. Usually I sleep for awhile and don't go to mangja, so when I get up I make some tea and eat some bag. Then I would read the Gomang's prayer called chöjö [Tib. ཆོས་སྤྱོད] which had over 100 pages. Sometimes when I didn't want to read, I just stayed idle and no one was pushing me and I myself was not kind of diligent in my study.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the morning dharma session shogchö, [Tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས]?   

**A:**  No. But sometimes I went to the afternoon dharma session, gungtsig [Tib. དགུང་ཚིགས] and sometimes I also for the ritual session, gurim [Tib. སྐུ་རིམ] and sometimes not.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the big shagtsang and labrang asking for work?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have to do this. They would come to ask you to work or take a messages etc. If you were sent to Lhasa to take something you get food before you left and after you arrived in Lhasa. There was no wages. So as I got to know more people, even though I had nothing or little in my shag, because I got sent on a lot of work, I still had food to eat.   

**Q:**  Please tell us about the dobdo from the long distance? What was the difference between the böba dobdo and the dobdo from the long distance? Did you have a kind of kyidu?   

**A:**  No. We didn't have the eatig commune, tobtsang [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང] although we were dressed like dobdo. I was a dobdo with not good clothes but not ragged clothes. I was mentally happy and also didn't fight and haven't killed anyone. But others would fight and kill each other by stabbing and hit the sword on their heads.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Amdo and the böba would fight when they serve thukpa.   

**A:**  Yes. they do.   

**Q:**  Were you with the böba or with Amdo ?   

**A:**  There was a very bad fight soon after I joined the monastery and in general when they pass by the road a fight erupted without much reason and mostly just pushing when they meet on the way. Mostly the dobdo fighting was over small things such as saying "why are you looking at me in an angry manner? [Tib. མིག་ལོག་ལྟ] Why did you push me? It was because the political stucture was not widely announced in the society. In general, in Kham area, there were many killings over things like the ownership of shiga, regarding the loans and spouse fights and in Lhasa there were less, but there were event where even monks, lamas, traders and kudrak were killed. Also sometimes there were fights in market. One monk would be asking how much something is and the dobdo standing by would say, "That's mine I have bought it." And the 1st would say, "If you have bought it give the money now." The Amdo dobdo would wear good clothes. During summer, the Amdo and the Khampa would go to trade though it was not a big trade and come back in winter.   

**Q:**  In general, were the Amdo richer than the Khambas or were they same?   

**A:**  Amdo were slightly richer. The reason for this is that the Amdo keep good relations with their homeland. And their families send them a lot of help. And they do trading in summer. But as for the Khamba, although there are many traders in the town and some families send some help, but they send less than the Amdo. The monks from the long distance do more trade and are more capable in trade, although it is nothing if you compare with the trade in present time. For example, we sold incense, adhesive tape used on face, matches, tobacco, snuff, soap, cotton tassels used on the hair braid in the countryside. In Lhasa, the kudrak and the rich people were using the silk tassels. In return, the monks take money, tsamba and flour.   

**Q:**  Did you go to rush and the compete in serving thukpa, thugyag [Tib. ཐུག་རྒྱག྄] where the Khampa and the Amdo fight?   

**A:**  Yes, I did it for 9 years.   

**Q:**  In the thugyag, you get the places like first and second and Gomang had a special way of doing this right?   

**A:**  Yes. In traja there were usually 4 teas, but if there is a thukpa, then there are only 3 teas and 1 thukba. If the thukpa servers are rich, they change their clothes when they serve. They leave their good clothes in the shag and wear medium clothes. The reason for this is that the melted butter drips all over when you serve. We also change our vest, töngag [Tib. སྟོད་འགག] and wear a thin long shawl. After the first tea in the traja, the sponsor would walk around the tshog carrying incense stick) [Tib.སྤོས་སྐོར] and the gegö reads the prayer requesting list, kyabtho [Tib. སྐྱབས་ཐོ]. Then after a short time, the second tea is served. Then the chabril, nangma, chabyog, jama, jayog, [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] and gegö stand by the door opposite of the rungkgang from where the tea and thukpa is served, jago [Tib. ཇ་སྒོ] stopping dobdo from rushing out. There is a gong near the door from where the tea and thukpa is served.   

**Q:**  Who would beat the gong?   

**A:**  The jayog would beat the gong. Only Gomang has the gong beating custom for telling the chagde to get up to serve. When the gong is beaten, the above mentioned six monastic officials move aside and the thugyag monks would run out. When the 2nd tea is almost being served, and the tea servers, chagde [Tib. ཕྱག་བདེ] go back and the thukpa servers get up and start rushing. At this time, the gegö would stand there holding a big stick and the chabril carries a pencase, nyugtro [Tib. སྙུགས་སྒྲོག] made from iron with bas-relief style of gold work [Tib. གསེར་ཚགས] which was like a thick stick little over a foot or maybe 2 feet long. If the dobdo start to move before the gong was beaten, then they would be beaten a lot to stop them and they beat on their head or eyes.   

**Q:**  You were belonged to Amdo group, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Serving thukpa to try for the first serving [Tib. ཐུག་རྒྱག་དང་པོ] is dangerous, as others would try to push you and some malicious ones would even hit on your head and eyes where you get wounded and there would be controversy after the tsog. So I didn't rush much to get the first place. If you get first in serving thukpa people would talk about you, but there is no other profit except reputation.   

**Q:**  There is no reward, right?   

**A:**  Yes, nothing. The thousands of monks would be sitting there saying "who is the first, who is the first?" and they would look very carefully. Then when the gegö says beat the gong, if the chabril and jama and others don't get out of their way at once, there is a danger they would be knocked over in the rush. If the gegö and those people were knocked over, the gegö would punish the monks by making them do works, e.g., to carry about 20 sacks of sand to the chöra. In Gomang we don't fine in money and they would not beat with switches and they scold them and beat them a little bit saying "who did you mistake me for?" [Tib. ང་སུ་དང་ནོར་སོང]. The thukpa servers would hit the pillars with their ladles as they run in. The reason for doing this is to stop the other ones following him to go ahead through the rows. If today, the Amdo and Khampa won the 1st place, the böba would be encouraged and would say we must in anycase win the next time. The böba were very tough [Tib. ངན་པ] at this time. Among the böba, there was one nicknamed "yak calf" Yagtrug [Tib. གཡག་ཕྲུག] who was more brave and stronger than the Amdo and he got the first place many times from among 10-20 Amdo trying to block him to get the first. If he gets into a fight he is tough -he wears a knife and a fighting key. He was tougher than the Amdo. Usually, the Amdo gets the first place.   

**Q:**  Did they grab the thukpa in the rungkhang? Where do they keep the thukpa containers, sola [Tib. ཟོ་ལག]?   

**A:**  The sola were kept at one side of the rungkhang and the tea container, chabtra [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ] were kept on the other side of the rungkhang and ladle would be given after they got the thukpa. First they would grab over getting the sola and put the sola near the cauldren. Once before the thabyog put the thukpa in the sola, the dobdo climbed up on the stove and the put the first scoop of thukpa into his sola with his hands.   

**Q:**  Didn't his hands get burnt?   

**A:**  Since there is a lot of butter fat on the top, it doesn't burn hands. The stove is high and you have to climb up to it to get thukpa. Yagtrug was able to jump from the stove over the monks waiting to get thukpa and land on the threshold of the rungkhang ready to run out.   

**A:**  In the runkhang, there are the thabyog and 2 monks over seeing the thukpa called thukpa jigyap [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] who had some title in the tratsang and they would hold sticks. If they go to scoop out the thukpa with their sola, they would beat the thukpa servers with the stick. But some tricky [Tib. མགོ་བདེ་པོ] ones only scoop up one or two handful into their sola and then leave and the jigyab would not get the time to beat him. For the first and second place they would only put thukpa enough for 1-2 monks. There was an instance when Yagtrug grabbed a handful of thukpa and simply smeared it on the top edge so that it looked like full but the sola was really empty. They only let 4-5 go into the front row. The 2nd and 3rd don't matter so much, it's the first that people talk about and that builds a reputation. So later, the gegö has to run over to the front row when the gong has been beaten so as to reach there before the dobdo and he stays facing the monks to check if they actually have any thukpa inside their sola and when he found the sola is empty, he beat them very severely.   

**Q:**  Where would the first and the second place serve the thukpa?   

**A:**  In the front row, they would send only 5-6 thukpa servers.   

**Q:**  Where would they send the other thukpa servers?   

**A:**  Then 2 monks are sent into each row. These two are called the [Tib.གྲལ་ཐུག] The rest are held up in two rows (by the wall). Then someone would check if there are any empty sola left and if there are then the gegö and chabril would tell some dobdo who were usually show offish to get up and tell the younger ones like 16-17 years of age to leave the sola and go to the tsog. And they would let them serve the thukpa to the end of the rows Then the chabril would give a speech in the tsog which is called tsogtam [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ] very loudly saying, "the rich sponsor is making this offering with great pleasure, respect and faith like using the wealth from the storage of Namse, the Deity of Wealth. If some evil persons waste and spoil this offering, I will not let him get through easily. So you should serve it with respect and faith and in a happy manner" [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག་འབྱོར་པ་ཅན་གྱིས་ལག་མ་ཐོགས་པར། དད་གུས་སྤྲོ་གསུམ་གྱི་ངང་ནས། ལྷ་རྣམ་སྲས་ཀྱི་བང་མཛོད་ལ་ལོངས་སུ་སྤྱོད་པ་ལྟར་གྱི་མཆོད་འབུལ་ཞུས་ཡོད་པ། མི་ངན་འགའ་ཤས་ཀྱིས་འཕྲོ་བརླག་ཆུད་ཟོས་བཏང་ན། ལས་སླ་པོར་བཞག་གི་མིན། ཁྱོད་ཚོས་དད་ཅིང་སྤྲོ་བའི་ངང་ནས་ཡག་པོ་ཞུ་དགོས] He would say it so loudly that he gets choacked like he is almost going to die. [laughter] Usually, they start serving from the west. The chabri would lead them to the western-most or eastern-most row. It was said [the sidhi called] Drugpa Künleg [Tib. འབྲུག་པ་ཀུན་ལེགས] served from the west and he said that the cauldron is not yet full. The dobdo don't push much in the dark areas at the end of the hall, but do push tremendously in the middle section where some light comes through. The böba monks who have done this for many years could hold the sola so firm that even when they were pushed hard and they do not let the thukpa fall even the thukpa become protuded on the sola and some melted butter would splash out. The dobdo while waiting for the order to serve, when they were told to raise your hands up, they would hold their ladle straight up in the air and serve the thukpa when they were told "serve the thukpa" [Tib. ཞུས་བཞེས་ཐུག] and then they would be told to "turn east" [Tib. ཁ་ཤར་ལ་སློག] and serve the thukpa. There was a saying that If you don't serve quickly, there would be shortage of thukpa. So they serve the thukpa very quickly and they would tell them to get out. If when you are running back and forth you slow down a little the chabril and jama would hit you with stick on the head. At the areas around the long pillars where there is more light they rush and push a lot and not much pushing in the dark area in the east and the west. And when you are going out, you have to wave the ladles many times, otherwise the guy behind you would grab you and throw you against the wall or to the floor. If you get thrown down, everyone would step on you. There is no risk to your life if you fall but it is humiliating. Gomang is special and different from other tratsang, you are not allowed to add water when there is shortage of thukapa. If it runs out, the sponsor would pay the money called thugdö [Tib. ཐུག་དོད] to the monks who didn't get the thukpa. Other tratsang would add water to avoid running out. I only remember them running out once when I was a new monk. At that time, the sponsor gave 5 sang to each monk which was a lot, so I was thinking I wish I could have sat where the thukpa ran out because we could buy a lot of things with 5 sang. [laughter].   

**Q:**  How much tsampa could you get for 5 sang?   

**A:**  At this time, one middle size load of tsamba cost 7 sang, so we could get a load of tsampa by adding 2 sang on it. The sponsor gave more than the value of the thukpa thinking the monks who didn't get the thukpa would feel sad.   

**Q:**  I heard in the dark corners, some dobdo when they serve tukpa, they would pour a sola full of thukpa into their bowl which is kept in one's cloak and they would dry the thukpa to be used in spring.   

**A:**  No. I don't think people really went this far. But the ladle is very large that your bowl couldn't hold it. When they serve, they hold it at the end of the ladle, so their thumb would touch the thukpa. Sometimes without realizing your skin burned from thukpa and the skin later peels off when there is not much melted butter. When there is lot of melted butter, it won't burn your skin. The lamas and kudrak sitting at the head of the row would only take one full ladle. They would cover their bowl with their cloak. The regular monks lay down a napkin under their bowl and when they get the two ladles, some falls off onto the napkin. They would eat some thukpa and then tie the bowl with the napkin and take this back to their shag. I have seen in ones own row where some thukpa servers serve the amount of two bowls for their friends and they have to do this secretly. But I haven't seen anybody pouring the full sola over in the cloak. There was some unclear talk about this, maybe one person have done that in the past, but I didn't see anybody doing this in my time.   

**Q:**  I heard that some thukpa servers would throw pieces of meat to the young monks who lent them their shawl and they also put balls of thukpa into ones mouth?   

**A:**  Oh. I haven't seen throwing like that or making thukpa into balls and eating while they were standing in line. I don't think that is true. But I have seen that if there is some meat piece left at the bottom of sola when you run back into the runkhang to get more thukpa, the thukpa servers would eat some.   

**Q:**  I heard that there was such rushing and pushing when serving thukpa in the tsogchen?   

**A:**  Actually there is very little serving of thukpa in the thsogchen. During all my time in monastery, the only real rice gruel thukpa I have seen was at the time of the Dalai lama's geshe examination. The rest are loose porrige as thick like yocurd. The recarnation of the regents, gyetrü [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྤྲུལ] like Kündeling, [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Tsomönling, [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] Reting and Taktra have to serve a thukpa in the tsogchen which is their obligation and they have to give tshogchen tea and thukpa and alms. Then give gye to the 4 tratsang. Then give tea and gye in Sera's 3 tratsang and the same in Ganden's 2 tratsang. But they don't give the same amount of gye to all. But in my time Kündeling only gave a loose thukpa as did Detru [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག].   

**Q:**  Did you push and rush etc?   

**A:**  No. The thukpa is too loose for this. The tsogchen has no sola of its own and ladle for the thukpa. So we use the tea container chabtra of the tratsang for the thukpa also. First these are used for tea then we pour the thukpa in them and serve. We serve them from the spout, we don't need ladle. On the Dalai Lama's geshe exam, it was a real rice gruel thukpa. From the two bigger tratsang, they sent about 100 chagde each. They also gave them each a sola. The tratsang's chagde met and they told them "if there is any controversy, [Tib. ལབ་རྒྱུ་གླེང་རྒྱུ], like rushing and pushing you would be expelled from the monastery at once. The government told us about this and monastery also have decided to do this. So rushing and pushing is not allowed. Gomang is considered as the elder tratsang and Loseling the younger. So we would send the servers of thukpa by tratsang seniority, first the senior tratsang (gomang). The thukpa was a great one. The rice for Drepung was supplied by one sponsor who was called Yeshe Gyentsen [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་རྒྱལ་མཚན] from Tö [Tib. སྟོད] a big business man. I heard that were 4 sponsors for the rice and they compared the quality of the rice and Yeshe Gyentsen supplied for Drepung. The government had rice but they could not stop the sponsors because the government could use the rice wherever they want. The thukpa was great and there were too many dry fruites that the dry fruits splattered when serving. When they served the thukpa, the tsidrung came into the rows and told the servers to serve the thukpa well. The excess thukpa was all given to beggars and the people coming for the pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  When was the geshe exam?   

**A:**  In 1958, on the 1st of the 8th lunar month, the Dalai Lama came to Drepung and stayed till about 24th and he also went to the top of the mountain [Tib. དབུ་རྩེ] behind Drepung and burnt incense and khata and he then he went to the mountain top Genphel Uste [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ་དབུ་རྩེ] and stayed over night in the hermitage. One day, he also went for the circumambulation around Drepung. He made the offerings to the 4 tratsang and went for the pilgrimage also and the tsogchen and then went to Sera. Normally the young monks in each courtyard would practice reciting their memorized texts for 2 hrs, but when the Dalai Lama came they divided up the boys in the grades below uma into two shifts and had them reciting for one shift till midnight and after midnight another shift who continued until dawn.   

**Q:**  Where would they recite the prayers?   

**A:**  They recite in the courtyard. There were two inspectors checking on this making the rounds-one was shengo and one was tratsang gegö. The entire monastery was like that. And during the Dalai Lama stay, everyone had to go to tsog and chöra and the gegö would pattrol. They couldn't stay in the shag unless they were in retreat or sick. If some one stayed in the shag recklessly, they would get scolded. And those under the uma grade could not go for the circumambulation around Drepung during Dalai Lama's stay. And if those above the uma grade go for the circumambulation, they have to go back to shag right away and were not allowed to sit on the rocks and talk. And in courtyard, had to go right into the shag and not allowed to sit on the benches in the courtyard and talk.   

**Q:**  When can you keep gidru in Gomang and Gungru? Was there any rule for that?   

**A:**  Yes, there was. From the grade khatog garmar till döndönjö [Tib. འདོན་འདོན་ཆོག] there were 6 grades. After that, Shungwog [Tib. གཞུང་འོག], Shungong [Tib. གཞུང་གོང], Kabdangpo [Tib. སྐབས་དང་པོ] and then Pharchin [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན] and then uma. Altogether 5 years. After 11 years you reach the uma grade. At this time, this grade by itself would have 2 monks over seeing the reciting, gyorpön as the leader. The khamtsen lend a house and pots etc. for this in turns [each having this job 1 year]. There was a ritual called düsang [Tib. དུས་བཟང] called uma semkyepa. [Tib. བདུ་མ་སེམས་སྐྱེད་པ]. The 2 gyorpön would take a khata at this time to the Gomang abbot and would say, "the reciting of our grade has finished, so please give us the permission to keep one gidru and give us the permission to keep a churn and the permission to open one side of the curtain".   

**Q:**  Usually, you are not allowed to keep the churn, right>   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How could you make butter tea without the churn?   

**A:**  Who know's! This was a custom from the early times. After asking these pemissions we don't have to go to recite the texts for two hours.   

**Q:**  If you don't study pecha how could you reach uma grade?   

**A:**  Whether you are a pechawa or not a pechawa, you move up with your grade year by year and you have to attend the same grade. When we reach düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ] or dzö [Tib. མཛོད] then they would hold a düsang and then the pechawa would be merged to karam [Tib. བཀའ་རམས] like karam sarma [Tib. བཀའ་རམས་གསར་མ] but we, the non pechawa are then simply called lagyüba and in the chöra we all sit together, but there is no grade for us. When you reach dzö grade, they hold the düsang before we end it and they do the counting and say that our grade has this amount of money. We use this commune money for performing rituals when the pechawa go into karam and we stay as lagyüba. And in the chöra when two karampa starts tsenyi debate with the higher grades, then the gegö says you older monks [Tib. བླ་རྒན] can leave together. The other grades aren't permitted to leave immediately although there were monks who don't study pecha among them.   

**Q:**  At one time, there was a big fight between the Amdo and the böba in Gomang when they were serving thukpa. Böba were saying that when Geyog Chungdag [Tib. ཆུང་དག] went to get the first place, an Amdo stabbed a böba and took his sola and went to get the first place. The Amdo were saying that Jayog Wöser Künga [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཀུན་དགའ] put the thukpa in the sola and gave it to Thusö [Tib. ཐུབ་བཟོད] and he kept the thukpa in his cloak and when Thusö stood up, the Amdo grabbed the thukpa and then they got into fight. Which one is true? Later, they got beaten with switches, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the reason for getting beaten with switches was because after the thukpa was served, there was very bad fighting outside as well. Altogether, the shengo seized about more than 16-17 monks and beat them a lot with switches. Some were expelled from the monastery. A few of other Amdo who were wealthy were able to flee to India and they didn't come back. They fled because they thought if they stayed, they would be beaten with switches and get expelled from the monastery and this would all be humiliating, so instead they fled. There weren't many khamba, mostly Amdo and böpa. I remember among the böpa, there was dobdo Thusö, Geyog Mama [Tib. མ་མ] and Chungdag and there were many others. I don't remember the names. The fight started when a jayog [Wöser Künga] poured some thukpa in a sola before the time and secretly kept it and gave it to him and then he rushed to get the first place. The Amdo and the Khampa said this is not okay. There is no such custom. If we leave this as it is, then later the custom would become established and there would be lot of controversy and there would be unrest [Tib. མི་བདེ་བ] for many people and they said that they are going to beat each other. That's how the fight erupted though the fight was not that severe because the Amdo were strong. The fight started in the rows inside the tsog and all the monks got up.   

**Q:**  Were you there at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there. And the monastic officials said, "sit down in the rows " and finally got everyone to sit down. The fighting continued in the tsog for a long time because the monks became kind of bias or prejudice [Tib. ཕྱོགས་ཞེན] and the monks said that this is not good and the tsog ended. The kudrak belonged to Gomang like Kündeling discussed about this. The Gomang abbot was a Hor called Temba Chödrak [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ཆོས་གྲགས]. He said now we have to eliminate the rushing and pushing, thugyag. If we allow this to continue there would be a terrible trouble in future which would hurt the tratsang. So they eliminated the thugyag. The Amdo dobdo got beaten with switches terribly. At that time, there was a late monk called Demjog [Tib. བདེ་མཆོག] who was holding a penknife and there was a Amdo trying to get the second place thugyag and the Amdo tried to rob his sola and got hurt with the penknife. Demjo thought that he would drop the pot and the Amdo would pick it up and go to get the first place. Then Thusö already went ahead and got the first place and there was some disturbance but the tsog could continue and then the sponsors came down from the roof top.   

**Q:**  After the tsog, the Amdo held a kind of meeting and then they fought with the böba, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Amdo said this is not fair to keep the thukpa and then hand it to another person. There is no such a custom.   

