# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0005.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 13 October 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tashi Sonam [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བསོད་ནམས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tashi Sonam was a Drepung monk from Gomang College. In this interview he discusses his work in the monastery and the salary he obtained from doing the Büdü [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] work. He also gives a detailed description of the events of 1959, including the arrival of the Chinese, details of the struggle sessions that were held. [Note: in this interview there is a long comment by Goldstein's research assistant Trindor that was added during the initial translation]   

---  
### Tape   

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0005_06/M_0005_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How much income did you get when you worked as büdü [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད] for the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> for 4 years [büdü was a task where monks were sent to various remote places by their monastery, college or residence unit to preach and conduct rites so that they can collect gifts and offerings for the monastery]? Did the khamtsen get both sheep and goats (as offerings)?   

**A:**  We only kept sheep; there weren't many goats.   

**Q:**  Were there goats in that area?   

**A:**  There were a few goats.   

**Q:**  How many yaks and sheep did you get during the 4 years?   

**A:**  In terms of animals, I think we got 18 milch female yaks and their calves during our term of office. There were also some (male) yaks, about 7-8 yaks. The nomads mostly would offer sheep, but since there was nobody to keep them, we converted the sheep into yaks or money. We left these animals on lease with a household. We made a list of each animal, its age, color and teeth, etc. We told the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> that there are these animals there now, but we didn't convert them into money. We sold all the other things if we could convert them into money. All of these things we left as milch animals on lease and some old yaks we got would be written in the prayer requesting list (kyabtho [Tib. སྐྱབས་ཐོ]) saying that these were offered to the khamtsen and also those things such as skins, tanned leathers, etc. were also written in the kyabtho. Our plan was to serve a tea to the khamtsen, a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོམས་ཇ] A prayer assembly meeting of a Khamtsen at which tea is served to the participating monks.">tshomja</span> [Tib. ཚོམས་ཇ], and give alms to the monks as well as a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</span> (soup). But the khamtsen said, "if you spend all the money at once, it would be a kind of loss for the khamtsen. So why don't you just give quite a good amount of alms and a tshomja (tea). As for the money you would have had to spend for the thukpa, why don't you leave this as an endowment for the khamtsen's regular rites/rituals (<span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</span> [Tib. གཏོང་སྒོ]). We said "we agree, since it will benefit the khamtsen and won't go at all for private gain. It will be spend for the donggo done on the holy days every month." So we gave 1 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</span> per monk as the alms and did a tshomja tea at the prayer assembly. We got the dayan coins from the cost of the wool. We also offered the skins and some used skin <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</span> robes which were bought by the monks to make bedding. The accounting was done with the khamtsen along with the inn keeper or Garyog. We also gave the khamtsen back the bagtsa (skin chupa with the fleece on inside [Tib. པགས་ཚག]) that I had been wearing for 4 years. The skin chupa was now old, but not in tatters, and the khamtsen told me to buy it to be used for covering my knees and they will sell it cheaply, but I didn't buy it. I thought if I spend all of my money, I wouldn't be able to make a living. While the monks were holding the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> prayer assembly, we would also have to offer a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</span> scarf and a butter lamp and do three prostrations to the protector deity Tenma [Tib. བསྟན་མ] who had sent us to Sangshung and who was the one to whom the khamtsen trusted and ask for advice. This was done as the symbol that we have done our job reasonably and honestly. We didn't have to say anything likr we did the job honestly for 4 years.   

**Q:**  What did you leave with the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span>?   

**A:**  In cash, a little over 100 dotse.   

**Q:**  What was the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</span> rate at this time?   

**A:**  At this time [1958] 1 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</span> was = 15 sang. Now it was 50 sang. Trindor: It was 20 sang.   

**Q:**  Why didn't the yak dung burn during the avalanche? Was it because it became wet when there was snowfall outside?   

**A:**  One year when I was there, it snowed for 27 days and nights. I was living in a small house the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> had built which had 2 pillars: 1 pillar in the living room and 1 in the storeroom. The lodging inn keeper was living in a yak hair tent. And there was a kind of thing like an ice or snowfall inside the house on the loads of grain, etc. At that time, they were saying that in the Fire Hare Year avalanche, even if the dung was dry, it didn't burn, though there was no snow on the dung. I heard that they would pile up the yak dung like a small wall and cover it with clothes and old skin chupa. So I was kind of anxious thinking that if such an avalanche occured, not only the animals, but the humans also can't survive. When I went to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</span> (the northern nomad area), there were people who were 93-94 years old and there were several who were 97 years old and one blind man was 101 years old. There were many blind people. It was said that this was their karmic result because they didn't make the butter clean which was used for butter lamp offerings. So they talk about the Fire Hare Year avalanche and said this present snowfall is not bad. After 27 days and the nights, the sky cleared and the ice or snow in the tent also vanished.   

**Q:**  When you leased out animals and when the nomads couldn't pay the butter lease fee this year and (the butter/money owed) would become like a loan, what method would you employ?   

**A:**  It didn't happen to us because we leased the animals in later times and we had a person staying there. In that area, Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Labrang was the one who had largest number of animals. Most of the animals in that area belonged to the families in Lhasa like Horkhangsar who had leased them. And there were a large number of animals that belonged to the government which was called Karkhang [Tib. དཀར་ཁང] in Nagchu, Bartha [Tib. བར་ཐ] and Sangshung. The government collected the butter and brought them to the three great monastic seats. Every morning, the government had to serve 4 teas for the three great monastic seats [called <span class "tooltip" data-text "[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</span>=[Tib. མང་ཇ]). They used 20 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</span> of butter for each morning's mangja in Drepung. Sera and Ganden must be little less. These nomads couldn't pay large amount of butter for their lease fee. Later, when their animals became exhausted, the owner would take back the few animals that were left and they (the nomads) would go to beg for food and later get settled in places like <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</span>, where they worked and made their living. There were also nomads who had taken the government animals lease for the butter supplied for the butter lamps offered in front of the golden stupa tomb [of the Dalai Lamas], the serdong [Tib. གསེར་སྡོང] so these nomads were also called Serdong. The government leased the animals on kyemey chimey [Tib. སྐྱེ་མེད་འཆི་མེད] where they pay the same amount of lease no matter whether the leased animals increased or decreased. If the animals increased, it is the nomads, but if they die, they have to replace it. The government did this, thinking that if the nomads worked hard, they will get some profit when the animals increase and it will be stable income for the animal owner.   

**Q:**  You leased the animals on kyeyö chiyö [Tib. སྐྱེ་ཡོད་འཆི་ཡོད], right? {This kind of lease required the leasee to pay the lease fee on the number of animals he had.] Did you have a term of years for this?   

**A:**  There was no time term. As long as the nomad paid most of the leases, we would just leave the animals there and we would not change the household.   

**Q:**  Can you describe the 1959 sequence of events. When the revolt took place on this day (say today), did the car come to the monastery on the next day?   

**A:**  Probably, it came on the next day. It was after they took <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> and the Khambas had fled from Norbulinga. After that, they were just fighting in the Lhasa area, but they didn't have any leaders to think about what they should do.   

**Q:**  When the car came, had the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> fled?   

**A:**  Yes. They had fled the morning of the day before. <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> held and surrounded <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> implying that the Dalai Lama is still there. Then they [the Chinese] fired cannons from Trip [Tib. གྲིབ] and Pelding [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡིང] and also from Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག] towards Norbulinga. So Norbulinga was kind of lost and since the Dalai Lama was not there, they [Khambas] crossed the (Kyichu)river riding horses and hundreds of riders were driven away by the river and many of them were killed. Since there were so many, we could see black spots crossing the river holding each other. At around 10 am, Norbulinga was lost. We were watching from the mountain. Two days before, on the 7th or the 8th, Kündeling Dzasa and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</span> Depön Tashi Pera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] went as volunteers to hold the hill called Chakyag Karpo [Tib. བྱ་སྐྱག་དཀར་པོ] which was located on the other side of the river. Although they couldn't hold this hill [for long], they had have it to use the ferry for the Dalai Lama when he left on the 8th.   

**Q:**  Did the car come on the next day?   

**A:**  Yes. <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> was finished before miday; there were monks looking at this through binoculars.   

**Q:**  Who were the ones looking through the binoculars?   

**A:**  Those were the people like the lamas and kudrak. There were many of them in the monastery. They saw through the binoculars and said that there were 6-7 of the biggest cannons and 14 smaller ones that were facing <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span>. There were 9 cannons facing Norbulinga and they were moving slowly towards Norbulinga, but they couldn't see the people going. They fired two shots at Drepung monastery. One landed in the orchard near the circumambulation road outside the monastery in the north. The second one landed even further north than that, but they didn't hit people. However, so many monks fled to the hills that even the hill itself looked like it wass moving. On the next morning, the car came and they told us to surrender. Then the two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span> came carrying a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</span> on their iron staff, the jaggyug [Tib. ལྕགས་རྒྱུག] and there was a new <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</span> manager who was an eloquent one. Altogether there were about 4 of them who were taken down [to meet the Chinese leaders].   

**Q:**  Did they take them to the Chinese Broadcast Office, the Gyangdrag Lekhung [Tib. རྒྱང་དྲག་ལས་ཁུངས] [located below Drepung]?   

**A:**  Probably they were taken to Lhasa to Yuthog [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] House where the Chinese leaders Tan Guansan and Zhang Guohua were living. They were told,"Go back soon and don't let the monks go out (leave). We won't desstroy the monastery." Then they came back.   

**Q:**  Did they come back on that day?   

**A:**  Yes, they came back right away. It took a little more than an hour.   

**Q:**  Did they gather the monks on that day?   

**A:**  Yes. Then some stronger monks were sent to tell the monks who were on the utse, on the top of the mountain above the monastery to return to the monastery to attend the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> meeting. The Chinese were not doing anything.   

**Q:**  Where did they hold the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span>?   

**A:**  Actually, there was no <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> (in the sense of a prayer ceremony).   

**Q:**  I mean when did they hold the kind of meeting?   

**A:**  After the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span> and those people came back, they gathered all the monks and put them in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> assembly halls, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འདུ་ཁང] An assembly hall in a monastery.">dukhang</span> [Tib. འདུ་ཁང].   

**Q:**  Were you in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> Collage at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. First they told us, "come to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> dukhang (college assembly hall), we have a few words to tell you." After all the monks were put in there, we didn't even get a drop of water for the whole day.   

**Q:**  At that time, there were no Chinese, right?   

**A:**  The Chinese officials had come to monastery.   

**Q:**  The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span> had also come back, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Some say that the monks came out to surrender by carrying <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</span> on sticks, was that true?   

**A:**  Yes, that was true. At that time, the Chinese said that the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span> should carry his iron staff/stick and hang a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</span> scarf on it. So the sheyngo took his iron staff in the car and then when he reached where the Chinese officers were, they held the iron stick and said that we are going to surrender. This was taught to them by the interpreter.   

**Q:**  Some say that for 2-3 days after the revolt, nothing happended and there was a 4 days gap after the revolt.   

**A:**  No. How could there be a gap? It was on the next day that we were shut in the hall for the whole day. At that time, the Chinese officers were there, but they didn't talk to us about what desisions they made. Then in the evening, they told us to go home to our <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> (apartments) and told us "you are not allowed to go out from the shag recklessly.   

**Q:**  Who said that?   

**A:**  The leaders [Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད] of the monastery told us what they were told this by the Chinese officers and the Chinese had left. Then the next morning there were Chinese troops surrounding the monastery and this was the morning of the 14th. The Chinese troops came and told us to turn in all our weapons, like guns and the Tibetan matchlock guns, knifes, etc. They wanted everything that could be used to fight and kill people, even knives for hair cutting and cleavers for making food were also taken out. I turned in some knives but kept my cleaver and the knife for hair cutting.   

**Q:**  While you were shut up in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འདུ་ཁང] An assembly hall in a monastery.">dukhang</span> for the whole day, what did they do? Did they search the monk's <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span>?   

**A:**  No, they didn't search the shag. At that time, they searched all the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span>'s boxes and things, not the monk's shag.   

**Q:**  Did they search the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> on the day when they collected the knives?   

**A:**  No, they searched on the day when the monks were shut in. Then in the evening we were let out and they told us, "you are not allowed to go outside, if you go and if you will be killed, we will not take responsibity for this. If you stay in your <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span>, nobody will harm you. So you make fire and boil tea and stay relaxed. From tommorow, if you go to Lhasa, you are not allowed to discuss the monastery's situation. And if Lhasa people come to Drepung, you aren't allowed to tell other people about what the Lhasa people told you."   

**Q:**  What happened after they collected the weapons?   

**A:**  The next day (15th), the higher ranking officials like abbot, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</span>, umdze, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཉེར་ཚང] 1. Storehouse. 2. Steward, person in charge of a storehouse. 3. A monastic official in charge of storerooms.">nyertsang</span>, and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྱི་བསོ] The head managers/stewards of monasteries as a whole, especially the large Gelugpa monasteries like Sera and Drepung.">jiso</span> were called to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span>'s roof. They were told to bring three day's food for education/study session. [Tib. སློབ་གསོ] Then another group of key people including the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span>'s <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</span>, ex-gegö, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> tsondu members, khamtsen gegen, lamas, tratsang's ex-cashier or <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དངུལ་གཉེར] Accountant, bookkeeper, cashier. Someone in charge of cash.">ngünyer</span> [Tib. དངུལ་གཉེར], ex-nyertsang, ex-chabu, etc. were all told to bring food for three days to Drepung Phodrang. There were many <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</span> in the Phodrang. There were probably a little less than 1,000 in Phodrang.   

**Q:**  How many were there in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> (roof)?   

**A:**  I think there were little over 100 or so. These were the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</span> in office at that time.   

**Q:**  Since then, they were all arrested, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were about 200 soldiers on guard outside the Phodrang. At each door, including the back doors, they stationed two soldiers guarding day and night. A regiment of soldiers moved there.   

**Q:**  Were these Chinese or Tibetan troops?   

**A:**  All were Chinese, except for the Tibetan translators who were from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</span> [Tib. གཙང]. Some of them had gone to Chinese <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</span> schools and were half Chinese and half Tibetan [Tib. ko ko g.yak] and like Nepalese. They wore uniforms but weren't real soldiers. The Chinese cadres lived behind the Phodrang. They enlarged the size of the kitchen and also built a kitchen for themselves. They emptied the Phodrang and sent the people somewhere after several months in that year.   

**Q:**  What did you do for the 6 months in Phodrang?   

**A:**  We had study sessions all day long. The main study topic was, "oppose three and exempt two" [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ་གསུམ་དང་ཆག་ཡང་གཉིས].   

**Q:**  They didn't make you work, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They held the study session for all day long. We didn't have to work. We would have been happy to go out and work because we were healthy. Then they held struggle sessions for those who didn't talk. They divided us who were in the Phodrang into about 7 teams. One team was in the office, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</span>, 2 teams were in the Kashar [Tib. ཀ་ཤར], 2 teams were in the Sanga Phodrang [Tib. གསང་སྔགས་ཕོ་བྲང] and 1 team was in the gotrakhang [Tib. མགོ་ཁྲ་ཁང] [this used to be a chapel where many statues of the protective deitys were kept]. There were so many people squeezed in there and since it was summer it was hot inside. The courtyard where they used to perform the operas was also packed. Usually, there was no bed bugs, but there were so many people, there were bed bugs and they bit us.   

**Q:**  Did you have bedding?   

**A:**  We were able to bring our bedding. They made lists of the number of the monks in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> before the revolt and the number of monks who fled abroad and went to other places like villages. This took about 1 month. Similarly, they did detailed investigation on all the government weapons we had been given and of all the private weapons in the khamtsen. How many guns we have handed over and where are the guns that were not handed over. It took more than a month. From Gungru khamtsen's 580 monks before the revolt, 172 had fled abroad. We turned in only 3-4 guns because the other guns were taken by the monks of other khamtsens who didn't have guns. This caused a great deal of trouble for us. On that day they brought the higher officials from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> to the Phodrang and they gathered the monks of the khamtsen and held the discussion on how many monks fled just after the cannons opened fire and just before the revolt. They investigated and asked for any different documents in the khamtsen and asked whether they took the documents abroad or had left them there. They also investigated who had <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</span> coins and how many.   

**Q:**  Some of them were saying that after the revolt there was a big meeting where the ex-abbot Gyepa Jampal Trinley [Tib. རྒྱས་པ་འཇམ་དཔལ་འཕྲིན་ལས] and one called Chö Dorje [Tib. ཆོས་རྡོ་རྗེ] gave a lecture. Do you remember this?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What date was that?   

**A:**  I don't remember the date.   

**Q:**  Was it on the next day after the revolt?   

**Q:**  No. Maybe it was 6-7 days after the revolt. This lecture was given at a big meeting that Tan Guansan, the bald one, was also there and there were high officials came with many soldiers.   

**Q:**  Was this before you people were shut in the Phodrang?   

**A:**  At that time, we were shut in Phodrang. So when they held the meeting, all of us were called including the monks who were outside. And there were several thousands of monks. They didn't call the ones who were shut up in Loseling. There was ex-abbot Gyepa and Chö Dorje who was a Chinese from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</span> [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང].   

**Q:**  <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</span> and Gyelthang [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཐང] are not same, right?   

**A:**  They were kind of the same. <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</span> is under Sichuan Province and located near <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</span> Ngapa [Tib. རྔ་པ]. Gyerong belonged to Loseling. Amdo Ngapa belonged to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> Sungchu [Tib. ཟུངས་ཆུ] Khamtsen. Some of Gyalthang belonged to Pompora [Tib. སྤོམ་པོ་ར] Khamtsen. The Gyerongwa Chö Dorje read a notice which was a document of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</span> and was given to him by the Chinese officials. It said that the Communist Party hasn't come to hurt the monastery. It has come to improve and help the monastery. Leave alone silver and gold, they won't even take one needle and a piece of thread from the monastery. We will add on things and take possession of the things for you and we won't change religion at all. Even if there is only one person, we won't change it. We will give an oath on this." On that day, Tan Guansan, the bald one, came to the meeting. I am not sure whether Zhang Guohua was there or not. They also read other notices. They used loudspeakers and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</span> songs and built a platform and had a table on it. In the morning, they played music, etc. This was in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> gomchor (courtyard of the main Assembly Hall). The monks sat outside on the steps and in the courtyard.   

**Q:**  What about struggle sessions? Did they hold struggle sessions against the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span>?   

**A:**  At that time, they have not specifically categorized the trerim. But before the revolt, they had made lists of people who were bold and tough in the monastery and which <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> they belonged to and in which courtyard they lived and whether he is Hor or Pöba (Central Tibetan) or <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</span> or mongolian and their wealth. So at that time, they didn't need to ask people about this. The first <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</span>s to be held were against the 2 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</span> who were the ones in charge of the jurisdiction. When they held the struggle session, they said, "You two were the power holders in the monastery and this wasn't enough for you and so you came to Lhasa to exercise your power." These were the things to be said on the struggle session.   

**Q:**  This was in 1959 itself?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In these struggle sessions, did they start beating people?   

**A:**  Yes, they started. Then they held the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</span> against the Jiso, Jinpa Trimey [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ་དྲི་མེད] who was nicknamed, "tiger with a torn up mouth" or Takarel [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ]. He was very brave and he understood things well [Tib. མགོ་ཚོད་པོ] and he was also tricky [Tib. གཡོ་ཆེན་པོ] and mean [Tib. ངན་པོ]. He was from Sangshung [Tib. གསང་གཞུང] but his father was from Lithang [Tib. ལི་ཐང]. He belonged to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> Washu [Tib. ཝ་ཞུ] Mitsen. They held a struggle session against him in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span>'s stone floor area. At this time they organized the people in Dambag [Tib. དན་འབག] village and in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</span> [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] to come to hold the struggle session. They [Chinese] told them to prepare 2 men and 2 women and told them that they must go to hold the struggle session. The stone floor couldn't hold all the people and they were made to sit around the areas at the right and the left side. Then they brought the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྱི་བསོ] The head managers/stewards of monasteries as a whole, especially the large Gelugpa monasteries like Sera and Drepung.">jiso</span> and held the struggle session where he was beaten very severely by the monks of Loseling. But after the struggle session, there was an internal talk saying, "What is this? Should we kill each other?" [Tib. ག་རེ་རེད།ང་རང་ཚོས་ང་རང་ཚོ་གསོད་རེས་བྱེད་རྒྱུ་རེད་པས]. And then they said don't do this and we stopped the beatings.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you in Phodrang?   

**A:**  I was still in Phodrang, but they would take us to wherever there was a struggle session.   

**Q:**  Wasn't one person killed in the struggle sessions?   

**A:**  Yes, some were killed.   

**Q:**  Didn't one person commit suiside?   

**A:**  A <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</span> from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> Tratsang killed himself in Loseling. He was from Tsembo [Tib. བཙན་པོ] Mitsen.   

**Q:**  Trindor: I heard an abbot was killed at that time.   

**A:**  There were just a few ex-abbots. <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> had only one ex-abbot and two incumbent abbots. And there were only two Düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ] abbots. I am sure not sure whether an abbot was killed. A <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</span> was killed in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</span> held in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</span> or in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</span>. Three or four people died in Phodrang because of the beatings in the struggle sessions here and 2-3 died in the chöra under the struggle sessions. One person was taken out from the Phodrang and after they held a very severe struggle session, he was bleeding a lot and then he died in Phodrang. And then the chabu of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> called Kongchag [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྱག] who in the past was expelled from the monastery by the government because of stealing the things of the Gen Lamey [Tib. རྒན་བླ་མེད] also died under the struggle session at that time. Because of some kind of karmic result, they couldn't kill Jiso Takharel. I remember when they called people from Dambag when they held the struggle session against Takharel. In the past, the lower floors of the Phodrang were packed with tea leaves. At that time, there was a sky burial carrier, a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན] The name of the corpse-cutters at Sky Burials.">tomden</span> [Tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན] called Tashi Bagdro [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བག་བྲོ] who came and recounted sufferings [Tib. སྡུག་བསྔལ་བགྲངས] by crying and said, "in the old society we laboring people in the Phodrang were drinking only water and when we took a little bit of tea leaves from the Phodrang, you punished us so severely." At that time, they were not beating severely and just hitting him a little bit. Takharel replied, "Yes, I heard that some tea leave were lost in the Phodrang, but who was the Phodrang Deba [Tib. སྡེ་པ] then? You go and ask him." Actually, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྱི་བསོ] The head managers/stewards of monasteries as a whole, especially the large Gelugpa monasteries like Sera and Drepung.">jiso</span> and the phodang deba were different. Even now, if there is something wrongly blamed, the monks would say, "who is the Phodrang Deba, you go and ask him".   

**Q:**  For how many months did they hold the struggle sessios like this?   

**A:**  These <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</span>s went on from the 2nd lunar month to the 6-7th lunar month, so for about 5-6 months. They held the struggle session against the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> chabu who were tough [Tib. ངན་པ] and they beat them and tied them up. When they held the struggle session against the Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] Abbot, an old monk took a long thin iron bar for gorging eye balls, but they [?] didn't let him in. Almost half of the monks suffered from the struggle session. Altogether, a little less 1,000 monks suffered from struggle sessions including some monks who were staying outside who were accused of theft and telling rumors, etc.   

**Q:**  Since 1961, they held a few <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> (prayer assemblies) and they held the Mönlam in 1962 right? Between that period what work did you do?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there was no work and after the struggle sessions until the end of 1959, there were study sessions all the time that told us that the Communists Party is good and you can trust in it completely and it is impossible for the old society to be revived. They were repeating this to make the monks understand it clearly. I was released from the Phodrang in the 8th lunar month on October first, Chinese National Day, and then we were studying in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</span>, but there was not much to study. Then the first construction in the monastery was the water mill built below Drepung in the place called Jiri where we built the courtyard and drew the water. I went there to work in its construction for 3 weeks. Then I rested in the monastery for about 3-4 days, and then I went to work at Ngachen [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན] power station. They made a list of 420 adult monks and 40 bigger student monks from among the 200 students and I also registered my name. They asked for volunteers among the 420 for three cooks and I volunteered. We left the monastery on the 13th day of 9th lunar month and returned on the 8th of 12th lunar month. It was near the river bank during the coldest period of the nine days [Tib. དགུ་འགྲིམ]. I was well paid, though the work was hard. At that time, money was rare. We were paid little less than 2 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</span> which was a higher wage. Others were paid 1 yuan and 4 maotse.   

**Q:**  Was it paper currency?   

**A:**  Yes. When we were in the phodrang. They exchanged the currency at the end of the 5th lunar month. Before a month or so, they distributed the proclamation saying that on such and such month the money will be exchanged. At that time, the value of Tibetan money was made less and a one hundred <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</span> note cost only 40 sang and we were paid only two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</span>. The exchange rate of the copper coins of the 5 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</span> and 1 sho denomination were little better and they paid one <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 毛] A Chinese currency unit. 10 maotse = 1 yuan. 10 fen = one maotse.">maotse</span> for one <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</span> garpo. After a month or so, they distributed a proclamation saying that from today on, the currency of the Local Government is not allowed to be used. Whoever used it, will be punished. [Note: the following is a long comment by Trindor la which is not in the tape and was added after during the initial translation] I worked at the Ngachen Power Station from the 28th of March to the start of September. We didn't get paid. Then they sent part of the people to Kongpo [Tib. ཀོང་པོ] and part of the people were sent to dig borax [Tib. ཚ་ལ་དཀར་པོ] [official name was, "The first brigade of the first Chemical Factory of Tibet" [Tib. བོད་ལྗོང་རྫས་འགྱུར་བཟོ་གྲྭ་ཨང་དང་པོ་རུ་ཆེན་ཨང་དང་པོ] (we had 2,500 people, only 2-3 Chinese--it had units of hundred workers <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བརྒྱ་ཤོག] A unit in the traditional Tibetan Army consisting of 100 soldiers.">gyashog</span> and the 7th and 5th gyashog were Tibetan. [1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th Tibetan --these had kudrak servants and Tibetan soldiers who were healthy and strong. 1st was Chinese prisoners (3rd gyashog) and then there were Chinese who they tricked to come from inland (7th gyashog). These all were under the military administration. Under the TAR government were Tibetan prisoners (mostly nomads), and about 5-6000 Chinese. I stayed there until the summer of 1962. They said to us that the Russian debt is paid off so you can leave now. They sent me to Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] to do farming. The difference was that we were first prisoners from the revolt and then released, so probably that's why. They were volunteers and not involved in the revolt. I wasn't in the revolt, but I was captured in the revolt. The work was hard but the pay was good, a little less than 2 yuan a day. At this time they paid us in Chinese paper money].   

**Q:**  What did you do after you came back from Ngachen?   

**A:**  After I returned from Ngachen Power Station, it was the Tibetan New Year, Losar [Tib. ལོ་གསར] After Losar [i.e., about March 1960], Drepung was given responsibility for doing part of the road building from Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར] to Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང] and the work was divided among the monasteries and villages, etc. Our monastery had to build a part of road from Dongkar and I went there as a cook. Because the areas were all fields, they had to dig the earth like this deep and fill it up with rocks brought from the mountain and put earth and the stones and make the road protuded. There were many monks there working, so it didn't take long to complete; it tookk a little less than 1 month. Then I returned to the Monastery. Then the officials said it's not all right to have the monks scattered in the monastery, so all should eat communally. So all the monks should come to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> and stay in the temples and eat together. All the monks had to bring all their food to Loseling for the common pot. There were 70 monks in Tayön [Tib. རྟ་ཡོན] <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> and these were allowed to stay where they were as a unit. They searched all the khamtsen, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</span>, big <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> and even the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> of the simple monks for <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</span>, flour, rice, sugar brown sugar, butter, meat all kinds of foodstuffs and they brought all these where I was making fire. I was told to be the cook for this. There were 1,019 monks in Loseling eating there. A few monks had returned home who live near by, and some went to do roadwork, and some went to be drivers. There was a movie showing they went to do all kinds of work.   

**Q:**  This was in 1960 after the Losar, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  From when you were released from the Phodrang till that time, were you allowed to do your prayers in the morning in your <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span>?   

**A:**  Yes, it was allowed.   

**Q:**  Were you allowed to display the statues?   

**A:**  Yes, but we were not allowed to display the Dalai Lama's pictures.   

**Q:**  At this time, were there the Dalai Lama's pictures?   

**A:**  Yes, there were a lot of Dalai Lama's pictures. At that time, the Nepalese shop called "Blue Door" [Tib. སྒོ་སྔོན་པོ] that sold the specially treated gold used for painting thankas and the face of the statues [Tib. གྲང་གསེར] made the Dalai Lama's pictures of which the size were so big. There were black and white and also color photos like with the throne and half photos. We were not told that we are not allowed to wear monk's robe, but it was inconvenient when we worked. So I did the cook's work for two years, then I got sick with my kidneys and resigned from the job. I was still a cook at the time of the first Mönlam in 1962. While I was the cook, they classified the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</span>. There were only 4 trerim in Drepung: <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མངའ་བདག; ch. 领主] Feudal lord, manorial estate holders, serf-owners.">ngadag</span> [lords], <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མངའ་ཚབ; ch. 领主代理人] Agents of the lords of manorial estates (as classified by the Chinese Communist Party), for example estate managers.">ngatsab</span> [agents of lords], and poor class rank, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དབུལ་ཕོངས] The communist term for the &quot;poor&quot; class.">üpong</span> [Tib. དབུལ་ཕོངས]. They also classified and made one trerim called <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆོས་ཚབ] A communist classification that literally means &quot;the representative of religion.&quot; It referred to monks such as geshes who served the religious needs of the lord&#x27;s class.">chötsab</span> [Tib. ཆོས་ཚབ] which actually didn't exist. Trindor: this was the representative of the religious workers [Tib. ཆོས་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཚབ་བྱེད་མི་སྣ]. Some Chinese officials were also saying that we have three trerim in China, what do you mean by chötsab. Then after they classified us into the class ranks, then they put the trerim in one part of the monastery and the üpong in another part. Each class had its own leaders [Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད] who were all from among the people. They incited ordinary monks against others trying to make a split between them. I could only stay for a year or so because I got sick and then returned to my <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</span> (apartment). Before I was sick, I also worked as the cook during the Mönlam for about 1,000 monks of Loseling.   

**Q:**  During this period, where did your food come from?   

**A:**  At that time, there were plenty of food that was collected together which lasted for several years. Later, the butter became rotten because we didn't have refrigerators.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you have <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</span> as much as you wanted or was there a grain quota?   

**A:**  When I was cook, we could eat as much <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</span> as we wanted.   

**Q:**  This lasted till 1962, right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably. There was a lot of grain in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</span> and also in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> which was the left over from paying the grain salary to the monks. So we gathered all the grain together and roasted and ground <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</span> in the water mill. So we had as much tsamba as we wanted to eat. We also made <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</span> bagthug and we had started planting some vegetables, so we ate vegetables.   

**Q:**  Was there the [Democratic Management] Committee [Tib. དམང་གཙོ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་གང]?   

**A:**  It was started right from the beginning when they came and held the struggle sessions. There was also a Work Team [Tib. ལས་དོན་རུ་ཁག]. In this place, there were soldiers and civilian officials wearing blue clothes. The main head was a civilian Chinese. Under him, there were three military officers. Under this, there were some Tibetan cadres from Hor, Tö [Tib. སྟོད] and Lhasa who had gone to China to study and come back.   

**Q:**  Were they continuously saying that they will not harm the religion?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying this all the times. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Did someone say that we wanted to hold the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> again?   

**A:**  There was no <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span> in 1959 because they were always doing the study sessions. In 1960, there was tsog in the tsogchen and we brought churns, tea containers or chabtra [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ]] and ladles and we build a stove for the tsogchen. The lamas of the monastery would gather together. Usually, when people die, we held a smaller tsog where we got 2 teas and alms of 1-2 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 毛] A Chinese currency unit. 10 maotse = 1 yuan. 10 fen = one maotse.">maotse</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</span> soup and rice thukpa. At that time, they piled up all the wealth of monastery put it in trunks and kept it in the house Küngara [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་ར་བ]. These were the wealth from the period of many abbots. Later [laughter] the Chinese were taken down these things and they were saying, "do not be suspicious. We are keeping these down there in a safer place because we are afraid that these will get lost. There is a list of these things in which it is written that such and such <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</span> have this and that things. And we will keep it as it is." And Chö Dorje who came with the Gyepa Abbot said that the communists will not take even a needle and a piece of thread. You can trust the Communists. I am old and a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</span>, I won't tell a lie."   

**Q:**  At that time, was the Gyepa Abbot in the committee?   

**A:**  He was not in the committee. Now he is in the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས]. In the beginning, there were two groups called the Religious Association [Tib. ཆོས་ཚོགས] and then they started the United Front [Ch. tong zhan bu]. Later when there were more people and they set up the Political Consultative Conference.   

**Q:**  The Panchen Lama came to Tibet in 1962, right? Did he come to the monastery?   

**A:**  No. He didn't come to the monastery when he came the first time. At that time, Kyabje Lhabtsün Rimpioche [Tib. སྐྱབ་རྗེ་ལྷ་བཙུན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] of Sera was giving an initiation on Künrig [Tib. ཀུན་རིག] in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས] 1. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together. 2. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone.">tsog</span>chen. So it was the time to go to the tsog to receive the initiation and we also had to go to receive the Panchen Lama at Dambag along with the religious procession, the serbang [Tib. གསེར་སྒྲེང].   

