# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0054.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Lhamo Tsering (Tib. lha mo tshe ring]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 21 April 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Lhamo Tsering [Tib. ལྷ་མོ་ཚེ་རིང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 71  
**Date of Birth:** 1924  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lhamo Tsering was the secretary-aide of Gyalo Thondup and was part of the second group of Tibetans trained by the CIA in America in 1958-59. After returning to India, he came to manage much of the CIA's operation in Tibet for Gyalo Thondup. In this interview, he talks about how he and Athar’s relationship began, how Chushigandru started their base in Lhoka and their connections with the CIA. He also talks about Athar’s meeting with the CIA’s Frank Holober in Calcutta, and how the US did not originally want to directly help Tibet, but ended up doing so later by air-dropping US-made weapons and training Tibetans in the US. Additionally, he discusses how they sent parachuted CIA-trained Tibetan in 1959-60 to places like Namtso, Jagra Pembar and Nakchuka, but to no avail. He also dicusses the plan to start a new home base for Chushigandru in Pemakö and the fighting in Mustang.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0054_04/H_0054_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1958, when you came to Calcutta with Athar and the CIA's Frank Holober—I met him [Holober] in the US and he said you did a wonderful job. You were the interpreter, but you didn't just interpret, you asked Athar questions and wrote it in Chinese. I couldn't do better than what you did. This is true. What did Athar come for and what did Holober ask? And what [were the] answers and what were the two plans—the Chushigandru plan and their own plan—and what were the instructions from Gyalo Thondup? Please tell me in detail.   

**A:**  I can't remember much. Litang Athar and I did not have relations in the beginning. When they (six people) were sent, they were sent by Gyalo Thondup. Then they were dropped at Lhoka and it was at that time that I had connections with them. This was probably around 1959 when the Dalai Lama left. At that time, I was introduced to them. They had wireless connections, but not many actual ones from Darjeeling.   

**Q:**  When they were sending wireless [messages], did they go to America or Okinawa?   

**A:**  I don't know where they were going exactly, but anyway, they were sent directly to them [the CIA].   

**Q:**  What was in the wireless and was it given to Gyalo Thondup?   

**A:**  The content was given to Gyalo Thondup. At that time, since we were working in Indian territory, we had to be very secretive. So we did not have the custom of writing things on paper, the content of the wireless [messages], therefore, were only told verbally. So whatever I needed to know, they used to tell me. The things I didn't have to know, they didn't tell me. The reason why Athar and the others were sent first did not have anything to do with the Chushigandru. They first went to Lhasa so that the CIA and the Tibetan government could have connections. However, they were not able to make proper relations. Since this wasn't possible, then they made relations with Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  Why couldn't connections have been made with the government?   

**A:**  I don't know clearly, but my opinion is that the strength of the Chinese was increasing day by day. So they were worried about making connections and it wasn't convenient to make connections. And so if they made connections and the Chinese found out, it would have become a big issue. So I see it as they just could not make these connections. Then it seemed it was not worth staying in Lhasa. So at that time, the Chushigandru was just beginning to get established in Lhoka, and so they went there. So then they said that they were in Lhoka with Andru and that they could not make relations in Lhasa, and that Andru was planning on starting a military base [Tib. དམག་སྒར]. So now, when this was the case, the time had come for a second plan. Then the Americans said, if this is the case, then we need one of you to come in order to make new plans.   

**Q:**  Did they say by wireless that they were with Gombo Tashi [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and that he needed help?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, Chushigandru was in Lhasa, and they also couldn't stay in Lhasa and they said that they were going to start a base openly in Lhoka and make war. When they got to Lhoka with Gombo Tashi, they said they needed arms, as they didn't have arms. And whatever arms they had were useless and they didn't have enough bullets, so would they be able to assist? Then the US said to send somebody. So Athar came and that's where we met. So I took him to Calcutta and met Frank, and we stayed there for about a week discussing [things] in detail.   

**Q:**  Where did you meet—in which place? Frank said that they hid behind the car and I forgot to ask him the place.   

**A:**  This was probably true. When we met, they didn't give us the address of the house. We used to meet on the famous street called Park Street [a main street]. They would give us instructions with signals, like carrying a newspaper in hand, and they would tell us to wait in such and such place at such and such time, and they would come and get us. They would come in a car. The car had no numbers [plates]. Then we went in the car and we were taken to a place to meet, and since it was dark, we didn't know where. And there we talked. It was not one house. They seemed to have three or four others in which they alternated day by day. They brought food and then we ate the food, and then they locked the door and left. The general area was behind Park Street. But we didn't know which house.   

**Q:**  So what did they ask? For example, did Frank say he had such and such questions or would Athar just tell his story?   

**A:**  As soon as they came there they started this conversation. "At first, we had a plan to connect with the government, but that could not be implemented. So now we are going to work with Chushigandru—so how is Gombo Tashi? How many troops does he have? If we assist [you], would it really be helpful?" That's what they asked. So Athar told the story of him coming to Lhoka and that they had so many soldiers, and that "Gombo Tashi is a national hero and can be trusted one hundred percent. Everybody respects him and whatever he says, people will do." So Frank said, "So if we help, how should we help?" Frank asked about the area and the food supplies, and if they dropped things from the plane, could they be hid right away or not? "If you can carry it, how far can you carry it? Where is your base?" Then later—they did not say that they were going to help.   

**Q:**  On these questions, what did Athar reply?   

**A:**  At first, he related about Gombo Tashi and Chushigandru. That they had such and such soldiers.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers did Chushigandru have at this time?   

**A:**  I can't tell you clearly. Maybe 5,000. Athar will know better.   

**Q:**  What did Athar tell Frank about what Gombo Tashi's goal was?   

**A:**  That, they most probably, did not ask and, regarding the goal, I do not quite remember. However, Athar said that it was for the sake of Buddhism, politics and the nationality [Tib. བསྟན་སྲིད་མི་རིགས]. So it was a militant operation for this sake. It was an armed force against the Chinese. That was our aim and it was not peaceful. It was for safeguarding our nation, religion.   

**Q:**  When he went to see Phala, Phala said he didn't want connections. Did Frank ask why?   

**A:**  Most probably. He said he went to see Phala and they felt it was difficult to make relations as there were many Chinese spies around the Dalai Lama, so we couldn't communicate freely. And that if we did communicate, the secret would get out, and if that happened, then it would be a disaster. I remember something like that. So it didn't seem to be a question of where the government didn't like to do it, but that there were so many Chinese spies. So it was not convenient to make the relations and have conversations. So Phala may well have said that it was good for them to leave.   

**Q:**  It seems to me that Phala probably did not specifically say he wanted it. However, it seems to me that when one asks what your plans are and there is no reply, then it implies that you didn't want it. However, did he secretly tell Athar or Gombo Tashi that he actually wanted it, but had to say that outwardly?   

**A:**  No. So with regards to this, there was no reason for Athar to hide anything because everything was open. So I do not think Phala said anything like that. Phala most probably did not say we needed help or assistance. So the two most probably felt it was uncomfortable and difficult for the government to make connections with the US. Phala was the main one making the connections, and from the government side, it's possible that there were government officials who liked the Chinese. So there was the possibility that the secret would leak out. This is what I think. But I do not think that it was a question of where, deep down, they really didn't want relations.   

**Q:**  Regarding this, did Frank take much interest?   

**A:**  He didn't ask much or take much notice. What I remember is that he asked about Gombo Tashi and the military organization, and "If we did assist you, would it be of use to you or not?" And if it was helpful, then how many arms would we need? And if Gombo Tashi gave an order, would people obey him or not—"Is he an effective commander and a leader? Can he give orders to the soldiers?" So he mostly asked about these things. Secondly, he asked about how they were organized and living. Whether in tents or in the mountains, or living on the plains, et cetera. Then he asked, "How are they going to get their food? How many soldiers can be supported by this local area? One needs food and that comes only from the people, so will the people support the organization? And how many soldiers will they be able to support and for how many years?"   

**Q:**  So what did Athar say?   

**A:**  Athar said this was definitely possible and that the people would [be able to] support [this], and that "Everyone supports Gombo Tashi, who is an effective leader. Whatever he orders, everyone will believe him and is willing to give up their lives for him. And I have no doubts about these things."   

**Q:**  At this time, did Gombo Tashi feel that he would be able to win, or did he feel that it was just to make trouble for the Chinese temporarily?   

**A:**  He wanted to first come to Lhoka at the base and then go to get the government arms from Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. ཤངས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. And then go to Chang [North] to Shotalhosum and Tramo [Tib. སྤྲ་རྨོག] to collect soldiers, and then return to Lhoka and hold a large area. And so he had a wide-ranging plan.   

**Q:**  Did Athar specifically mention this plan?   

**A:**  This is the real true information. When Athar came to Calcutta, they had not yet gone to Shang. At that time, I don't remember this thing about going to Shang for arms [implies it occurred after their talk]. But, they talked about [how] the base would be placed where the arms could be dropped and could be hidden, and also [how] there was an abundance of food.   

**Q:**  Then as far as you can remember, their goal was to hold an area?   

**A:**  Yes, they were going to hold an area and then increase its size. This I have personally seen [have personal knowledge of] because until Gombo Tashi came to India, we had relations/contact. So he had wide-ranging plans to take many people from Shotalhosum and increase the number of people.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that there were two plans. One from Chushigandru and one from Athar and Lhotse. The Chushigandru plan wanted heavy cannons like the Howitzers, but Athar said they couldn't even carry [these]. So Athar made a plan which was much more realistic [in accord with the times].   

**A:**  It's possible that that may have been said, but I do not remember. What I recall was first, about Gombo Tashi and secondly, [was] about living conditions and supplies. Third, "If we did assist you, which at this moment we do not have any plans to do—so if we did assist you, then could you keep it a secret? And if we did assist you, are you going to go and fight immediately, or what are you going to do?"   

**Q:**  So what did Athar say?   

**A:**  Athar said, "We won't take the arms and fight immediately." And Frank said, "That's exactly right because if you did that, it would be useless," and gave many reasons why it would be useless. "If you send one to two, they will send 100, and if you send 100, they will send thousands. Secondly, if the arms are dropped, then you should hide them underground among rocks. And when doing this, you should not fight conspicuously, but carry on guerrilla-type warfare. If you are able, then you will fight and if not, you will run away." So he said a lot about this.   

**Q:**  What Frank told me was that one should make an organization with cells like the Communists. "At first, make kind of a network. And then all of a sudden, all of Tibet should rise up at a certain time."   

**A:**  Yes, about setting up a network. But regarding the second one, of all rising at once, Frank did not say that. He said, "If you take the arms and fight, it would be useless since you are very few people." So he said, "Do not fight directly. Your job is to engage in guerrilla warfare. Wherever you can fight, you fight, and wherever you cannot, you flee. Attack the weak points and hit and run away. Secondly, you all should create networks and make relations with the local population, and make secret organizations. That's how you will get your livelihood and get your information." This I remember clearly.   

**Q:**  How many times did Frank and Athar meet?   

**A:**  We stayed [the two of us] at a hotel for about a week. They used to come at night to collect us. I don't think it was a week—it was for about four to five days.   

**Q:**  Then it's said that Frank went some place.   

**A:**  It's possible, but we wouldn't know.   

**Q:**  Then after some time, he came and delivered a message, is that true?   

**A:**  I guess, yes. Anyway, we met continuously for four to five days. What Athar was saying was, "Are you guys going to help or not? You have to decide. Tell us if you are going to help with arms or not, as I have to go back and give them an answer. This is my goal. The soldiers are there, they have a place to stay [and] they have a leader who is very capable. What we do not have are arms. So you should help us with that." At first, Frank definitely did not agree to this at all. Even up to the time he was leaving, he did not agree to do this. He probably thought the secret would leak out. He said, "I cannot guarantee that we will help. However, if we are able to help, then you have to do this"—hide arms in various places. Then, another thing he said, "You should not say that these arms are from America, but rather [that they are] from Taiwan or Japan." So at that time, it did not seem to me that they were really going to help [us] with full strength. Later, all the help was not from the US but from Japan, Czechoslovakia [and] Germany. So there were no American weapons.   

**Q:**  So this was for the first drop? And the second drop when the Dalai Lama was coming?   

**A:**  At that time, they helped openly. [The second drop] In the first drop, there were 300 rifles, none of which were from the US. At that time, even though I do not know their policy, it seems like they did not want to be involved. This is my opinion. [He means with their own arms.]   

**Q:**  Then after some time, had they not decided?   

**A:**  All of these things were approved. [Frank said?] "In any case, I will recommend this to my superiors." But he never, in my opinion, clearly said the words that they were going to help. He didn't say, "I will definitely help." He was only saying, "If we did help." But from the tone of his voice, one got the feeling that they were probably going to help.   

**Q:**  Did you talk about this? That if they were actually going to help, regarding arms [asking for]. Then training for the wireless, and one also had to be trained with the new guns. What Athar said was that there were plans to train 500 men, about 100 or 80 for wireless, and for guerrilla tactics, about 400.   

**A:**  No, there was not. At that time, they did not give [us] the new wireless sets—only the ones you cycle [turn the handle] on. No, there were no such plans.   

**Q:**  No. No matter what, if later there was to be assistance, then without the wireless, it was difficult to know [about] guerrilla warfare. If good guns were to be given, then without training, how could they have done that?   

**A:**  Let alone that, in 1997 [??], when we began eight wireless [stations] in Shotalhosum, Nagchuka, Markham, and Chang Namtso, even then we did not have such plans. Only at Mustang, did we request [this] and they gave us training to communicate between internally groups of 100 [Tib. བརྒྱ་ཤོག]. Prior to this, we did not have any. Previously, we had one at Lhoka. So at one place, there was only one, and that too was very difficult to carry. Without two to three mules, you couldn't carry it.   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. too heavy.   

**A:**  Yes. And it was not easy. Later, in 1969, I think, then they changed it. The new one was the size of a tape recorder. All the messages were type keys. It was very easy. It took about one or two minutes.   

**Q:**  When did they change it? In the autumn of '58—the 10th month?   

**A:**  When the two of us were in Calcutta, it was not very hot, and so it may have been around fall. August-September most probably.   

**Q:**  Then, soon thereafter, the second group was sent. People like you. It seems that immediately after the plan was made, it was sort of decided that other Tibetans would go. When did you all go?   

**A:**  In 1958. The reason being that I came [to India] after the Dalai Lama left in 1959. I stayed for only one year. That means around September 1958 [he left]. I was taken for the second [training session]. Second, third.   

**Q:**  You stayed in the States for one year?   

**A:**  For about one year.   

**Q:**  So from what you recall, from your meeting with Frank, was it that the Americans did not finalize something like that?   

**A:**  After that, when I got there, Frank was not there. [He] probably went to Vietnam.   

**Q:**  That's right. [In] 1959, around February, he left. He made the first plan. According to him, when Athar came, they did not request a specific budget. It was some leftover money. He made the plan for a million dollars or whatever.   

**A:**  Anyway, when I got there, I did not meet him.   

**Q:**  If he was not there, then it was Ken.   

**A:**  No, not Mr. Ken. When I got there [it was] Mr. Mac. [and] Mr. John. I don't know the real names.   

**Q:**  But Frank's name is Frank.   

**A:**  Frank, I know him, but he did not appear at the training center.   

**Q:**  And Ken's name is really Ken.   

**A:**  Ken was also not there. Only Mr. John.   

**Q:**  Oh! John Reagan.   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  Yes, he was the one.   

**A:**  When I got there, Mr. John came. At that time, it was [in] Virginia, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. Williamsburg.   

**A:**  At that time, it was John. Then in Colorado, it was Mr. Ken.   

**Q:**  When did the Americans decide to give arms to Chushigandru?   

**A:**  Before Athar arrived back in Tibet, arms were dropped. So it seems that Mr. Frank returned and the decision was made. Before he arrived there, the arms were dropped.   

**Q:**  Would Athar have known about that?   

**A:**  He would not have known until he arrived there [Lhoka].   

**Q:**  Athar returned, right? So was he disappointed since they [the Americans] did not finalize [anything].   

**A:**  From the disposition of [Frank], we could see that they were going to help. The reason being that [Frank] was saying, "If assistance is given, where are you going to keep the arms and where are you going to hide them?" not to use them, et cetera. If he was not going to help, it was useless to say so, right?   

**Q:**  At this time, was Gombo Tashi thinking of fighting for the sake of all of Tibet, or only Kham or Amdo or that side of the Drichu?   

**A:**  He only thought of holding on to Lhoka and expanding from there. Yes, he had plans. The reason why he went to Shotalhosum was to make relations in Litang and Kham.   

**Q:**  Is that right? I thought that the reason he [Andru] went to Shotalhosum was that he could not go to Drigutang since the road was blocked by many Chinese soldiers.   

**A:**  That was not the case. Yes, on the one hand, that was the case, but he had the idea right from the beginning. He was going to get the arms and then make relations with the Litang and Kham side. Later, I met Gombo Tashi.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Yes, I met him later [in India]. It is true that he could not come [to Drigutang] because the Chinese found out. That was one thing. However, when he did this Shotalhosum thing, he had grand plans to make relations.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  When he tried to do that, he could not, right? Since the Dalai Lama had already left. So he brought whatever [soldiers] he had and via the Potramo area, he came to Lhoka. If the Dalai Lama was in Lhasa, then he had plans to make relations [get more soldiers]. Later, he had a lot of documents.   

**Q:**  Is that right? By documents you mean?   

**A:**  By documents I mean [papers] about his information [Tib. གནས་ཚུལ].   

**Q:**  Where are these documents?   

**A:**  Now I don't think there are any. I don't know if Athar has [any] or not.   

**Q:**  I doubt he does. If he has [any], we didn't see any [laughter both]. Now we [can] skip to something else. The Dalai Lama came to Lhüntse Dzong in March 1959. During this time, the Kashag and Phala discussed [things] and after some time, they sort of replied to the first question [earlier US inquiry?] and Athar told the Americans that now they wanted help and they were going to fight. Did you know about this?   

**A:**  Yes, Athar said that. I most probably have that in my book. They sent it from the US saying, "Now we are going to definitely help, and so stay there and don't come to India."   

**Q:**  Why did they say that? What were the Americans thinking?   

**A:**  From my perspective, from this time on, the US changed their plan completely. Prior to this, I felt that they were not openly assisting [Tibet]. [They were] just saying that they were going to help, but I did not see a concerted effort. The reason being that I knew about their arms help. They did not send any arms [US-made] because if they had gotten into Chinese hands, it would have been said that the US was sending arms. Then from that time on, he said [Athar] that the US said to stay there and that they were now definitely going to help. So when this was said, then they must have discussed with the CIA and made new plans. After this, many drops were made into Tibet and there were many sent for training. All arms from this time were their [US] arms, and wireless [was] sent too.   

**Q:**  So from your perspective, they changed their plans?   

**A:**  They changed their minds and became more involved.   

**Q:**  You mean more support, more training, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  For example, how many went to the US with you?   

**A:**  I think it was 12. One was sick and could not go—so 11. Yes, so even from that time on, the US had changed their plans. Otherwise, they would not have trained so many of us.   

**Q:**  Was that while you were in the States or before that?   

**A:**  No. I think...I got there in 1958. The US changed their policy after the first arms were dropped. That's why they asked us to go.   

**Q:**  Already?   

**A:**  Yes. They were thinking of expanding. So there is only one conclusion to be drawn from that, right? Otherwise, they had only agreed to take in six persons, which was one wireless group. So this is my guess.   

**Q:**  So you think it already changed by then? So that was before the Dalai Lama came out?   

**A:**  Just before. After Athar and we met, and after the first drop at Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Were the arms better and were they US-made for the second drop?   

**A:**  However—they were not completely [US-made]. From Shotalhosum, then everything was American.   

**Q:**  Did they supply M1s at Shotalhosum?   

**A:**  Yes, they supplied M1s, recoilless rifles, everything was there.   

**Q:**  I met the leader of Shotalhosum in Lhasa—but wait—I have something else to ask To my thinking, the [US] was saying to stay in Tibet. They may have been thinking about a non-Communist "Free Tibet"—this is the way the Americans thought, and so did they say anything like that? "If you can hold on to a 'Free Tibet'," that it would be convenient to hold?   

**A:**  It was like this. If we could not hold on to some land, then they could not help. So that was one thing. Secondly, the way I see it, they were helping us and they did not want communism in Tibet and wanted to stop it. Is this correct? That's how I see it.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  They were stopping communism all over the world and they wanted to do the same in Tibet. So that's why they wanted to help us. So if they wanted to stop the Chinese, they had to hold on to some land. If all of the land was lost, then they could not stop them, right? Even if they helped, it would have been useless. So I think that was the case. So they definitely did say to hold on to some land.   

**Q:**  As you mentioned last time, the US said to stay in Tibet and to stay at Tsöna [Tib. མཚོ་སྣ] Dzong.   

**A:**  That I don't really recall. They were saying to hold land wherever, but don't come to India. In this, all of the places like Tsöna and Drichu were included.   

**Q:**  Then after some time, it was not possible to hold on to the land, and when one reached India, there must have been a lot of discussions on this issue. So what was the reason, and I too do not know because if one looks at Chinese documents today, Mao Zedong sent commands to not chase the Dalai Lama. So it seems to me that the Chinese had not come so close. So why was it not possible to hold on to Lhüntse Dzong and Tsöna Dzong?   

**A:**  Most probably—all the land was lost and most may have felt that it was better to go to India. They could not be stopped, even though people were stopped. When Gombo Tashi came, he told people not to go. So while [some] people were staying, [some] people left in groups of 10 or 100—like that. There was no reason. They [US] said, "If the Dalai Lama is going to India, he can go. We will help you people." But, it was said that they could not stop the people. It was a psychological affair.   

**Q:**  Yes, morale was probably lost.   

**A:**  Yes, [they were] thinking that the Dalai Lama had left, Lhoka was lost, and so it was probably useless. However, if we had held on to land, then it was possible. It was not easy for the Chinese. The land is empty, weather wise [is bad], food—Tibetans are used to it—can live at high altitudes, eat tsamba, and it was difficult for the Chinese soldiers. No good communications, transportation. Tsöna is very high. The Chinese were very determined. However, naturally, there are some difficulties.   

**Q:**  If the Tibetans had good weapons, they could have put up a fairly good resistance.   

**A:**  They tried to stop them, people like Athar were there, but they could not manage to stop the people. So I cannot give you an exact answer [to your question].   

**Q:**  You mentioned earlier to [Paljor la]—and I too heard about it—that after Lhoka was lost, there was a plan to start something at Pemakö. How did that come about? Whose idea was it? Was it the Americans or the Khambas?   

**A:**  This was Gyalo Thondup’s and our idea. People were already sent to Mustang.   

**Q:**  I see, it was after Mustang?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes. Quite a lot of people were sent to Mustang. We started Mustang in 1960. We were thinking that no matter what, it was Nepalese territory. It would not be dependable. If we could go to Tibet, then that was it. If not, then, we were in Nepalese territory and that was breaking the law. So what we were hearing was that Pemakö was a clean area [unoccupied]. So we sent people [there].   

**Q:**  People were sent?   

**A:**  Yes, it was well done.   

**Q:**  I see. How many?   

**A:**  At first, we started a wireless communication—four persons.   

**Q:**  Khambas?   

**A:**  Not only Khamba, but Ütsang [Tib. དབུས་གཙང] and Amdo too.   

**Q:**  The wireless people were from your group?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we started an organization.   

**Q:**  Was it underground?   

**A:**  Yes, there were a lot who had fled from Tibet—guerrilla fighters, and they were re-organized. So after the drop zones were made etcetera, in 1962, the Sino-Indian War started at Bomdila. The Indians had destroyed all the bridges at the border and so our people had to leave. We had to bring all of our supplies, food, from India. The Indians destroyed all the bridges, saying that the Chinese were coming. The Indians were really shameful [Tib. ཞབས་འདྲེན་ཞུས་སོང]. The Chinese didn't destroy them—they did it themselves. Our people could not come out. Pemakö is a very difficult area [to travel to] and without the bridge, one has to cross the river.   

**Q:**  So the idea was to bring supplies via the road?   

**A:**  No, we were making preparations and then we were going to ask the Americans to help. It is a forested area and the drop zones were made by cutting trees.   

**Q:**  What difference did it make for guerrilla warfare whether there were bridges or not? I am not clear [about this].   

**A:**  At that moment, the supplies were coming from India and we had not asked the Americans to help us to drop [people].   

**Q:**  So one could not drop [people] from the plane? They had not discussed that as of yet.   

**A:**  We had not discussed with them about dropping [people]. What we had discussed was to collect information from Pemakö. So based on that, we started in Pemakö. We were thinking that if we could get well established [there], then we would ask for arms, saying we were doing such and such, and we had so many people. Without plans, they would not help. We had to show them something to make them believe [us]. So while things were going on well, the war started at Bomdila, and our supply lines were cut and we had to withdraw. Then the Chinese sent soldiers.   

**Q:**  What is the local population like? Loba [Tib. ཀློ་པ] or what?   

**A:**  No, not Loba. They are under Metok Dzong [Tib. མེ་ཏོག] and I think they are Sera Monastery's misers. However, there were Khambas also. In the earlier days, it was an area where criminals used to flee [to] and ex-monks ashamed to return [would go], and so there were a lot of such people. So when people come to Pemakö, they could not be managed [by the government]. So there were a lot of people if we needed to fight and if they had the guts. So with the war, our supply lines were cut, and secondly, the Chinese came there.   

**Q:**  Mustang was started, and did the Nepalese government know?   

**A:**  Sure, they knew. They tried to stop [it] but could not. There was a regiment of Nepalese soldiers but they could not manage since [we] were armed.   

**Q:**  Would they have known about the CIA connection?   

**A:**  No, they would not have known. [They] only [could have] guessed. The newspapers say [support came] from Taiwan and that is also what we said.   

**Q:**  You mentioned last time that the Americans said not to make connections with Taiwan. When was this?   

**A:**  Although they didn't tell me that, what they were saying was that "Taiwan is the same as mainland China, and in their constitution, #120, it states that Tibet is part of China. Therefore, if you make relations with them, then you are part of China. So there is no reason for this. What you want is freedom."   

**Q:**  From the US government side [question not finished]   

**A:**  No, not the government. But the people who we were working with [were saying this].   

**Q:**  When you say this idea came from your organization, then you mean Gyalo Thondup and [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes. Gyalo Thondup was very much against this and they [US] also supported his idea.   

**Q:**  When you went to the US, did the important US leaders and your training teachers say that they were going to help get an independent Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, the teachers would say this. I don't know [what] their aim [was], but it was probably a psychological thing to boost morale. In case they told us we were not free [Tib. རང་དབང], then we would say that we would leave, right? This was the nature of the teachers.   

**Q:**  Did Frank and Ken [and] their types say this?   

**A:**  Frank did not. We never had conversations about whether we had freedom or not. They did say the freedom fighters.   

**Q:**  During this time, the US government policy was the same as the Taiwanese government's. Did you know this?   

**A:**  That we did not know. We said we were not going to make relations. Because at that time, Gyalo Thondup met the Taiwan UNO representative in New York and requested him to help since they had a seat in the UN. [He said] that "Taiwan is a Security Council member," and that "You should announce that Tibet is free and independent." He said that that was not possible.   

**Q:**  I have only one [more] question to ask and that is about Jagra Pembar. How did you make relations and how did you help? Then after some time, it did not work out, right?   

**A:**  After I was trained and I returned, this was in 1959, around the 10th month. The CIA had really decided to help and they wanted to know the various places where assistance was needed. The information needed to be collected. The first was near Namling [Tib. རྣམ་གླིང], and then north of Shentsa Dzong there was a person called Nagtsang Phurbu who had opposed [led the people against] the Chinese a long time ago. So we said help was first needed for Nagtsang Phurbu since we had information that there were two to three thousand fighting. So the first [aid] was sent to Chang Namtso. When they were dropped, Nagtsang Phurbu [Namling] was already destroyed and nothing was left. The second was in Shotalhosum. We said there were soldiers there.   

**Q:**  There were two drops in Shotalhosum, right?   

**A:**  More than that. About nine drops. There were three groups.   

**Q:**  Arms were also dropped, right?   

**A:**  We sent three groups. After the assistance in Shotalhosum, one group was to go to Amdo, the other to Kham and one was to remain in Shotalhosum. That was the plan.   

**Q:**  They dropped people, right? And so what was their responsibility? I met the (local) leader in Shotalhosum (Pembar) in Lhasa and he said that the people who were dropped from the planes would not say anything to them. When they came, they asked, "What is your plan?" Naturally, they [the locals] did not have any plans. They were just disorganized.   

**A:**  The person you met was probably a new one. They were trained. All the soldiers were formed [arranged] into various groups and a lot of training for 100 people was done for collecting information, map reading, [and] training in all arms. A lot was done.   

**Q:**  Plans were made to fight, [right]?   

**A:**  Yes. But they were very suspicious that we were Chinese. We said that we had to use guerrilla warfare and the aim was not to get 2-300 together and fight. We had to fight accordingly, based on our strength. We should have formed groups of 10 or two at the most. So they were trained. We said that "The idea is not to fight with 100-200 horsemen. For us, the smaller the better. We have to attack their weak points and not their strong spots. If we do that [attack their strong spots], then we will be the losers." So when we said that, they thought "Oh. These people must be Chinese spies. Our plan is to fight with 300 to 500 to 1,000 troops. These people want to reduce the 1,000 to 100 and 100 to 10. What are they saying?" So they were hesitant. Some of them—they did not agree with our training. What we were saying was that we must be able to kill one person with one bullet. So our idea and theirs conflicted. So [we] were not all [in agreement]. One day, the people who were dropped in Shotalhosum were almost killed. All the people gathered were saying that we were all Chinese.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  There were about six from the plane and they were surrounded and almost killed. They said that they [we] were Chinese spies. "If this is not the case, then how is it possible for you to come to our land? You are sent by the Chinese." So talks went back and forth and we said we were sent by the Dalai Lama. They asked, "Where is the Dalai Lama's order?" Fortunately, we had the Dalai Lama's order.   

**Q:**  I see, is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. Otherwise, they would have killed us. We said that we were not Chinese spies. They said, "No, no. The Chinese have sent many spies so far. You guys are just trying to fool us. No, you are the spies." So there was this advice from the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Who were the biggest leaders there?   

**A:**  There were about three. One was Derge Sey Thonyö [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས་དོན་ཡོད], [who is] presently in Nepal. Otherwise, they are probably all dead. Only three were able to escape. One was at Bomdila, another in Mundgod and one in Nepal. All others were lost. Then, when they saw the Dalai Lama's order, they were happy and they were well received.   

**Q:**  So these were the ones who had gone there first. Earlier, Andrutsang had come to Jagra Pembar, right?   

**A:**  No, not Jagra Pembar. That was the second one [Pembar]. Past Nagchuka there is the Thangla. There was a large base there. Once Shotalhosum broke up, then there was one in Chang [north]. There were two to three wireless groups. There were a lot of people there. If you include all the people, and the sheep and goats, there were about 8-10,000. This was after Shotalhosum.   

**Q:**  When was Shotalhosum destroyed? In 1961?   

**A:**  Probably at the end of '61. No matter [what], in '63, it was all finished. Everywhere.   

**Q:**  Do you mean all of Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In your mind now, the US was backing Chushigandru, though it is not certain how much. But since you were unable to hold the place, you were not able to make many problems. The way I see it, why weren't you more successful?   

**A:**  We too are very disappointed. Our goal was for the people in Tibet to not fight in a big way. The reason is that our people had no experience. Secondly, they did not know how to use the arms. They didn't think about killing one or 10 or 20 people. Only about killing one and then, "If I'm killed, [then it's alright]." Wherever we tried to train [them] they asked, "What are you saying about sending a few instead of 100?" They did not like that because they had no experience and since their level of education was low, it was difficult for them to understand. They said, "If we are a few, then we will get killed. You guys are sending us [off] to get killed." They would not listen to us. They said that we were following the Chinese policy. So really, among those whom we trained, there were arms and the land was there. For example, there were only two routes. One was the Qinghai Highway and the other was Sichuan. If Tramo and Shotalhosum were blocked, if Chang Nagchuka was blocked, their supply was cut off. So [then] it would be difficult for them in Tibet. Then we could hold on to the land. The people would naturally like us and not the Chinese, right? So our backside was very strong. We had very good arms. We knew the area and the habits. We could easily get information. However, they would not listen. Reducing the number, no one liked that. Then we also said that we should not all bunch [together], but stay separately. To that, they said that then they would be nicely fixed-up [Tib. ཏག་ཏག་བཟོ་གི་རེད] [means vulnerable]. At Chang Nagchuka, there were 30,000 odd animals, like sheep and goats, and more than 10,000 people, both nomads and Khambas. After that, we said not to stay and to move out. Then the Chinese found out about this and bombed them and destroyed everything. They asked, "What do you mean by 'staying separately'? Are you trying to hand us over to the Chinese?" [Laughter both] So that was the problem.   

**Q:**  How did the fighting take place out of Mustang?   

**A:**  From 1962 to '75, the Chinese had two regiments. They could not move and stayed there.   

**Q:**  By regiment you mean jun?   

**A:**  No, not jun, but tuan. The two tuan were there 24 hours [a day]. Whether we were there or not. If just one person went nearby and fired in the air, [then] we just started a two to three day movement. So the Shigatse to Ngari highway was cut off and they could not use this. Then from Nagchuka, they made another way to Ngari.   

**Q:**  So during this time, was there any idea of holding on to some land?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. At first, we had this idea. However, we could not implement our plan. When we got there, it was an empty land. Then we sent a lot of soldiers. Then the southern area was very safe [Tib. བཙན་པོ] and then we moved North. But to establish there, the supply was very difficult.   

**Q:**  Thank you.   

