# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College. In this interview he discusses the grain salary and how it was paid, by whom, and when it was paid. There is also a discussion of the monastic position that was responsible for the payment of the grain salary, and the roles and responsibilities of that position.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_08/M_0003_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  At that time, I was a child and I just went to the tsog and the dharma grove, chöra [Tib. ཆོས་ར] but I didn't have any idea.   

**Q:**  You didn't understand what they were debating, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I didn't understand what their debate was about. I didn't know the system of the dharma and I didn't know what bad things were happening then.   

**Q:**  Did you have a separate place to sit for the monks like you who were not pechawa?   

**A:**  When the chöra started, there was a separate place to sit. In the chöra during the 16 years, there were 16 different places to sit according to your grade [Tib. འཛིན་གྲྭ] level. After 16 years, then all the monks would sit together. During the daytime, in one tsog, all the monks would gather together. When we came to the chöra, the monks would sit according to their grades and they will start tsenyi debate and when the prayer started, all the monks would gather together.   

**Q:**  Today, I would like to ask you about when you were staying in Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང], how much salary you would get and from where did you get? Some of the salary would be paid from the tratsang and some salary would be paid from the Committee Consisting of Abbots, Rigdra [Tib. རིགས་གྲྭ] and some of them were paid from the jiso and there were different places from where you can get the salary, so can you tell me one by one about the salary?   

**A:**  No, I can't tell you.   

**Q:**  I mean the grain salary?   

**A:**  I can tell you about the grain salary.   

**Q:**  For example, for the Gomang Tratsang, how much grain salary would they pay in one year?   

**A:**  In the past, they would pay one 1 khe of grain in a year. And in a period of time before the revolt they paid 3 khe of grain. That's all what they get.   

**Q:**  The tratsang would pay 3 khe of grain and how much the jiso would pay?   

**A:**  The Drepung jiso would pay 2 khe of grain in a year. The jiso was saying that they paid 2 khe of grain, but actually, there wasn't 20 dre [Tib. བྲེ] per khe, there was just 13 dre and a few phü [Tib. འཕུལ] per khe. It was a small bo [Tib. འབོ] which was almost smaller by three times than the regular bo [khe].   

**Q:**  So all together, they would pay you about 27 dre right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there any other who would pay the grain salary?   

**A:**  All the tratsang would pay the grain salary.   

**Q:**  What about from the Rigdra?   

**A:**  From the Rigdra, they won't pay the grain salary measured in bo. In the past, they would give roasted barley for the salary. Later, they didn't give the roasted barley and they gave tsamba. When they gave the tsamba for the salary, they would measure the tsamba in a wooden utensil with a handle called daso [Tib. ཟླ་ཟོ] and sometimes they would give 2 daso and sometimes 3 daso. There were differences in the Rigdra.   

**Q:**  When did the Rigdra pay the grain salary?   

**A:**  They would pay it in the 7th lunar month.   

**Q:**  Was that at the time of the Opera Festival, Shotön [Tib. ཞོ་སྟོན]?   

**A:**  Just after finishing the Shotön, the Rigdra would begin. They would also pay salt and soda [Tib. བུལ་ཏོག] measuring in dre. Sometimes they would pay 2 dre and sometimes 3 dre and sometimes they would pay 4 dre. So it was not same in every year. They have different names like the big Rigdra [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག] and the middle Rigdra [Tib. འབྲིང་ཁག] and the small Rigdra [Tib. ཆུང་ཁག].   

**Q:**  From the Rigdra, they would pay salt, soda and tsamba, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Rigdra would serve tea in the tsog. But we didn't go to the tsog.   

**Q:**  They would pay the salary from outside of the main gate of the monastery, gomchor [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར], right?   

**A:**  Yes, they would call this receiving the salary share, kelen [Tib. སྐལ་ལེན], but there was no different on the amount of the salary whether you join in tsog or you get the salary share.   

**Q:**  When Gomang Tratsang leased the shiga, the tratsang would get about 1,000 khe of grain for the lease, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There was a system where the shiga directly would give one khe of grain to each monk. Did you have this kind of system?   

**A:**  Our Gomang Tratsang won't give the grain directly from the shiga.   

**Q:**  Loseling would supply grain to the monks from shiga directly, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but for the Gomang, the shiga would deliver the grain to the tratsang and the tratsang would put them in the main granary in the tratsang. If there were left over grain, then they would give it to the monks.   

**Q:**  In which month Gomang Tratsang would pay the three khe of grain salary?   

**A:**  There was no fix time for that. To tell you the truth, they pay the grain salary when the number of monks were less. This is very bad.   

**Q:**  Who has the power to pay the salary?   

**A:**  The chabu has the power.   

**Q:**  The grain salary would be paid from the monastery or would they give a receipt for getting the grain [from the shiga]?   

**A:**  The shiga manager would pay the lease or the storage grain, karjug [Tib. བཀར་འཇུག] to the granary in the monastery and the grain steward, drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] would pay the grain salary.   

**Q:**  When would the jiso pay the grain salary?   

**A:**  The salary from the jiso had a fix time, probably one is in spring and one is in autumn and the jiso won't wait for the number of the monks to become less.   

**Q:**  When you were young, you would get one khe of grain from the tratsang and two small bo of grain from the jiso and also little grain from the Rigdra, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Among the monks if they didn't have any source of livelihood and they have to depend only on the salary, were they able to manage their livelihood?   

**A:**  No, they weren't able to manage themselves. But, among the monks, some of them would go to manage the dzong and shiga. Some of the monks would do big trade. Some of the monks would do the small business. Some of the monks would carry the load of merchandise from Lhasa to the countryside to sell them. There were also monks who carry loads from Lhasa to the monastery. That's how they find the living. In general, the monk's livelihood was very poor. For example, the income for the farmers is the yearly yield and the monk's income in a year is the Prayer Festival, Mönlam Chenmo [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་ཆེན་མོ].   

