# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.13 : Tape 13  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College. In this interview he discusses issues surrounding the distribution of tea and butter during particular ceremonies in the monastery and the distribution of alms by jama. Additionally, the estates of the khamtsen are discussed as well as the incomes of treasurers and details of particular estates, the lease payments of these estates, and details of the subsistence activities of the estates. There are also details of working for Changdro and the responsibilities of the managers (chabu). Grain salary payments to the monasteries are discussed as well as taxes on animals on the estates. There are also details involving the shengo and gegö and the relationships between the the branch monasteries of Gomang and Gomang College. Included also are the details of the Debating grove (chöra). Finally, there is a discussion of the how the Democratic Mangement Committee effected the monks and issues surrounding monks current conditions under the Work Team and how this is different from the past.   

---  
### Tape 13  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_13/M_0003_13.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last year, you talked about the jama in the khamtsen and about the reception, but you didn't tell me in detail how did they make the tea. How did they make the tea served in the khamtsen, tshomja [Tib. ཚོམས་ཇ]?   

**A:**  In our khamtsen, they didn't churn the tea and the tea was black tea on which the butter was added in the cauldron and they would stir it and serve it. The senior monks who sit at the front of the row would get tea with grease and at the end of row, they won't get the grease. Namely, there were 8 laymen who would fetch water, chulen [Tib. ཆུ་ལེན] and one for making the fire, metonga [Tib. མེ་གཏོང་བ]. Altogether there were 9 of them.   

**Q:**  Was this in the khamtsen ?   

**A:**  Yes, this was in the khamtsen. These 9 laymen would come to the monastery if there were work to do and otherwise they have their residence in Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག] which is located at the lower part of Drepung.   

**Q:**  Were they all laymen?   

**A:**  Namely, there were 9 people, but actually there were 4-5-6 people only.   

**Q:**  Were they miser of the khamtsen ?   

**A:**  Yes, they were miser of the khamtsen. If the monks have money alms, they also would get the same share. Jama is the leader of the 9 men.   

**Q:**  How did they call the 9 men?   

**A:**  If there were alms and assembly tea, mangja [Tib. མང་ཇ] then they will come. They would come whenever they were called. If there was no alms and mangja then they won't come.   

**Q:**  If there is tsomja served in khamtsen, the jama would get the butter and tea from the store room or how did they do it?   

**A:**  If the tea was served by the khamtsen, they would get the tea and butter from the storeroom and if the sponsor supplied the assembly tea, then the sponsor would bring the tea and butter. They will boil the tea and put the butter on it. When the sponsor supplied mangja, they would give alms regardless of the amount. The sponsor would come in person and offer the alms. The khamtsen would arrange a separate place for the sponsor to sit and serve them tea and droma dresi and the khamtsen would give the khata to the sponsor.   

**Q:**  If the assembly tea is served by the khamtsen , then the jama would take out the tea and butter from storeroom?   

**A:**  No, they would give the tea and butter to the jama.   

**Q:**  The khamtsen gegen would give the tea brick to the jama?   

**A:**  No, the two chandzö of the khamtsen would give the tea to the jama.   

**Q:**  For example, if the tea was served by the khamtsen, the chandzö would give tea brick and butter to the jama?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the jama have the right to crash the tea brick and to control how much butter to be used for the tea? How did they do it?   

**A:**  The jama would over see it and put the tea brick in the big cauldron and boil it. They would cut the butter into small pieces and they would make the monks to cut the butter.   

**Q:**  Who would cut the butter?   

**A:**  Usually, the jama would cut the butter and if there were other people around the jama and if the jama ask them to cut the butter, they would cut the butter for the jama.   

**Q:**  The servant of jama, jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] won't cut the butter?   

**A:**  The jayog was like a servant for going outside and they won't stay with jama for long time.   

**Q:**  So the jayog is like a servant, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were 30 monks as the member of the khamtsen tsondu. Jama and jayog had the responsibility to look after the rules and regulation of the monastery whenever they got the order from the monastic officials; tshogchen shengo, the abbot in the tratsang and the gegö of the Gomang Tratsang. The name of the jama is small but they have a big responsibility.   

**Q:**  Did the jama have to smash the tea [Tib. ཇ་གད]?   

**A:**  They didn't need to smash the tea too much because the sponsor would bring smashed 2-3 packages of four tea bricks. If the tea should be smashed, we have to smash it as we have many people. The tea leaves should be soaked earlier in the cauldron.   

**Q:**  They also have the responsibility for putting the right amount of water for the tea and the butter, right?   

**A:**  The water for the tea would be controlled by the jama. There were few thabyog. There was a rule when they served the tea in the assembly. Sometimes, they have to serve one cup of tea for each monk and sometimes 2-3 cups should be served. Usually, as for the thabyog, they would try to put some more water because if there were tea left over, the thabyog would carry them in buckets to Thamba to their homes. Therefore, when they were making the tea the jama has to control the amount of water because the thabyog might make a light tea for the assembly and take away a lot of left over. It would not be okay if the thabyog didn't get any left over tea to take home, because the thabyog didn't have any wages. They were obliged to fetch water as a tax. That's how it is.   

**Q:**  The jama would get the alms called thondabarsum, [Tib. ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ] where they go to ask for alms shares to the beginning, middle and the end of the lines when the monks were standing in line to get the alms. How much shares of alms would the jama get?   

**A:**  There were many monks who would get the alms called thonthabarsum like the two khamtsen gegen, two umdze of the khamtsen, two chanzö, jama, two nyerpa, jayog, nyungja [Tib. ཉུང་ཇ], the jama for making tea for small amount of monks, thabyog and nangsen. Altogether there were 12 people who get the alms called, thonthabarsum in the khamtsen. These people would come to receive the alms when there was alms in the khamtsen .   

**Q:**  Did the monks get the alms called thogthabarsum [Tib. ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ] in the khamtsen ?   

**A:**  If there were alms in the tsogchen and if they didn't get the chance to join the assembly, then the jama would get their alms for the 12 monks who get the alms called, thogthabarsum and he would deliver it to the monks.   

**Q:**  The jama would take the alms for the 12 monks and deliver it to the monks, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How much shares of alms would these 12 monks get?   

**A:**  Each monk would get 12 shares.   

**Q:**  As for the alms called thogthabarsum, if other monks have one maotse, how much would they get?   

**A:**  They would get 12 maotse. When they gave the alms there were two lines for the monks who get 12 shares and they would get three shares from each line. And they would get double share from each two line. Altogether they get 12 shares.   

**Q:**  That's how they get one yuan and 2 maotse right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there the same thing in the tratsang?   

**A:**  They would do the same thing if the tratsang or the tsogchen was belonged to the khamtsen . In the tsogchen you didn't have to go in person and the jama would go there and get the share of the alms. In the tratsang the monks would come to get alms called thonthabarsum by themselves.   

**Q:**  How many shiga did the khamtsen have?   

**A:**  There were many good chöshi for the khamtsen. I didn't know for sure. In the past, Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] Khamtsen was very well known. Hamdong Khamtsen had many nomads and many shiga. The bigger shiga for the khamtsen were Kyormolung Jarag, [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང་སྦྱར་རག] Gyangkar [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར], Sechung [Tib. ?], those three shiga were best. As you know, when they were leased, the lease for Jarag Shiga was 1,000 khe of grain in a year, for Gyangkar Shiga, 600 khe of grain and 200 khe grain for Sechung Shiga. These were the main shiga.   

**Q:**  Was Sechung Shiga called Shangdrong [Tib. ཞང་གྲོང]?   

**A:**  The Shangdrong is the name of the place and Sechung was the name of Shiga.   

**Q:**  So now we would like to talk about the tratsang. The böpa were allowed to become the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Every body can become the gegö whether you were böpa, Khampa, Mongolian or from the north, Horpa.   

**Q:**  Anybody can also be the steward, nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང] of tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Anybody can be the nyertsang, but have to be wealthy. The nyertsang can be done by all the nationalities.   

**Q:**  You mean to say the Gomang's nyertsang right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were the böpa allowed to be the chabril and the jama?   

**A:**  There were three monks who were servant of the gegö called Nangma, jama and the chabril which can be done by anybody. For the Gomang's chabril and the jama should be appointed by the nyertsang of the Gomang. The gegö will appoint the nangma.   

**Q:**  What kind of works would the chabril do?   

**A:**  Chabril had many works to do and also he had a wide power [Tib. དབང་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ]. Usually, in the monastery, the shengo and the gegö would tell the chabril when he would pass the messages to the monks. There were 16 khamtsen and when the chabril would pass the messages to the khamtsen, all the monks will get the messages. If the chabril was unable to go to pass the messages, he would send his servant the chabyog [Tib. ཆབ་གཡོག] to deliver the messages. The chabril would get many things to eat and he is happy. Usually, when the Gomang Tratsang's chabu would hold the tsondu, the chabril can join with them and he can put his bowl with the chabu for all day and he could eat with the chabu. The jama, jayog and nangma didn't have the chance to eat like this. They would get the same alms as the chabril, but they won't get the same food.   

**Q:**  What kind of income would the chabu get?   

**A:**  The chabu would get a good income. There were 4 big khamtsen ; Hamdong Khamtsen, Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ] Khamtsen, Gungru [Tib. གུང་རུ] khamtsen , Bati [Tib. པྲ་ཏི] Khamtsen. These were the 4 nachen [Tib. sna ? chen]. They would come to hold the assembly everyday. On that day, the gegö and the umdze would come to hold the assembly. And the tea and the food would be served by the tratsang for the whole day. Usually, they would also get double alms.   

**Q:**  I was surprised that the other monks would get more than double and they would also get the alms called thogthabarsum, but the tsondu members get only double shares?   

**A:**  First, I will tell you about the shares of alms that would be helpful. The abbot of the Gomang Tratsang would get the most highest alms which is 30 shares. The gegö would get 10 shares, the umdze would get 8 shares. For the two jama, chabril, nangma [Tib. ཇ་ཆབ་ནང་གསུམ] would get double share. The jayog and thabyog would get one share. These were the monastic officials. The chabu didn't have many shares. They would get only 2 shares, but they have food to eat to be full. The chabu would get the double share. Usually, they would deal with many miser and give the loans to the miser and collect the loans. The grain nyerpa, drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] would deal with miser permanently and the chabu had the power and they would give the order to the drunyer and the drunyer have to do the works. There were many chabu, but only two chabu would go to deal with the miser and they would get lot of things to eat. The people would go to see the chabu and request them to give the loans and they would give meat, money and khata. When the chabu came back, they would divide all the things that the miser gave them privately among them. The places wherever the chabu would go, they would serve them food.   

**Q:**  How many chöshi were there under the chabu?   

**A:**  Tratsang's chabu have some part of the chöshi. The two nyertsang had some part of the chöshi.   

**Q:**  I think I know about the chöshi of the nyertsang?   

**A:**  Otherwise, there was no chöshi.   

**Q:**  How many shiga were there for the tratsang itself?   

**A:**  The most famous monastic shiga were; Kyarpo [Tib. སྐྱར་པོ] Shiga which was leased to the Regent Talungdra, Nyen [Tib. གཉན] Shiga which was in Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང] and there was Chölung Tashi Gönde [Tib. ཆོས་ལུང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དགོན་སྡེ] which was not that big.   

**Q:**  Chölung Shiga is located on the way to the Ganden, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the Khardong [Tib. mkhar gdong ?] Shiga in Phempo [Tib. འཕན་པོ]?   

**A:**  Khardong Shiga also belong to the Gomang and it had a small branch shiga called Namo [Tib. སྣམ་མོ] Shiga.   

**Q:**  How much lease did they get for Kyarpo Shiga when it was leased to Taglungdra?   

**A:**  The lease was 1,000 khe of the grain per year. I have seen that and I also collected the grain. The tratsang got back the Nyen Shiga at one time and they didn't lease it. And the tratsang planted the land and they sent the shidü. Kyarpo Shiga was leased and makes most income. It was said that the Kyarpo Shiga had 8 branch shiga and some of them were small ones.   

**Q:**  Do you know how many khe of land it had?   

**A:**  I don't know how many khe of land because the lease was 1,000 khe of grain.   

**Q:**  Do you know how big the Nyen Shiga was?   

**A:**  Nyen Shiga is much smaller than Kyarpo. Kyarpo had many miser and they were capable. The miser of Nyen and Khardong were poor.   

**Q:**  Khardong Shiga [Tib. མཁར་གདོང] was small or big?   

**A:**  The Khardong Shiga was small.   

**Q:**  Did they lease it or the tratsang plant it?   

**A:**  In the past, Khardong was leased, but I don't remember how much lease they got. I think it was 600 khe of grain or something. Khardong Shiga was leased to Kabshöba [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] who was a famous kudrak of the dewashung. The quality of the land is good and it is near to the Shiga.   

**Q:**  What about Chölung Shiga?   

**A:**  Chölung Shiga is very small. In Chölung, they had a granary from where they would lend the grain loans. Nyen Shiga have the granary and Khardong Shiga had the most biggest granary. This is the Shiga where I went. The granary and Shiga have separate incomes. The drunyer would control the grain loans and he would do the lending loans and collecting the grain loans. The shidü would eat until they were completely full. He would just give the orders to the people. That's how it is.   

**Q:**  How much grain storage [Tib. བཀར་འཇུག] did the drunyer have?   

**A:**  The storage grain is not like we had in Khardong. In the past, we have 10,000 khe of grain storage in Khardong. At some time, all the places had a poor yield because of the drought. So it didn't have 10,000 grain storage and it only have few thousand. If there were large amount of grain storage, then they have to transport the grain [to the monastery] for giving it to the monks as alms.   

**Q:**  How many grain storehouses [Tib. བཀར་ཁང] were there?   

**A:**  There was only one storehouse. The drunyer had one granary for collecting the loans and giving the loans. There were two granary for the shidü. There was only one storeroom and they would regard this very important.   

**Q:**  Where was the storehouse located?   

**A:**  It was located in Khardong Shiga. Small storehouses were in Chölung and Nyen.   

**Q:**  Were there 23 drunyer?   

**A:**  In Khardong there were 3 drunyer, in Tsongdü Jangragang [Tib. thsong 'dus lcang ra sgang] had 2 drunyer, which was located just near Khardong. In Phenpo. There were 5 drunyer in Phenpo. In Chölung Shiga, there were 2 drunyer and there were 1 drunyer in Kyarpo. In Tölung Nyen, there were 2 drunyer. And there were two drunyer in Chushü [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] and one drunyer in Barthang [Tib. བར་ཐང]. There were 13 drunyer.   

**Q:**  When the 13 drunyer would lend the loans and collect loans would they collect and store them in Khardong?   

**A:**  Each drunyer might have their own small storehouses like Chölung had their storehouse and Nyen had their own storehouse. The main granary was in Khardong. When they collect grain from other shiga they won't get much grain. If the yield is good in all the place, then in Khardong, they would collect 6,000-7,000 khe of grain per year.   

**Q:**  You mean to say Khardong would collect 7,000 khe of grain, right?   

**A:**  If the yield is good, Khardong would get that much. They also lent the grain loans and collect them.   

**Q:**  Did the chabu transport the grain to the monastery?   

**A:**  Normally, the drunyer would get the grain which they collected in this year. When the tratsang chabu would come, first the drunyer would divide the grain into three parts; one is to be stored in the storehouse, one is for taking them to the monastery and one part to be kept for lending loans in the next year. The grain which they stored in the granary sooner or later would be transported to the monastery. The grain in the storehouse and the grain which belonged to the drunyer had a separate account, but the grain is same and used for the same purpose.   

**Q:**  Everybody says that the chabu had a great power, so what kind of power did the chabu have and what kind of work did they have to do?   

**A:**  The Gomang Tratsang had many miser and nomads, so the chabu have to look after them.   

**Q:**  So the nyertsang would deal with their own miser, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the chabu would deal with their own miser. There were 4 chabu and one of them have to go to Northern part Hor. The chabu would get a good income from this. He would collect butter and meat. And he also have to spent some money. The Hor would offer butter to the tratsang and the chabu himself would have a good income.   

**Q:**  Were there nomads belonged to chabu?   

**A:**  The chabu had to go to look after the nomads which belonged to Gomang Tratsang. The nomads were belonged to Gomang Tratsang.   

**Q:**  The nyertsang also had their miser, right?   

**A:**  Yes, The chabu's miser and the nyertsang's miser were all in Chang Nyenrong [Tib. བྱང་གཉན་རོང]. Gomang Tratsang had many animals leased in the places like Sangshung [Tib. གསང་གཞུང] and Bartha [Tib. ?] which is located in long distances.   

**Q:**  Was that in Nagchuka [Tib. ནག་ཆུ་ཁ]?   

**A:**  That was just before you reach Nagchuka.   

**Q:**  Every year, one chabu have to go there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they call it going to the north, Changdro [Tib. བྱང་འགྲོ]. This was kind of famous. When you reach your turn for the Changdro, you have to take capable servants because on the way there were many robbers and once you get robbed they would take away every thing. The main thing was the monk who go to Changdro had to hire a clerk and altogether there would be 5-6 people. I went as the Changdro for 6 years.   

**Q:**  Oh really?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tell us about going for the Changdro?   

**A:**  Since I left for the Changdro until I come back, the tratsang, khamtsen and the mitsen would keep my share of alms because I was working for the tratsang. But I won't get the alms share in the tsogchen. I would get 5 khe of butter as for the yearly wages.   

**Q:**  Was that for a year?   

**A:**  Yes, but it won't take a year and it would take only 2 months.   

**Q:**  When did you have to go? Was it in summer?   

**A:**  Yes, we have to leave on the 3rd-4th of 7th lunar month and come back on the 20th of the 8th lunar month. I was hired as a clerk of the Changdro. So during that time, the Changdro would give me the food. The chabu would get a many income like butter. When the chabu arrived at chang, the miser would come and they would offer butter to call on to pay the respect, jelshu [Tib. མཇལ་ཞུ], but the clerk would also get that.   

**Q:**  What do you mean jelshu?   

**A:**  Jelshu means when you arrived at the place, the miser would come to give you lot of things to call on to pay respect. The clerk also would also get the gift which would be merged with the gift to the chabu. I would get 5 khe of butter per year as the wages.   

**Q:**  The gift you received also belonged to chabu, right?   

**A:**  I was hired by the chabu and actually the gift should belong to me but I merged the gift to the chabu because I was paid 5 khe of butter as the wage.   

**Q:**  What do you mean Jelshu?   

**A:**  When you first came here as the Changdro, the miser would come to see you and give gifts according to their livelihood. The miser gave the gift to the Changdro and not to the Gomang Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Most of them were the miser or were they the people who took animal as lease, shey [Tib. ཤེ]?   

**A:**  In the long distance places like Sangshung, Bartha had some animal as a lease, but most of them were miser in Nyenrong [Tib. གཉན་རོང]. The name of the miser was called Bugparuwa [Tib. སྦུག་པ་རུ་བ]. In Nyendrong there were many miser who belong to different owners. There were different miser among the Drepung's miser and there were also misers of the dewashung and Sera Monastery.   

**Q:**  So how did they collect the tax?   

**A:**  They would collect the tax according to their document which shows how many animals they have. If the animals gave birth to the calf in this year, then they have to pay 3 khe of butter.   

**Q:**  That was for the animals which gave birth to calves in this year, kyema [Tib. སྐྱེས་མ]?   

**A:**  Yes, if the animals gave birth to calves in the previous year it is called yama [Tib. ཡ་མ] you have to pay 1-2 khe of butter. Our tratsang would treat the owner of the yak kindly. You have pay only 4 sho for a yak and this was called Gyabdö [Tib. རྒྱབ་དོད] There were difference between the northern, changpa miser and böpa miser. The changpa miser were doing very bad. It is difficult for them to think about the well being of the majority monks. Each and every animals had a brand on animals horn called radam [Tib. རྭ་དམ]. If animals died, then they have to show the horn. Even though they show the horn there won't be the brand on the horn which was branded in the previous year. So they would sell the animals and they would slaughter the animals and eat them and they would just show one horn. The changpa miser wouldn't adhere to the karmic law of cause and effect [Tib. ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས]. The böpa miser wouldn't do like this.   

**Q:**  They would slaughter the animals and they would say the animals died, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they would show the horn, but that was not the real horn. If that was a real horn, then they can say that animal died. They were not allowed to sell the animals. They would just one horn give a little money for the meat and leather of the dead animals. Actually, an animal cost 300-400-600-700. When they showed the horn, we just have to write off the animal in the list.   

**Q:**  This is about the lease, shey income right?   

**A:**  Yes. As I said they had a good income who goes for the Changdro because they would get the Jelshu gift twice. That was the main income for the Changdro. The first Jelshu was called, "arrival gift." given when they arrived at the place. This was called Phebjal [Tib. ཕེབས་མཇལ] And the Changdro have to supply tea, chang and food for the miser. But they would give him big pieces of butter as for the gift.   

**Q:**  Each and every household would give the gift or from the village?   

**A:**  Each and every household would give the gift.   

**Q:**  What kind of gifts would they give?   

**A:**  They would give butter only. For the khamtsen , we need a lot of dry cheese for changing the yearly torma offering [Tib. ལོ་གཏོར]. 25 bo [Tib. འབོ] of cheeses would be used for changing the torma. They didn't give cheese to the tratsang. If the chabu knew some people in the north, then they would give extra things to eat and if the chabu was new, they would treat them regularly.   

**Q:**  So they gave the gifts twice, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How much butter would each household give when they come for the Jelshu?   

**A:**  They would give quite a large amount of butter like this. Some poor people would give just a small amount of butter like this. They would give the gift according to their livelihood.   

**Q:**  The gifts were the income [Tib. ཟ་སྒོ] of the chabu, right?   

**A:**  This was the main income for the chabu.   

**Q:**  Were there any term for working as a chabu like 2-3 years?   

**A:**  In the past, there used to be a term and lately there was no term and the chabu would work for a long time. The chabu should be capable person with honor to serve Gomang Tratsang. He should be also likable person and how to know look after the well being of the miser. If there were chabu like this, he would do the chabu for a long time. If the chabu is not good then he won't remain for a long time.   

**Q:**  The responsibility of the chabu is to collect the tax, to settle the miser's trouble and what other things chabu has to do?   

**A:**  The chabu would get double shares of alms.   

**Q:**  What kind of other responsibility did the chabu have?   

**A:**  If there were something to do in the tratsang, then the chabu would make the monks to do the work and chabu would just give the order and he doesn't need to work.   

**Q:**  The storehouse of the nyertsang and chabu's warehouse [Tib. མཛོད་ཁང] were separate, right?   

**A:**  They were completely separate. In the chabu's warehouse, there were place where they would store valuable things like gold, silver and brocade. The assembly hall of Gomang Tratsang had 108 pillars. And the pillar decoration and other religious decoration and there were many Chinese rugs were stored in the warehouse. There was also the storeroom for keeping like food stuffs. There was a house for making fire. They would have to manage very well all these storerooms. Before they would go home, they would put seal on the doors of the storerooms. And when they come back they would put the seal in the box which is kept in the tratsang and one of the chabu would put a seal in the box. In the next morning when they open the storeroom, they have to show the seal to the chabu.   

**Q:**  The chabu had to pay the grain salary right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you first join the monastery, how much grain salary did they pay you?   

**A:**  There was no extra share for the grain salary. The abbot of the tratsang have 30 shares of alms. But, they won't get extra share on the salary. The gegö and umdze and all the monastic official in Gomang Tratsang just have own share [Tib. རང་སྐལ] of salary.   

**Q:**  How much grain salary did you get in a year?   

**A:**  In the past, when I just joined the monastery, there was only one khe of grain. Later, it went up to two khe of grain. And before the revolt there were 4 khe of grain.   

**Q:**  When did they start paying 2 khe of grain for the salary?   

**A:**  I don't remember very well but I think it was 10 years ago. There were many shiga in villages which were leased very cheap and later they increased the lease because of the capable chabu who knows how to do things.   

**Q:**  When did they start paying 2 khe of grain? Was that after the Chinese came or before that?   

**A:**  That was before Chinese came to Tibet. Since Chinese came monks, they didn't get the chance to increase the salary because, the Chinese won't think about the monk's salary.   

**Q:**  Just before the revolt, the ordinary monks filed a law case saying, there were many grain in the monastery and the grain should be given to the monks for the salary and also they need to audit the accounts. So they came to the Branch Judicial System where Civil Disputes are settled, Gyöshib Lekhung [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས] to do the audit, was that right?   

**A:**  I am telling you the truth. The law case of the monks were not that certain. No matter how much grain they have in the store, they have to give the grain for the salary in every year. The tratsang didn't have many storehouse [Tib. བཀར་ཁང] in the tratsang. There was a big house called granary which had two stories and they would fill it with grain in both stories. There was a hole in the second story and when the grain is finished they would take out the grain from the hole. The case was not only about that. There were also many matters beside that. The law case was based on the Nyen Shiga in Tölung and we got that Shiga through the law case. I think this was about the difference between the pechawa and the lagyüba. I didn't know about the previous law case. The law case was very well known and the Gomang Tratsang got the first audit from the Gyöshib Lekhung.   

**Q:**  Was Gyöshib set up just before the Gomang Tratsang applied the law case?   

**A:**  Just, before we applied the law case, Gyöshib Lekhung was set up. They did the audit for many days and the monks who were in charge of this matter, didn't have to face any trouble. The monks who filed the case didn't fully understand what was the real matter and they just talked recklessly. It would be difficult for the monks to talk deeply about the case. In the past, the Khampa, Amdo and Mongolian were only allowed to be the chabu in Gomang Tratsang and after they filed the law case, they allowed the böba to be the clerk. On the next law case when I was in the monastery, they let another böba clerk to join the chabu. And they made the rule that the clerk only should be done by böba.[laughter]   

**Q:**  Some people were saying that Gomang Tratsang had 200, 000 khe of grain. Did the tratsang really have that much grain?   

**A:**  In the document it was more then 100,000. In Khardong Shiga at some point the dewashung said we have to make payment arrangement, gyeje [Tib. brgays dpyad]. Before that, when I was the drunyer in Khardong I was the one who could remember the list in the document. Other drunyer couldn't remember well. In Khardong there were over 97,000 khe of grain.   

**Q:**  Were these all the old loans?   

**A:**  These were all the old loans. Even if a household like a beggar who didn't have any thing to eat in home but in the document it was written, they had several thousand khe of grain. [laughter] Among the Gomang Tratsang's granary the Khardong granary was the biggest.   

**Q:**  What kind of changes did they make when they made payment arrangement, Gyeje?   

**A:**  The Gyeje means in the pledge there were many interest of grain accumulated and even if you didn't have anything to eat, interest would keep growing every year and it would become several hundreds or thousands. When you make the Gyeje, you would make a payment arrangement in a year, you don't have to pay the interest. Since they made the Gyeje you were not allowed add interest on that.   

**Q:**  Do you remember when khamtsen was making the tsomja, how much butter and tea would they use?   

**A:**  Our Hamdong Khamtsen had many monks and they didn't have work. Comparing with the Sera Hamdong Khamtsang the Drepung Hamdong Khamtsen's food is worse. Sometimes, on auspicious day there were mangja [Tib. མང་ཇ]. For the tea, 3 gyama of butter and 4 bricks of tea would be used.   

**Q:**  For one tsomja there were 3 tea or 4 tea?   

**A:**  For one tsomja there were 3 tea.   

**Q:**  The 3 gyama of butter and 4 bricks of tea was for three 3 tea or for each?   

**A:**  That was for all three teas.   

**Q:**  That was little, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in one month, there was 3 days for the solstice, Nyilog [Tib. ཉི་ལོག] one day for Lama Chöpa [Tib. བླ་མ་མཆོད་པ] ritual one day for Kalachakra [Tib. དུས་འཁོར]. On these day they have to serve tea for all day and there was a limit on the butter and tea. Even if one person would serve a tea, he would need 3 khe of butter. Usually, the Hamdong is poor. The 40 monks who were the tsondu member they would eat very good food. The system of Sera Hamdong and Drepung Hamdong were different on the discipline.   

**A:**  If the animals gave birth to the calves in this year, Kyema, then you have to pay 3 khe of butter.   

**Q:**  This was the lease, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there taxes for miser like the nyaga for the horn, Ranyag [Tib. རྭ་ཉག]?   

**A:**  It was 2 nyaga for the Ranyag.   

**Q:**  So that was the tax for animals which belonged to the miser, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many nyaga for each animal?   

**A:**  It was 2 nyaga for each animal.   

**Q:**  That was the tax which was not the lease, right?   

**A:**  The Ranyag is for the animals list in the document in the Gomang Tratsang. I am sure there was no tax for the animals which belonged to the private.   

**Q:**  When you finish your turn for the chabu did you have right of thön [Tib. ཐོན]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there any system like if you finish working as chabu your gidru can stay without going to the dharma grove, chöra [Tib. ཆོས་ར]?   

**A:**  There were many monks who don't need to go to the chöra. In Gomang Tratsang, there were monks that they can only hold the assembly when there were alms. When they pay the salary from the main gate of the assembly, gomchor [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར] many monks would to come to receive the salary. Therefore, the monks who can only come to the tsog when there were alms filed the law case that saying this is the rule that we didn't need to join the tsog and it is not right if we have to join the tsog.   

**Q:**  If I finished the term of chabu then I would become the ex-chabu right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So were there any chance that among the gidru, 2-3 of them do not need to work as the shöndre?   

**A:**  No, the gidru have to do the shöndre. The chabu was not the only who have the thön, there were the gegö, nyertsang, abbot, ex-shengo, ex-jiso and ex-phodrang depa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ] who had a special power. So these all have the thön, but their gidru didn't have any priority.   

**Q:**  The gegö have the special power right?   

**A:**  Yes, he didn't have to do the shöndre.   

**Q:**  I heard that lot of people didn't want to be the gegö because if they do the gegö, they have to suffer the loss from having to supply the tonggo. So the abbots have to insist the monks to be the gegö, is that right?   

**A:**  They didn't have to supply for a big tonggo. There were two kinds of gegö; one is the winter gegö and the other is the summer gegö. In winter, the gegö should be done by the geshe because there was a good assembly tea and alms. So for that every one would do the gegö in winter. In summer if Gomang Tratsang got the turn for the shengo, then the first candidate of the shengo would be the gegö. Therefore, the monks would have competition to become the candidate of the gegö. Otherwise, unless the abbot insist the monks to the gegö, they won't do it by themselves.   

**Q:**  In winter, the monks want to do the gegö because there was a good tonggo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the summer gegö? The summer gegö would be at the time when there wasn't many mangja and alms. So nobody want to do the gegö right?   

**A:**  Yes, in winter, there were good alms and tea and there were not many monks that the gegö need to pay the money in replacement of the rice gruel thukpa [Tib. ཐུག་དོད]. Anyhow, in summer, if there was no candidate for the shengo then nobody want to do the gegö.   

**Q:**  The gegö should pay the money for the thukpa and on that did the gegö need to give the alms or not?   

**A:**  It is okay to give the alms in addition to the replacement of the thukpa. In the past, they have to supply the thukpa and later when they have to supply the thukpa, it is expensive. So they paid the money in place of the thukpa.   

**Q:**  At the time of the shengo's candidate, there was competition to become the gegö, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the term for the shengo and the gegö?   

**A:**  The shengo is for one year and gegö is for 6 months.   

**Q:**  How did they go for the candidate for the shengo?   

**A:**  If they would get the shengo's position that would be good. But if they didn't get it, they couldn't do anything. The winter gegö would start working from 15th of 5th lunar month to the 15th of 10th month. And the summer gegö would start working in 15th of 11th month to the 15th of the 4th month.   

**Q:**  The summer gegö won't get the chance to be the candidate of shengo every time, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was because 4 tratsang would take turns for the shengo. In each year, there were only 2 candidates for the shengo. Therefore sometimes, they would get the turn and sometimes, they wouldn't.   

**Q:**  The responsibility of the chabril is for passing the message. Were there any other important responsibilities for the chabril?   

**A:**  Yes, the chabril have other important things to do. Under the Drepung tsogchen shengo, Gomang Tratsang's abbot, Gomang Tratsang's gegö, the chabril have to do many small things like serving the thukpa and tea in the assembly and making the monks to stand in lines. The chabril have many things to do and he is powerful. As I said, when the two chabu would go to villages to lend the loans, in anycase the chabril have to go with them. When they came back, the chabril and the chabu would divide the things that they got from village.   

**Q:**  How did they hand over the storehouse of the nyertsang and the chabu?   

**A:**  When they hand over the nyertsang, there was a high ranking kudrak called Drepung phodrang depa and he had the main seal of the Drepung. So they would invite him when they hand over the nyertsang. The chabu of Gomang Tratsang and the clerk have to go there. All the people would sit in rows and talk and one person would read the book and they would hand over the things right away. And the most powerful is Phodrang Depa.   

**Q:**  You mean to say when they hand over the nyertsang?   

**A:**  All the chabu have to go there. When they hand over the nyertsang all the chabu have to be present and the main decision would be made by the Phodrang Depa.   

**Q:**  What would they do when they hand over the chabu?   

**A:**  They don't have anything to hand over for the chabu. If one chabu finish his turn he would leave and the new chabu would take his place. There were 4 chabu and they won't finish their turn at one time.   

**Q:**  Were there any one who examin on the account of chabu on their expenditure and income?   

**A:**  No, when two chabu would go to lend the loans in one year, Gomang Tratsang would do the general audit for all the grain. They would see how much grain they got in that year and how much was stored in the granary and how much they had transported to the monastery and how much grain the drunyer have in their hands. Two chabu have the power to audit these accounts. But the main power is in the hand of drunyer. The drunyer had the key of the granary. In general, the chabu had more responsibility on the account, but in actual work the drunyer had more responsibility.   

**Q:**  What was the responsibility of the Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་གསར]?   

**A:**  Tashi Khangsar had the responsibility to supply the mangja in the Drepung Tsogchen.   

**Q:**  Was Tashi Khangsar belonged to the government?   

**A:**  Tashi Khangsar was belonged to government. Tashi Khangsar was belonged to Namgyal Tratsang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང] in Potala.   

**Q:**  Tashi Khangsar was the monk of the Namgyal Tratsang or Drepung?   

**A:**  He was the monk of the Namgyal Tratsang. He was called Tashi Khangsar Depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ] When the Tashi Khangsar's term is finished, he would give a huge amount of alms that we would feel surprised. In the past, he would give alms like 50-60-100-200 yuan and make monk's cloak with new material and give load of tea packed in skin to the monks of the Namgyal Tratsang when they finished their term of the Tashi Khangsar. I don't know the term of the Depa.   

**Q:**  Did the Depa have many shiga to get the income?   

**A:**  The Namgyal Tratsang had the best shiga. In Tibet there were 7 well known monasteries which have power. The 7 monasteries; Sera, Drepung, Ganden, Gyüdö, Gyüme, Namgyal Tratsang and the Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Tashi Khangsar has to transport the butter and tea to the tsogchen every month right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  From were did they transport the butter and the tea?   

**A:**  I didn't know from where did they transport the butter and tea. [TN Note: part of the butter was transported from Tö Saga [Tib. སྟོད་ས་དགའ] Dzong to Drepung.   

**A:**  I think he would receive the butter and tea from the government office. Under the local Tibetan Government, Laja (Treasury Office) was the main office supplying the tonggo for the Mönlam and the Tsongjö and the Tseja in Potala would deal with the supplies for the attendants of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  When they were making mangja, one person from the Tashi Khangsar should come to watch when they make the tea, was that right?   

**A:**  Yes, when they were serving the mangja, one person from the Tashi Khangsar should stand near the cauldron.   

**Q:**  The Depa himself wouldn't come when they serve the tea right?   

**A:**  He wouldn't come. But one of his representatives would come and he would supply the butter and those stuffs. The day before the mangja, the people from Tashi Khangsar would gather together and weigh the butter in nyaga [Tib. ཉ་ག] and put the tea leaf in the cauldron. There were many people who stand at the front of the cauldron when they serve the tea in the tsogchen. The following people would stand at the front of the cauldron; a person from Tashikhangsar, one person from Deyang Tratsang called Deyang chatshül deba [Tib. ཇ་ཚུལ་བསྡེ་པ].   

**Q:**  What did chatshül deba do?   

**A:**  He just come and watch when they were making the tea. He won't go to the long distance and do kind of works.   

**Q:**  Did he make the arrangements for the tea server [Tib. ཨོ་ལོ] in the Mönlam?   

**A:**  No, there were two people known as Deyang Deba [Tib. སྡེ་ཡངས་སྡེ་པ] would arrange the tea servers.   

**Q:**  So the two people from Deyang would take care of serving mangja right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were also two representatives of the two abbots and two tea makers, jama. These people should stand at the front of cauldron every morning.   

**Q:**  The two abbots means one from Loseling [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] and one from Gomang right?   

**A:**  The abbots would take turns. The tea served in the assembly was a black tea with little bit grease on the surface.   

**Q:**  You mean to say the tea served in the tsogchen has a little bit of grease, right?   

**A:**  Yes, only the geshe and senior monks would get a little bit grease and newly joint the monks won't get much grease in the tea. Anyhow, there were 6 people who were looking after the tea each morning.   

**Q:**  What kind of relationship did the branch monastery of Gomang [Tib. གཞིས་དགོན] have with the Gomang Tratsang? Some of them were saying that the abbots of the branch monastery would be appointed by the Gomang Tratsang. Some people were saying that the Branch Monastery would pay the tax to the Gomang Tratsang and the Gomang Tratsang wouldn't do any thing to the branch monastery, so what was the reality?   

**A:**  Gomang Tratsang had less branch monasteries comparing with other tratsang. In the past, there were Champaling [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གླིང] Monastery in Lhoka area and there was a abbot in the monastery which belonged to Gomang Tratsang. Later, Labrang Kündeling [Tib. བླ་བྲང་ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] kept the monastery.   

**Q:**  Labrang Kündeling took the Shiga as lease and they also kept the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes, therefore in the past, as you said that there were law case and the case was about the Champaling Monastery. They increased the salary of the monks. Before that, they just had about 2-3 yuan.   

**Q:**  How did they increase the salary? Did they increase the salary since they got the shiga or how did they do it?   

**A:**  They kept the shiga and they increased the lease and they paid a special salary. We couldn't handle Kündeling in the law case. Gomang Tratsang would get good income from the monks who collect the donation and offering, Büdü [Tib. འབུལ་སྡུད]. The tratsang would send Büdü to Amdo [Tib. ཨམ་མདོ] and there were two sources of donations. One was Soktsang büdü [Tib. སོག་ཚང་འབུལ་སྡུད] and another one was Dzorge [Tib. ?] büdü. When the tratsang send the Büdü, they would send one Geshe or Lama with servants and the assistant monk in charge of offering [Tib. མཆོད་གཡོག]. When they come back, it was really helpful to the Gomang tratsang.   

**Q:**  You mean to say on income right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There were many tragyün who came from the monasteries in the long distance, from Amdo and Kham and those were like the branch monasteries, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were kind of belonged to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  So what kind of relationship did they have between the branch monastery and the main monastery?   

**A:**  I don't know about that. There were many well known and holy Amdo Lamas in Gomang Tratsang. But they didn't have any sources [like monastery]. There was a monastery in Kongpo [Tib. ཀོང་པོ] called Tashi Rabten [Tib. བཀྲ་བཤིས་རབ་བརྟན] which was a small monastery. The monastery had little miser. From Drepung Monastery, they would send a monk called Tashi Rabten Depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ] to that monastery. The Deba would stay in Tashi Rabten for few years and when he would come back he would offer little amount of butter as the income he got from the animals. There wasn't any fix income from Amdo which is written in the books.   

**Q:**  There were Branch Monasteries in Amdo and Lithang [Tib. ལི་ཐང] and other places, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were branch monasteries.   

**Q:**  So we know that there wasn't any financial relation between the branch monastery and the Gomang Tratsang. The monks would come to Gomang Tratsang and they would say that our monastery was the branch monastery of the Gomang Tratsang. So what was the reason to become the branch monastery of the Gomang Tratsang?   

**A:**  Probably, this was because the branch monasteries were belonged to Gomang Tratsang from the ancient times [Tib. ཐོབ་ཁུངས]. The well known Amdo Jayang Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱང་བཞད་པ] was belonged to Gomang Tratsang. In Lhasa there were the houses called Eastern Jayang, Jayang Shar [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱང་ཤར] and Midddle Jayang, Jayang kyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱང་སྐྱིལ ] and Western Jayang, Jayang Nub [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱང་ནུབ]. Jamyang Shepa offered all of these houses to the Gomang Tratsang and he also offered an Shiga in Kyarbo which could produce 1,000 khe of grain in a year for the Gomang Tratsang. Beside that, there wasn't anything that the Amdo offered to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  When did they begin the belonging system, Thobkhung?   

**A:**  I think that began in the early times of the Jekumbum [Tib. རྗེ་སྐུ་འབུམ] which was found by the Lama Tsongkhapa [Tib. ཙོང་ཁ་པ]. When the Amdo came up, they would supply the tonggo to the Gomang Tratsang and make investment and offer mangja and alms. The year before last year one Amdo Lama came to Gomang Tratsang and he said there aren't assembly mattresses and he offered the mattresses and he offered 1,000 khe of butter.   

**Q:**  Wow! When did he offer that? Was it recently?   

**A:**  It was just few years ago. That was at the time when Panchen Lama passed away. There was one Amdo Lama called Gungthang Tenpe Drönme [Tib. གུང་ཐང་བསྟན་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ] and he was from Amdo and his monastery is in Amdo and he is holy [Tib. རྩ་བ་ཆེན་པོ]. The main birth place of Gungthang Rinpoche is in Tselgung Thang [Tib. ཚལ་གུང་ཐང] [located at the east side of Lhasa]. He asked the people whether they could build the monastery in Tshelgung Thang or not. The people said they can't build the monastery. He told them that if you can build a monastery, I would help you. But, they were unable to build the monastery. And he asked them, "do you know what was my birth household?" They said they don't know. He was born in Tselgungthang. When Gungthang Rinpoche went to pilgrimage to Ganden he gave 1,000 khe of butter to the people who were living near the Ganden because there were poor. He said. "you people should divide the butter to all the people in the village equally regardless of age." When he came for the pilgrimage to Gomang Tratsang, he saw that tratsang didn't have the assembly mattress. So he told them to make the mattress and Gomang Tratsang made the mattress with felt covered with fine woolen material Shema [Tib. ཤད་མ] which is best quality woolen cloth. This was offered by the Amdo Lama Gungthang Tenpe Drönme.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, how many monks are there in Sera?   

**A:**  There are over 400 monks who were regularly admitted.   

**Q:**  So that was as same as Drepung?   

**A:**  Yes, it is same as Drepung. Most of the monks didn't have residence permit [Tib. ཐེམ་ཐོ]. There were 300-400 monks were yet to be admitted. There were many young monks who had already memorized pecha, but yet to be admitted. Last time, the government's Work Team [Tib. ལས་དོན་རུ་ཁག] came to the monastery and said, "there is no discipline in the monastery and we would make the discipline and we would admit new monks but not too many. We have to report to the superior" They made a great deal on saying that. They said a lot about admitting monks to the monastery but they didn't admit a single monk. After that, the talk about admitting the monks is becoming more and more distant.   

**Q:**  What was the procedures for getting admitted in the chöra in Sera? In Drepung, if I say I want to get admitted in the chöra, it was not so easy. How about over here?   

**A:**  Here, you would get admitted. In Sera it is a good place to learn the tsenyi and when you got admitted, the gegen would tell you that you should learn the tsenyi. But some of the young monks didn't behave well and wandered around. There was the Tantric ritual [Tib. སྔགས་ཆོག] which need to be memorized. The monks who were memorizing the Tantric ritual do not need to learn tsenyi. In Tibetan Buddhism is divided in two part one is Sutra [Tib. མདོ] which is tsenyi and the other is Tantra. So you can chose whatever you want to learn. If you didn't know the tsenyi then you can tell the leader [Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད] that I want to learn the tantric ritual, they would agree with that.   

**Q:**  You have to join the chöra right?   

**A:**  If you got admitted you can join the chöra. Nowadays, even if you didn't get admitted in the chöra and if you want to debate on tsenyi, then you can tell the monastic official that I want to join the chöra and they would let you join it. The monks who join the chöra would get little bit wages according to the number of days they joined the chöra. The wages was not high it was just like almost little less than one yuan or few fens. They would make notes everyday for the monks who came to the chöra. In the evening, when you go to receive the teaching from your gegen, they would make the note. And they would pay the wages according to the note. If you don't have residential card, then you wouldn't get the wages even though you joined the chöra.   

**Q:**  To get the wages, do the monks have to be regularly admitted or do they have to have the residence permit?   

**A:**  If they didn't have the residence permit to show that they were nomarly admitted, then they would become very poor. There is a very strange system in Sera, if you go to the chöra or to receive teaching, they would differentiate the monks who have residence permit or not. Actually, they should treat them equally whether they have residence permit or not because the monks who didn't have residence permit are also studying the tsenyis. During the daytime, there are many monks who go to work and the wages would be paid according to the residence permit.   

**Q:**  The monks who have residence permit would get more wages?   

**A:**  Yes, that is very bad. The residence permit is to get the ration grain. The monks who have residence permit and the monks who didn't have residential when they go to work they would go together they would get off from the work at the same time. But, the monks who didn't have the resident card here would suffer a great loss when they differentiate the monks who have residence permit and who have not. We don't know what is the aim of the leader. We have the resident card, but I don't have a job.   

**Q:**  You are belonged to the Nursing Home [Tib. རྒས་གསོ་ཁང] right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, in Drepung they set up a new school and is there any hope that the system of the school would be as same as Sera?   

**A:**  Yes, there is the hope for that. They decided to set up a school. They were saying that they are going to admit new monks and they would give them resident card and they also said they would give the resident card to those who didn't have one. They said like that, but they didn't do it yet.   

**Q:**  Who promised that? Was it the Democratic Mangement Committee [Tib. ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] or the Work Team?   

**A:**  The Democratic Mangement Committee and Work team discussed together but the Work Team has the main power. Except 300-400 children got admitted, rest of them were all registered. The Work Team already made the registration and they said, "we are going to set up the school and any one can join the school. If you learn some thing it would help you in the future. If you don't want to come to school no one would call you to the school."   

**Q:**  Did they start the school?   

**A:**  Not yet. The Work Team said they are going to make many classes. In Drepung, they would teach pecha in the morning and in the afternoon they would let them learn Tibetan writing and reading. I think in Sera, they are going to make classes like Tibetan, Chinese, English and tsenyi. They said they are going to make strict discipline and if you do well, then you would fulfill your parents and gegen's wishes and in the future you would be happy. Otherwise, if you just say that you want to be monk in the monastery and if you didn't study pecha or learn skill, it won't help you. They started registering ten days ago.   

**Q:**  In Drepung, the Work Team came and registered the young monks and they got admitted in school. The Work Team said it is not allowed to admit more new monks, is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right.   

**Q:**  Did they say the same thing in sera?   

**A:**  At the beginning, they said like that. Now we don't know because they hadn't summerize [Tib. སྡོམ་རྒྱག] the number of students in the school. They will count how many students joined the school and then summerize it. They said the monk who didn't come to school or the monks who didn't get admitted in the monastery were not allowed to stay in the monastery. If they didn't get admitted in monastery then they can join the school. This is right, we really need discipline in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Do the monks need to pay the rent?   

**A:**  No, all the monks didn't need to pay the rant.   

**Q:**  If you get retired, do you need to pay the rant?   

**A:**  Yes, I think you have to pay a little. There were not many retired monks.   

**Q:**  For example, the monk who is not retired and he didn't get admitted in monastery and used to be monk and stay in Sera Monastery, did those monks need to pay the rent?   

**A:**  They were considered as retired. Anyhow, the monks who didn't belong to Sera, but if they just stayed in Sera, they would be considered as retired. I think they need to pay the rent. I am not so sure. If they have to pay the rent, it is not high.   

**Q:**  Did the Work Team ask you about monks opinion, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So what did the monks say?   

**A:**  It is hard for the monks to tell their real opinion. Some of the monks said, "in the past, there were many monks, but not now. So please let the monks join the monastery and give them the resident card. If they don't have the residence permit, it is hard for them to find the living. If they don't find the living, it is hard for them to practice Dharma [Tib. ཆོས]." Some of them were saying, "the monks didn't have good discipline and going to Lhasa and wearing pants and riding bicycle and the discipline is getting worse."   

**Q:**  Did the Democratic Mangement Committee have the power?   

**A:**  No, the Work Team had the power.   

**Q:**  When the monks were wearing laymen clothe and going every where in Lhasa, did the Democratic Mangement Committee have the power to stop them?   

**A:**  They were talking about that everyday. There are also gegö and he was saying that monks were not allowed to ride the bicycle and not allowed to go out to Lhasa. The monks were not allowed to go out late night and not allowed to drink chang, smoke cigarette. But, those things were still happening like that.   

**Q:**  Were there any way to stop them?   

**A:**  That was because they couldn't make the discipline strict enough. It was not as same as in the past.   

**Q:**  If the monks were wearing laymen clothe and going to Lhasa with out getting permission, what if the monk got fired from association Kyidug [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག]?   

**A:**  It is okay to fire the monks. The Democratic Mangement Committee and Work Team would scold the gegen very much saying, "you people have many gidru whether your parents told you to keep them or your relatives told you to keep them, or you kept the gidru because you are getting many things to eat. Anyway, why didn't you control your gidru. When you keep your gidru you have to know how to control the gidru. Some of the gegens didn't even know where the students have been. If you gegen didn't control the gidru then the Work Team and Democratic Mangement Committee would call you." These things happened because in general, they didn't have good discipline. In the past, at the time of 9200 monks in Sera Jei and Sera Mai [Tib. བྱེས་སྨད], all the monks were under the Tsogchen Shengo.   

**Q:**  In the past, they could whip them right?   

**A:**  In the past I swear they would decide the things by beating them up with switches.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, is it not allowed to beat the monks with switches?   

**A:**  No, it is not allowed to. And not allowed to fine them. In the past, they would fine them and they would beat them in the assembly and they make the person lay down and beat them with switches. Anyhow, in the past all the monks were controlled under two people. [the shengo] Nowadays there is no discipline. So they couldn't control the monks. If all the leaders [Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད] have solidarity and steadfast that would be good but sometimes they were like that and sometime were not like that. The members of the Democratic Mangement Committee are monks and the director [Ch. zhu ren] is a lay man. They would discuss all the matters when they met together. The director is the most powerful one.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, who is the most powerful one?   

**A:**  The zhuren is most powerful who is a lay man.   

**Q:**  Is that the lame person?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did Drepung have the same opinion?   

**A:**  In Drepung, they already set up the school and the student were studying tsenyi and writing and reading. The student were not allowed to go to school wearing laymen clothes. You have to wear the monks robe. That is the best. If they didn't allow to happen these things in the monastery, then they won't go every where. All of the monks were not like that. Just a few monks were not good. Most of the monks were good and they were studying pecha really hard. The monks who go to work they would work hard. Nowadays in the park there are 20 monks working in the park. They told the monks who were working in the park, "if you work hard in the park, later even if couldn't pass the exam, we would let you in the monastery." But no one knows what would the Work Team say in the future. You have to memorize 300 pages of pecha and take the test in order to get admitted. Last year and in the year before last year, even when they couldn't memorize 3-4 pages, they returned them back.   

**Q:**  Some of the monks in Drepung have the opinion that the gegen sent their gidru in the chöra and learned pecha. When they became 15-16 years old, they went to join the demonstration to shout slogan in Lhasa. So some of them got arrested and some of them escaped to India. So the gegen kept some new gidru and they would study and later they also joined the demonstration. Therefore, the gegen were disheartened. Is there the same situation here?   

**A:**  Yes, it is something like that.   

**Q:**  All the pechawa went to join the demonstration, right?   

**A:**  Few of them went. Depung had more pechawa.   

**Q:**  I was told that the monks who join the demonstration were best pechawa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were good in pecha and chanting prayers. [Tib. འདོན་ཆ]. At the beginning of the demonstration many monks from Sera jointed it. Last year, and in this year there were not many monks from Sera who joined the demonstration. Even now, there are quite a lot of monks in the jail. The Work Team came and they were mainly talking to the gegen and they told the monks not to joint the disturbances. This is the principle.   

**Q:**  Did most of the gegen tell their gidru that it is good to joint the demonstration?   

**A:**  I don't think the gegen would verbally tell their gidru that it is good to join the demonstration even though some of them might have been thinking that it is good to join the demonstration. Nowadays, the reason why they think it is better not to join the demonstration, is because in the jail they would get seriously beaten and they would get beaten until they are almost dead. Therefore, the monks were thinking that it is not worthy to join the demonstration.   

**Q:**  Did the Work Team say that if the monks didn't join the demonstration, then they would get more new monks admitted and they would spend more expense?   

**A:**  The Work Team was saying something like that. They didn't say that say if you don't join the demonstration, they would have the monks admitted. They just said, "it is useless for the monks to join the demonstration. In the old society, Sera and the dewashung had a war. At that time, monks of Sera didn't stay still, although the dewashung didn't have the power, but they destroyed the Sera Monastery and many people died and many of them were fired from monastery. Don't you people know about that? If you didn't know about the situation between dewashung and Sera, now the Chinese Government is very powerful, so you cannot raise your hands and over throw it." Actually, the meaning is different, but they are talking like that because they have the power. If we get the independent, we are not saying that we want the whole China. We are not saying that we want to overthrow China. If we gain the independence, it would be beneficial for the Buddhism and also for all sentient beings. More over, we could invite the Dalai Lama [back to Tibet].   

