# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.12 : Tape 12  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College. In this brief interview, further details of the dispute between the old and the new disciplinary officer (gegö) in Deyang are discussed.   

---  
### Tape 12  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_12/M_0003_12.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  At that time, many people were expelled from the monastery.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for this dispute?   

**A:**  I heard that they didn't get along well on handing over the old and the new gegö and mainly the old and the new gegö confronted. Some must have backed the old one and some have backed the new one. Many were expelled and among them there was an ex-shengo, Deyang chabu called Ringden la [Tib. རིགས་ལྡན་ལགས] who was a kudrak from Phenpo [Tib. འཕན་པོ], 4 old and new gegö and one of them probably died the next day when they beat him with switches.   

**Q:**  Didn't both of the 2 die?   

**A:**  No, one died and one was among the expelled ones. It was a serious matter. I don't remember in detail.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between laymen's family or housheold and the monk's shag which was also like a household of monks. Are they same or different? Was there a custom where the gegen would feel [Tib. འདུ་ཤེས] like the father and the gidru would feel like children?   

**A:**  If the gegen have gidru and if it is a big shagtsang, then it is just like a household and they would become like a household from generation to generation. But if it is a simple monk [Tib. གྲྭ་པ་གྲྭ་རྐྱང] and if the shag is not that big, when the gegen dies, the gidru wouldn't be thrown out right away and they would inherit the gegen's shag. And if there is a bad gidru who violates the discipline of the monastery, the gegen would throw him out. In general, the big shagtsang are exactly like laymen housheolds. In the past, the shagtsang even had their names. Shag, [monk's apartment] in gegenral were scares in the monastery. Hamdong, e.g., had a limit of 1,800 monks, but there were probably 2,000. There were only 29 common houses, jikhang [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁང]. There was no room in the Hamdong jikhang for them, so some had to rent shag from other khamtsen who had some vacancy and they have to pay the rent. We also have to pay the rent for the shag in one's own khamtsen.   

**Q:**  After Yigtsang settled the law case, some of you still stayed in the monastery, right? I heard that the Dalai Lama gave several thousands of dotse to Gomang Tratsang as a kind of endowment [Tib. ཐེབ་རྩ]. Do you remember that?   

**A:**  Yes some of us were allowed to stay in the monastery. I haven't heard this at all and I have never used it. If it was a regular custom where the Dalai Lama gave something to the great monastic seats, we wouldn't know because we were expelled. The case was settled on the 13th of the 12th lunar month.   

**Q:**  I heard that Kündeling Dzasa was the backer of the pechawa, did anything happen where the pechawa bribed Kündeling Dzasa?   

**A:**  Probably they did.   

**Q:**  There was a talk that they [pechawa] took out dayang from the tratsang storage [Tib. བཀར་འཇུག] and bribed him. Did that happen?   

**A:**  I swear by the Buddha statue in the Jokahng [Tib. ཇོ་རི] that there was a danger of doing that because the money storage was right in the room where the umdze, laja and chabu were working.   

**Q:**  So if these three people worked in unity [Tib. ཁ་སྒྲིལ], they could take out the money, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it is ready to be taken out [Tib. བཏོན་ཆོག་ཆོག]. But, to tell you the truth, I don't know anything about this having occurred. The pechawa's main supporters were Drönyerchemmo Phala Thuten Wönden [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་འོད་ལྡན] and Kündeling Dzasa who were mahjong playmates.   

**Q:**  Was there any reason for Kündeling having relations with Gomang?   

**A:**  Kündeling was belonged to Gomang, so we used to seek advises from the old Kündeling Dzasa Tempa Wangchug [Tib. བསྟན་པ་དབང་ཕྱུག] on important decisions and he would over see [Tib. ལྟ] the Gomang Tratsang. The new dzasa in general would also over see the tratsang though he might not be the first person saying that the salary should be paid in the chöra, but he and Phala became the back door supporters for the pechawa and then he heard about the salary. That's why we said, "we, the simple monks have been carrying only khata and we didn't have back door supporters and we didn't bribe the kudrak even a simgle fen by using the public property [Tib. སྤྱི་རྫས]. Some of our people knew Trunyichemmo Bumthang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] and we offered a khata Ashe, but he didnt accept the khata and returned it back.   

**Q:**  I heard that Kündeling was backing pechawa because he was holding a grudge against the common monks because they wanted a shiga back that had been held by Kündeling and they wanted the shiga to be managed by the tratsang. Is it true ?   

**A:**  I heard that in the very early times, there was a dispute [Tib. ལབ་རྒྱུ] with the common monks in Gomang and at that time, they appointed the additional clerk and Tölung Nyen [Tib. གཉན] Shiga was given then. I don't know whether Kündeling dzasa supported or not because I was not there.   

**Q:**  At the time of the dispute, was there any talk about the reason why Kündeling dzasa supported the pechawa was because he was holding a grudge?   

**A:**  No. Not at all.   

**Q:**  Gomang Tratsang had a shiga in Champaling [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གླིང], right?   

**A:**  Yes. This dispute happened in the very early times.   

**Q:**  I heard that Kündeling didn't return this to Gomang.   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. This was called the Champaling salary and at that time, they [Kündeling] had to increase the salary when Gamang said that the tratsang is going to manage the shiga, Kündeling said it will not be okay if the tratsang managed the shiga and they will increase the salary. In the past, the salary was money salary like 3-4 tranka which was famous in the early times.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན] the Kündeling dzasa?   

**A:**  Probably not. This happened during the time of the abbot Wöser Dorje [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་རྡོ་རྗེ] when I became a monk.   

**Q:**  Before that, Wöser Gyentsen was a tsendrön, right?   

**A:**  Yes and he was demoted from the tsendrön because of a dispute during Taktra Regency. Later, he got the Sitsab Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] as his back door supporter and became tsendrön again and then he became the Kündeling dzasa. The Champaling dispute happened at the time of our sacred [Tib. རྩ་བ་ཆེན་པོ] Mongolian abbot. It was his idea when they started to pay one khe of grain to the Gomang monks. He also made the new rule to have the full day tsog to perform the ritual on the 16 Arhats, Neten Judrug [Tib. གནས་བརྟན་བཅུ་དྲུག] on the 15th of the 4th lunar month where rice gruel thukpa and mangja was served.   

**Q:**  Were you arrested after you became the nyerpa of Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར] Dzong?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  For how many days did you do the nyerpa?   

**A:**  I stayed in Dongkar for 7-8 days. The reason for arresting me was because when the Chushigandru came to Nyethang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང], I went there for the greeting [Tib. འཚམས་ཞུ]. For that, I was sentenced to 20 years imprisonment. At that time, they held a meeting in Dongkar and we also prepared 200-300 khe of grain from Dongkar for their horses fodder and we also gave hay and firewood, 1 load of butter packed in skin and one box of tea. We didnt get a chance to send these. For the greeting we only spend one khata Ashe. On the day, the Chushigandru came to Dongkar, 5-6 of us, the reprersentatives were sent from Dongar Dzong for the greeting carrying a khata Ashe. Since I was the acting dzongpön called dzongtsab [Tib. རྫོང་ཚབ], I had a bigger name.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Dongkar Takog Kusho Awala [Tib. ? sku zhabs a wa lags] with you in Dongkar?   

**A:**  No, he was on the revolution [Chinese] side. He was the gyatso gempo [Tib. བརྒྱ་ཚོ་རྒན་པོ] in charge of sending horse corvees etc.   

**Q:**  He was called Samten La, [Tib. བསམ་གཏན་ལགས], right?   

**A:**  Yes, the eloquent one. When Chushigandru came, there was a nyerpa who was a böba and an eloquent one and there was one known to be Chamdo magji. I met two of them. They said "when the revolt take place, can you block the motor road in Tölung? We said "we can't block the main motor road which is built by the miser of the Shun [Tib. ཤུན] [Dongkar]". Then they asked, "can you destroy the small bridges for crossing the streams back and forth? We said "we can destroy them". [laughter] They said "we heard that in Dongkar, there are many people consorting with the Chinese regiment. Who are those people? I said "I've just arrived Dongkar Dzong, but I heard that there are about 4 such people like Samten, Takog [Tib. ?] and Gang Drepog [Tib. sgang ?]. But I have not seen them doing things. Because of this conversation, I got 20 years imprisonment. [laughter]   

**Q:**  When the revolt was taking place. Did you think you could win against the Chinese with all your army at that time?   

**A:**  At this time, I didnt have any idea whether Chushigandru could win or lose. I didn't have any choice but to go to the Chushigandru because I was afraid. It was said that if the leaders didnt help the Chushigandru they would catch them and punish them. On that night, when we came to Nyethang, Chusigandru had seized the guy called Damsim [Tib. དན་གཟིམ] and shakled him and handcuffed him. Among us, there was one called Gang Drepog who was one of the tsodrag. The miser also told us, "last night, Damsim was seized, it is not going to be good among you people. So you should be careful because the Chinese are also suspecting people amongst you" When we came back, they didn't seize people, though they had planned to seize Gang Drepog.   

