# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College, and Hamdong Khamtsen. In this interview he discusses a serious conflict between the abbot and several monks, including the himself, and how a plan was created to murder the abbot because of his behavior. It was decided that this murder would not be acceptable, so instead, three of the abbot's household members (shagtsang) and College Chant Masters (tratsang umdze) were taken and beaten by the common monks. This act generated severe consequences, as these monks, including himself, were expelled from the monastery.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_03/M_0003_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Although they were talking about killing the abbot and usually I would say some strong things to say and the monks were listning to me, but I had loyalty [Tib. ཤ་ཞེན] to the abbot. I also had faith in him because he was my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚན་ཉིད] Buddhist dialectics. This is taught after the six-year curriculum called düdra.">tsenyi</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a>i gegan before he became the abbot. At that time, I did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> in front of the deity Maha Kala, Gombo [Tib. མགོན་པོ] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Tratsang whether he should be my pechai gegan and the senriy said yes. Then I took pecha study with him for 4 months. If the student have a breach against the teacher [Tib. བཤེས་གཉེན་བསྟེན་ཚུལ་ལོག་ན] it will destroy your this life and the future life [Tib. འདི་ཕྱི་གཉིས་མེད]. It is said, "to the lama who has taught you even one line, if you don't consider him as your lama, you will be reborn as a dog 100 times and then be reborn as a cannibal "[Tib.ཚིག་བཅད་གཅིག་ཙམ་འཛིན་པའི་བླ་མ་ལ། གང་གི་བླ་མར་མི་འཛིན་ན། ཁྱི་ཡི་སྐྱེ་བ་བརྒྱ་བླངས་ནས། རྨེ་ཤ་ཅན་དུ་སྐྱེ་བར་འགྱུར] So If I agree with them it would be terrible. Secondly, he was personally good to me. i thought a lot about this and I felt it would be terrible if I agree to kill theabbot. They say it's like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> abbot, but I thought we do not know the reasons for their action and we have our own situation, so it is not same. So one word from my mouth stopped them from killing abbot. I said, "Killing the abbot is not allowed and you are not allowed to say that you are going to kill the abbot. Gomang's 3,330 monks have the abbot who was approved and appointed by the Dalai Lama from 5 respected <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> candidates submitted by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>. If we kill him, it will be against the Dalai Lama who is our refuge in all of our rebirths [Tib. འདི་ཕྱི་ཚེ་རབས་གཏན་གྱི་སྐྱབས]. There will be no other serious negativities than doing this. So lets not talk about killing abbot. There is another way. We can throw these three persons out of the window of the meeting room if they didn't agree with us. The three were the two abbots' <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, and the tratsang umdze." So they listened to me. So about 6-7 of us went into Rabsel [Gomang tratsang's office) and told them "this is the public place where the daily works for the benefit of 3,300 Gomang monks is done and where you people eat the common property of the monks [they stay all day and eat their meals there--eg. butter]. But you three people now have become the enemy of the masses of the monks. Because of this, you people do not have the right to work here or eat here. So you people must leave and we can measure from all dimension to see who is wrong. So bring your bowl with you and get out." There were 9 people at the meeting. So when we were talking, naturally, they wouldn't go taking their bowls, right at the same time, the monks flocked into the room in commotion and began to pull them out, and not only pulling them, perhaps they would even throw them out of the window. I also think that that we had to say that we will throw them out of the window, but we actuall wouldn't throw them out if it wasn't necessary. Then the other 6 from among the 9 came in front the 3 and were appealing to monks not to do that saying,"please do not do such things, we will talk and the problems will be solved peacefully. We will appeal to yigtsang and by whatever means we will settle the matter". And the monks were going to pull the three down. At that point, "I told the monks to go out for the time being and I will talk to the officials and it will be okay". So after that I told the 6 officials. "you please come out and let us go to the other room and we will sit down there and talk about this". The 3 involved monks remained there. Soon after when we went into the other room and sat down, then we heard the stepping sounds, "di di di" of the other monks who immediately rushed in and caught and tied the 3 of them to the pillars outside.   

**Q:**  Who were these three?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> chandzö, Samlo Dreba and the umdze. They were tied to the pillar like a bunch of incense. So the mass [Tib. མང་ཚོགས] monks suspected that they had weapons and searched them, but they had nothing, except the umdze had a amulet, gau [Tib. གའུ]. Then they beat, kamdung tang [Tib. སྐམ་རྡུང་བཏང] them well. [TN Note: kamdung tang means the beating with hands or sticks without using weapons such as knives that caused bleeding] Then the senior monks told and advised the monks not to do that and let them go free. And finally they let them go. Then that day's activities ended and we told the 3 that they must not leave the room where they were. We told them that they were like under house arrest--not to leave this room and we will report the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> and the settle the matter. But they didn't stay there. Since the situation now was major and had gone out of control, on the next day Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> and the leaders of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Tratsang put the case to the Yigtsang Office. Of course, they didn't have any choice but to report it. That evening, by the grace of the Three Jewels and protective deities I told them not to kill the abbot. After we got upstairs, we also closed the two main doors, the back door and the lower one [Tib. ལྟག་གཤམ་གཉིས] which was done well and prevented the monks from pouring in with weapons like stones, sticks and maybe knives. They were crowed near all the doors. If that had happened, there is no doubt that the three would have been killed, but as for the abbot it was not certain whether he would be killed. From the other side, they would have killed people like us. After this, the Yigtsang investigated about who beat the three and the facts of the case and the other side also reported the Yigtsang who were the persons who beat them and then after a few days all of us were called to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to the gag.   

**Q:**  After that, there was no disturbances, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. There were no more disturbances after that big night. All from both sides were called to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> office. Befor the disturbance, the trunyichemmo told us that we can submit a report, but we didn't have time to submit the report. Finally, the Yigtsang gave the decision that 24 monks should be kicked out (expelled) of the great monastic seats [Tib. གྲྭ་ས]; 16 from the common monks side and 8 from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a> (including the 3 ringleaders). These were the ringleaders [Tib. བྱེད་གཏེ]. By the grace of 14th Dalai Lama we were just expelled but no further punishments were given. If it had been the 13th Dalai lama, he would have whipped us and also confiscated all the property. And we would have been handed back to to the original <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> [Tib. དཔོན་ཁུང]. The next morning the monks were talking about this and also brought tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and money, showing sympathetic feelings toward us. The monks gave Chönphel Tsültrim and me a khata Ashe and 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>. And the rest got a khata and 50 sang thanking us for acting on behalf of them, like the proverb, "breaking one's private needle for the common work" [Tib. སྤྱིའི་དོན་དུ་སྒེར་གྱི་ཁབ་བཅག]. They said you'll be okay, don't be sad. As for our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a>, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> let us keep our shag for three years, although normally once a person is kicked out of monastery, they lose their shag, but the monks appealed on their behalf and tratsang let us stay over 3 years. This implies that we were going to continue the case. The tratsang said that during the 3 years period, if a person dies or lose his celibacy, then the shag will be returned to tratsang. This was also accepted by us and they left the shag as before. Soon after that, the revolt took place and then that is it.   

**Q:**  Later what happened to the case?   

**A:**  They didn't get the time to settle it.   

**Q:**  What happened to the abbot? They didn't tie him up, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Nothing happened to him. The common monks didn't give any punishment to the abbot.   

**Q:**  The umdze who is now in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> was the one who was tied then, right?   

**A:**  Yes. His name is Gendün Nyima [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ] He is working in Jokhang. In the meantime, I still had my shag.   

**Q:**  At this time, you became the steward of Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར] Dzong?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> then?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> was Senangsey [Tib. སྲས་ནང་སྲས] brother of Detru Rimpoche [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ].   

**Q:**  How long did they tie up the three person to the pillar?   

**A:**  They didn't tie them for a long time and then we told them not to do that.   

**Q:**  Did they beat them severely?   

**A:**  No, they just beat them a little bit and there was no bleeding [Tib. རྨ་ཁ་ཁྲག་ཤོར].   

**Q:**  Didn't they say anything like we have the made the mistakes and so on?   

**A:**  No, they didn't and they wouldn't say that. We just left them there and told them they were under house arrest and we went home and the monks of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ལྷོ་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) in Sera Monastery.">Samlo Khamtsen</a> and the three people also went out. On the next day the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> reported the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>. Then we were called to the Yigtsang and we, the common monks were interrogated for 1 and half day and they were preparing to kick us out. And also the 16 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and the other partner were also interrogated by the Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  What did you have to say when you were interrogated? Did you tell them to settle the case correctly?   

**A:**  We told them from the beginning to the end, how the case originated and proceeded. How Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung [Tib. སྣང་སྲིད་ཞབས་འཕར་ལས་ཁུངས] had mediated for 4 months and how we accepted, but the other side didn't agree.   

**Q:**  During this time, did they guard the three persons?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They were staying in their shag.   

**Q:**  Were these three persons also expelled?   

**A:**  Yes, they were the main ones who were expelled.   

**Q:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> when they were called to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>, did they tell them other things than telling them they are going to be expelled?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> told them that 24 people will be expelled and as for the other ones, they were told to prostrate in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཇ] The daily meeting of Tibetan government monk officials (tsedrung) at which tea was provided. However, unlike the collective meetings of monks in monasteries, there was no collective chanting of prayers at the Drungja. The event started at around 9 a.m. and lasted for about an hour. When the Tse ga (the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat) was in the Potala, it was held there, and when it was in the Norbulinga Summer Palace, it was held there. All monk officials in Lhasa were expected to attend.">drungja</a> for 3 days and some for 5 days and some for 7 days. Like this the case was settled. And they were also told that they are not allowed ro join the other great monastic seats.   

**Q:**  At that time, what was the main crime the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> accused both sides as the reason for punishing them?   

**A:**  Our main crime was that we filed the law case and we beat people. As for the accusation for the other partner, the main crime of the three person was that they mixed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a> into the law case although the pechawa not involved [Tib. ཐེ་ཇུས་མེད་པ] in the case and their main crime was that they made the law case bigger.   

**Q:**  Did the revolt take place after few months or a year?   

**A:**  It took place after several months. We were expelled on the 13th of the 12th lunar month. It was just after 2 months.   

**Q:**  In what month did you tie them to the pillar and beat them?   

**A:**  This must be in the beginning of the 12th month lunar on the 1st or the 2nd.   

**Q:**  Did this happen in the morning, afternoon or evening?   

**A:**  They were beaten in the late evening.   

**Q:**  When you 6-7 people came there, was it just before the sunset?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where did you tie them?   

**A:**  We tied them to the pillars in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མཆོར] The area outside of the monastic assembly hall that is supported by tall pillars.">gomchor</a> where there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>'s Rabsel [Tib. རབ་གསལ] hall where they would hold the meetings.   

