# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.11 : Tape 11  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. 'od zer chos skyong]  


**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. 'od zer chos skyong]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  

---  
## Abstract  

Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College. In this interview he discusses the elimination of the old loan system, and details of Gomang's estates, including the holdings of grain and the salary from the Senior Manager (jiso). This interview includes detailed descriptions of how the conflict between the common monks (lagyüba) and scholar monks (pechawa) affected him personally and details of conflicts between monks, including how the Dalai Lama was incorporated into this conflict during his visit.
  
---
### Tape 11  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_11/M_0003_11.mp3" type="audio/mpeg">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When did they make the rule of payment arrangements, gyeje [Tib. rgyas bcad] for eliminating the old loans in your own experience when you were the grain nyerpa, drunyer [Tib. 'bru gnyer]? What was the reason for making it?   

**A:**  I can you tell you the reason, but I don't know the year.   

**Q:**  Was it the time when you were the drunyer?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was it after the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  It might be just before the Chinese arrived. It was in the Water Horse Year [Tib. chu rta]. What year was that?   

**Q:**  It is 1942 when the Talungdra's just started the regency.   

**A:**  It was little after Talungdra became the regent. The miser then had very large loans from long ago where interest was added upon the interests and some households had totalling several thousand khe, some had 500-600. From the early times, there was the gyeje. As for the gyeje done at my time, dewashung treated the miser with compassion and probably it was in the Water Horse Year, the Kashag issued the edict with the black Kashag seal [Tib. bka' dam] which was called the Water Horse Endorcement [Tib. chu rta 'go mchan]. And it was told that all the government, gerpa and chöshi [Tib. sger gzhung chos gsum] must do the gyeje. When they did the gyeje, they had to divide the miser debtors into five categories of which I only remember three: better, middle and smaller [Tib. rab 'bring chung] on the basis of their living condition. At first, they gave or excempted [Tib. ster ba] a quite a good amount from the total amount of the principal. Then they did the gyeje for the remaining loan by dividing them into three categories as mentioned above.   

**Q:**  Was it immediately put into action?   

**A:**  Yes. As soon as the Kashag pronounced it, they put it into action and it took about 1-2 years for doing that. Gyeje was an old policy, but giving or exempting [Tib. gsol ras chag yang] a part of the loan was new.   

**Q:**  If it was a middle standard household with a debt of about 100 khe of grain how much exemption would they get?   

**A:**  They would probably exempt one third of the principal and did the gyeje for the two third. They gave the exemption according to 4 catagories; rich, middle, poor and the poorest [Tib. rab 'bring tha tha lhung]. As for the gyeje, there were almost many levels like 10-20 khe, 3-4 khe and even 2 khe for some poorest household and they pay it yearly until the loan was eliminated and during that period, there is no interest charged.   

**Q:**  How many shiga does the Gomang Tratsang have?   

**A:**  Not many. The largest is (1) Kyarbo [Tib. skyar po] Shiga. Under it there were 8 small branch units. This was originally belonged to Amdo Jayang Sheba [Tib. 'jam dbyangs bzhad pa]. He gave it to Gomang. In Lhasa there were three houses called Eastern Jayang, Jayang Shar [Tib. shar], the Western Jayang, Jayang Nub [Tib. nub] and the Middle Jayang, Jayang Kyil [Tib. dkyil] were all belongded to Jayang Sheba and was offered to Gomang Tratsang.   

**Q:**  How many khe of land did these shiga have?   

**A:**  I don't know how many khe of land it had. We leased Kyarpo Shiga to Talungdra Regent and he had to pay about 1,000 khe of grain as the bawma. This must have included the branch shiga also. Kyarpo Shiga is the big shiga with good lands.   

**Q:**  What else did Gomang have?   

**A:**  There was one called Nyen [Tib. gnyan] shiga. This was given to Gomang during the last Reting Regent's time. It's not very big. It is mainly a source of military salary [Tib. dmag phogs]. It's yield goes in part for the military salary and a small part for Gomang.   

**Q:**  Is this Nyen located in the south, Lhoka?   

**A:**  No, this is in Tölung [Tib. stod lung]. These two shiga were under chabu. Then there were shiga under the nyertsang of Gomang; These include (1) Gebo [Tib. gad po] Shiga and (2) Shangdön [Tib. ?] Shiga, (3) Tölung Nambar [Tib. stod nam pa ba ?] Shiga. This is all I can remember. In general Gomang had few chöshi. In Drepung, the jiso had the most chöshi. But Gomang had 13 granaries [Tib. 'bru khang] for storing grain for lending out loans. In Phenpo [Tib. 'phan po], we had Khardong [Tib. mkhar gdong] Shiga where I stayed. We got this sometime later, not from the early times. It had 2 granaries. In the early times, it used to belong to Kündeling [Tib. kun bde gling].   

**Q:**  How many khe of land did Khardong Shiga have?   

**A:**  I don't know because I was not the shidü. The shiga was good one which was taken as lease by Kabshöpa [Tib. ka shod pa] for many years, but then we took this back and managed it by ourselves.   

**Q:**  When the tragyün come, do they have to join a mitsen.   

**A:**  Yes. There was no tragyün without mitsen. They must follow their own mitsen [Tib. thob khungs]. The people from the north, Hor belong to Hor Mistsen. The Inner Mongols belong to Juchö. The Khampas were belonged to Washu Misten which included three mitsen and was said to be the mitsen of the Amdo Jayang Sheba. The eight gyashog of Dam [Tib. 'dam brgya shog brgyad] was belonged to Tshoga Mitsen. They just have to enter mitsen, don't have to give money and khata to the khamtsen. If there were 2 or 20 comes, they are all taken in the mitsen at once and they didn't have to tell the khamtsen that this number of tragün came. If it is böba, you have to tell the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  You said that just before the revolt Gomang had over 90, 000 khe of grain, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The total amount of grain was over 97,000 khe includes gyeje and the lease grain and the grain in the granaries. All the loans included in this.   

**Q:**  At that time. how many khe of grain did you have in hand?   

**A:**  I can't tell you clearly how much we had in hand. Probably, the drunyer had about 6,000-7,000 khe to be used for lending loans. And there was also some grain storgaes [Tib. bkar 'jug] in the tratsang's granaries and they store the grain there.   

**Q:**  What kind of the salaries do the tratsang pay?   

**A:**  Do you mean money salary?   

**Q:**  I mean grain salary.   

**A:**  Tratsang pays a little grain salary. In the early times, Gomang Tratsang had only one bo [Tib. 'bo] of the grain in a year, but later toward the end they got 3 bo of grain in a year. The grain comes from the yields of the shiga and from the interest of the loans which was added on the salary. This didn't have the fixed amount.   

**Q:**  Did you get fried cookies, khabse [Tib. kha zas] and those stuffs?   

**A:**  There is also a distribution of khabse five times in a year. The khabse was about 3 feet long given to each monk by Gomang nyertsang. A child monk can't carry this in his cloak and their parents have to go to get it. In New Year, they give 5 khabse for each monk. There is no extra shares for khabse and everyone gets only 5, no more.   

**Q:**  If you don't go in person, you won't get the khabse, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there a butter salary?   

**A:**  There is no butter salary in the tratsang. Butter salary is paid by Hamdong Khamtsen. Gomang gives the 3 khe of grain salary and the khabse which was the best. Then sometimes on some holy or auspicious days, düsang [Tib. dus bzang] there is all day tshog where 11 bowls of tea and thukpa was served in one day. Usually, we have 4 bowls of teas and thukpa.   

**Q:**  When do they serve this?   

**A:**  There were 12 düsang in Gomang in a year and there were 3-4 düsang where they do not serve 12 teas and thukpa. The following düsang have 12 teas and the thukpa; the great spring retreat, jichö chenmo [Tib. dpyid chos chen mo], the great summer retreat, yarchö chenmo [Tib. dbyar chos chen mo], the great autumn retreat, tönchö chenmo [Tib. ston chos chen mo], the great winter retreat günchö chenmo [Tib. dgun chos chen mo]. In one year, altogether we had 8 dharma grove, chöra [Tib. chos ra] gatherings. Then there is one düsang commemorating the birth, death and the Paranirvana of the Buddha, on 15th of 4th lunar month, Sagadawa [Tib. sa ga zla ba]. And on 25th of 10th lunar month, Ganden Ngamjö. On these 6 times there are 11 bowls of teas and thukpa. On the other düsang, there are seven, eight or nine times tea and thukpa a day. Normally at tshog there are only 4 teas and the thukpa.   

**Q:**  What about money salary?   

**A:**  There were a lot of these. Gomang had lots of endowments left by the sponsors for the money salary. Some were given by chabu and some by nyertsang. Some by the 4 joint cashiers, ngünyer shidre [Tib. dngul gnyer bzhi sbrel] and two joint ngünyer[Tib. nyis 'brel] and some by the chibgyur [Tib. chibs sgyur] ngünyer who is in charge of accomodations and decorations in the assembly hall when the Dalai Lama visits Drepung. These 4 were the ones who pay the money salary and each had to pay on several different occassions, not just one time.   

**Q:**  How much do the monks get in a year?   

**A:**  I can't estimate how much we got. We get quite a good amount because there were many people leaving the endowments.   

**Q:**  What did you get from the khamtsen? Do you get grain salary from the khamtsen?   

**A:**  The khamtsen was poor. In all my time I only got 1 khe of grain salary from Hamdong and that was when they build a new assembly hall and for celebrating when it was finished, they gave each monk one khe of grain. The best we get from Hamdong was the butter salary at the time of the New Year. Each monk got about 5-6 nyaga. One khe is equal to 20 nyaga. Those in the tsondu got 3 khe and 5 ngyaga. This was their special privilege.   

**Q:**  Do you get khabse from the khamtsen?   

**A:**  No kabse. But when the khamtsen had tsog they serve a little bit tea. And there were a few money salary from the khamtsen. The khamtsen also had cashiers. The khamtsen had little income and little expenses for the tonggo. In Hamdong, for example, they had only 5 all day tsog in the whole year. There were a lot of one tshog sessions during the year, however. For example, on the day comemmorating the Buddha coming back to the earth, Lhabab düchen, [Tib. lha bab dus chen ] and the day commemmorating the Buddha gave the teaching on the Four Noble Truths, Trugba Tsheshi [Tib. drug pa tshes bzhi] and Ganden Ngamjö. Those were all day sessions. And also on 15th day of the 3rd lunar month it is the day of Kalachakra, dükhor [Tib. dus 'khor] and there was one day for the ritual Lama Chöpa [Tib. bla ma mchod pa] and in 11the month, there is the winter solicit, nyilog [Tib. nyi log]. On these 5 days we got 11 teas and the thukpa each day.   

**Q:**  What salary did you get from the jiso?   

**A:**  Long ago we got only 2 bo of grain a year. Later we got 3 bo a year. This was during the jiso nicknamed, "the tiger with torn up mouth" Tagkharel [Tib. stag kha ral] time when he worked hard and the collected lot of things from the miser. Before that, it was two bo and the bo was not big which had only 13 dre and the 4 phül [Tib. 'phul].   

**Q:**  Was this bo which had 10 dre called junbo [Tib. bcu 'bo]?   

**A:**  It was bigger than the junbo. Three of that kind of bo is equal to two regular bo.   

**Q:**  Does the Jiso give khabse?   

**A:**  Yes. At Ganden Ngamjö, the jiso gives a lot of khabse and lot of money also. Before dawn, they give 3 khabse called mugthung [Tib. smug thung] which is 1.5 foot. Then they give one flour pancake [Tib. khur ba] at noon and about 5 nyaga of butter. Then they give the famous Drepung brown sugar mixed with butter, buram garma [Tib. bu ram sgar ma]. When they make it they put brown sugar, butter and water in the pot, boil it and stir it for a long time and then they pour it on the Arka floor and when it coagulates, each monk is given a thin slab of buram garma about 1.5' by 1.5 feet--width is about 1/4th inch. And they give this on the Ganden Ngamjö on the 25th of the 10th lunar month and they also give more money. Then at the prayer session of the Matriya Buddha called Chamön [Tib. byams smon], the jiso gives each monk the 8 slabs of butter and salt and soda. The Jiso gets alot of butter income from the miser. It was said that Drepung Jiso had 24 shiga.   

**Q:**  What about the Rigdra [Tib. rigs grwa]?   

**A:**  This tonggo is given by the 6 abbots. They give a little money and there were 3 levels. The Rigdra Chekhag, [Tib. che khag] the big one, Rigdra Dringkhag [Tib. 'bring khag], the middle one and the Rigdra Chungkhag, the small one and they serve tea to the monks tea for 15-20 days. For big one they serve tea for about 20 days and for the middle one they serve 15 days and for the small one they serve tea for about ten some days. They give money, salt and soda measuring in dre and in the past, they also give roasted barley, but later they gave tsamba to each monk measuring in the daso [Tib. zla zo]. The Rigdra itself had lots of miser who pay the taxes. There were both Hor and böba. Their most famous shiga was Phembo Rama.   

**Q:**  Do they get something else like grain salary and khabse etc?   

**A:**  No. They give khabse only on Ganden Ngamjö.   

**Q:**  Had there been any cases of the government demoting the shengo and the abbot?   

**A:**  Yes. During my time these occurred.   

**Q:**  Please tell us in detail.   

**A:**  Yes I will.   

**Q:**  Tell us again about the lagyüba and pechawa dispute. I am not clear about how they started to make the appeal and how the mediation was done. There was the talk about reporting the Yigtsang and the Office of Performing Additional Rituals, Nangsi Shaphar Legung [Tib. snang srid zhabs 'phar las khungs] and then going to Namseling 's house. It seems to me that there was disorder in the sequence of the case.   

**A:**  In the beginning, after the dispute started, the first mediation was done by Drepung Laji.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were the Hamdong jama and when you first heard about the plan to change the place for paying the salary, did you tell them that it is not good to report the laji? What did you do as the first step.   

**A:**  When the dispute started internally, it was the time when the Dalai Lama was about to come to Drepung to take his Geshe Exam, tsentag [Tib. mtshan rtags]. So the Drepung Laji was suspicious that they [lagyüba] might make the appeal to the Dalai Lama and there would be trouble. So one evening, the jaji called 6-7 representatives and I was among them and they told us, "you have that dispute [Tib. lab rgyu], so you should not do that [appeal] when the Dalai Lama comes and you have to put seal on an agreeement [Tib. gan rgya] saying that you will not cause any controversy [Tib. lab rgyu gleng rgyu] during the Dalai Lama's visit and you have to put your thumbprint on the agreeement". In the beginning, there were many people and some said, "we won't know what will happen when the Dalai Lama comes" I said,"we can't put the seal for guaranteeing that there will not be any controversy. I was sent here as the representative and I wasn't authorized to put the seal. Putting seal has a heavy responsibility. But we will guarantee that there will not be any controversy while the Dalai Lama stay in Drepung." The laji kept insisting on saying that we must put the seal.   

**Q:**  Did the laji say that or the abbot?   

**A:**  The so called laji is consisted of abbots.   

**Q:**  Were there both the abbot and the ex-abbots and the shengo?   

**A:**  There were the abbots and the ex-abbots, the shengo and also tsogchen umdze, phodrang deba [Tib. pho brabg sde pa]. These were the higher ones and there were many smaller ones. Finally, we said that we will guarantee that there will be not be any controversy during the Dalai Lama's visit. And this was settled.   

**Q:**  This was the first discussion, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At this time, the laji was not talking about the dispute, right?   

**A:**  Yes but they knew that there is the dispute. After the Dalai Lama's tsentag was over [answer not finished]   

**A:**    

**Q:**  What month was that?   

**A:**  I'm not sure when it was, probably in 8th or 9th lunar month of 1958.   

**Q:**  What happened after the Dalai Lama's tsentag was over?   

**A:**  The second step was the mediation done by Tsipön Namseling.   

**Q:**  Before that, did you lagyüpa go to the abbot and tell him your opinion?   

**A:**  No, we didn't go to the abbot.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Later when the time came [Tib. skabs mtshams] they [laji] did that to the abbot. We, the partner in the dispute didn't go, but the laji went there [?]. Before that, we, 16 khamtsen held a meeting and we reported the abbot, "it is not good to leave the dispute like this because the Dalai Lama is going to come. If you leave it like this, there will be trouble when the Dalai Lama comes. So you should settle the dispute". We went through the back door and sent Düwa Khembo Shasur Thubten Tsering [Tib. 'dul ba mkhan po bshad zur thub bstan tshe ring] to the abbot of Gomang to do his good office [Tib. 'go 'dren] for the lagyüba. But our abbot only knows religion and does not know politics and the dispute was also caused by the members of his shag and not by the abbot himself. The abbot only replied "I don't know." Anyway, it was not settled.  Since the Dalai Lama was about to come and the dispute was not settled, so the laji called us. The Dalai Lama came and nothing happened during the ceremony. After that, the dispute got heated [Tib. shugs chen po langs].   

**Q:**  How did the dispute get heated?   

**A:**  The 30th of the 10th month was the day commemorating the death of 13th Dalai Lama. On that day there was a lot of salary for the monks. So we went to tell the salary payers "you should pay the salary in front of the main gate, gomchor [Tib. sgo mchor] as you do before. If you pay it in the chöra, we won't come to get it there".   

**Q:**  To whom did you tell this?   

**A:**  We told this to the chabu, 2 joint cashier, ngünyer nyidrel [Tib. dngul gnyer nyis sbrel], 4 joint cashier, ngünyer shidrel [Tib. bzhi sbrel and nyertsang. All of them said, "yes yes" [Tib. le se le se] but no more. On that day, they had to pay the salary as before in the gomchor. That day, we told the common monks, tramang [Tib. grwa dmangs], "we should go to the gomchor to get the salary. Normally, the monks have to go to the dharma grove, chöra [Tib. chos ra] and the tsog, but on that day, if they are going to pay the money in chöra, don't accept it and come back here and we should stay under the gomchor".   

**Q:**  Was Namseling's mediation done before that or after that?   

**A:**  This was after that.   

**Q:**  At that time, they wanted to start the new rule, but they couldn't start it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, we wanted the salary paid in the gomchor continuously, but all were saying that they couldn't do that. We also said that whenever they didn't pay the salary in the gomchor, we will raise our hands [beat them]. In between that, Namseling did the mediation and we didn't agree with Namseling. Then we were called by Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung.   

**Q:**  Did you hear the first time about the Dalai Lama's divination in Namseling's house? .   

**A:**  Yes. At Namseling's house. We didn't know about asking and doing of divination by the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Was there a written divination with red round seal on it?   

**A:**  Yes. It was the seal of the Dalai Lama. But they were cunning or tricky [Tib. mdo bde po]. If they really want to ask for the divination having faith in him, they should have ask for the dinination before the dispute arises. But the law case took place in the 11th month of last year and they asked for the dinination in 5th month of this year. Therefore, we were saying that it is not that we didn't respect the Dalai Lama. Namseling read the letter and then held it out asking if we have any body who can read it. We won't say that we want to read it whiile we were standing there, so he banged it on the table with this left hand.   

**Q:**  Was it regarded as bad if someone put the letter on the table with his left hand?   

**A:**  He did this to show his greatness or superior [Tib. che ba]. If it was a real divination done by the Dalai Lama, after he asked us whether we want to read it, he should have left it on the table gently, but he banged [Tib. brdabs] it on the table while saying, "this is the divination done by the Precious Jewel, His Holiness the Dalai Lama [Tib. rgyal ba yid bzhin nor bu]. Will you abide [Tib. brtsi bkur] by the order of Dalai Lama or not." I said, "you don't need to talk about whether we will repect the Dalai Lama. Whoever is reborn in the 13 areas each with the population of ten thousand [Tib. khri skor] all families will respect him. It is not that we didn't respect the Dalai Lama, but we said we can not abide by this divination because this divination is not asked according to the custom of we Buddhists, this was asked according to the custom of Brahmins [Tib. mu stegs pa]. The dispute started last year in the 11th month and the divination is done in the 5th month of this year. Did you deceive the Dalai Lama and ask for the divination? Or did you ask the Dalai Lama having faith in him? " No matter, how did you ask for the divination, we will not accept it". [repeats the full content of the divination. See earlier translation]. After that, the Namseling changed his facial appearance. When I said that there were the representatives of 16 khamtsen and the representatives of the enchöndze and the representatives of the Geshe who had passed their exams and the representatives of all the lagyüba and then the representatives of the two partners in the law case. Among the representatives nobody answered Namseling.  . I was seatted at the back side and I spoke what I mentioned above. I also said, "if some one looked at this case all of sudden, it looks like a dispute where the beggars didn't get along well on some food. But our case it is not like this. Normally, when Drepung Tsogchen shengo, the abbot, the monastic officials gave speeches, they always say that we should keep on the old good custom and do not let it decline [Tib. snga srol bzang po ma nyams pa] and not to have the bad modern custom flourish [Tib. phyi srol ngan pa ma dar ba]. But later, our discipline have declined and so many people resigned. Therefore, we should follow these speeches." This was the motivation we had to start the dispute.   

**Q:**  How did you lagyüba select the representatives?   

**A:**  At the very first there were some lagyüba who got together and said we have to sue the law case. They might have gone to the Yigtsang. One day, a person asked me to accompany some of the better and older monks who are going to the Yitsang regarding the law case, but I didn't go.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  This is probably back before the 11th month when the dispute started. This was in the beginning.   

**Q:**  Did you know what Yigtsang told them? Did they tell you about this?   

**A:**  They didn't say anything, they never told me what the Yigtsang said, but they had a hard time taking over the dispute because they have to go through the secretary, Yigtsang Nyerpa [Tib. yig tshang gnyer pa] and if he says "don't bring such cases at this time, just leave it for the time being" and then that's all. But I don't know what they said. Then one day in the chöra the common monks held a meeting and when they talked alot of about the law case, I spoke a great deal.   

**Q:**  Was this meeting held after Namseling's mediation?   

**A:**  This was before that and it was even before the laji did the mediation. The monks from the other side said that I and an another older monk should be arrested and put in prison by Yigtsang while the Dalai Lama comes for his tsentag. But they didn't arrest me because the khamtsen and those people told them "this wasn't a work done by one or two people and this was an issue of many people", so they didn't arrest me. Since then I became one of the ringleaders and became a main figure in that law case. My partner in this was an Amdo who was not eloquent. He was kind of stupid but very brave. He was a strange person. I stopped him many times on some important points of the law case. The Amdo at this time said, "let us chatch the ringleaders and give their leaders a good beating and then throw them out of the monk's order", but I stopped him. I said we don't have the authority to throw them out, so lets leave it for now. But we can tell them that you are not allowed to stay in the Gomang Trastang Rabsel room doing the common work and eating the common food and we are going to kick you out of the Rabse where they were meeting because this was a place where the common works of the tratsang is done. And then they followed what I said and we told them accordingly. In the beginning, the monks decided to kill the abbot, but I could stop them from doing this though I also committed crime and was involved in the law case.   

**Q:**  Was this before or after the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung's mediation?   

**A:**  The talk of killing the abbot was after the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung. Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung called us after Namseling's mediation.   

**Q:**  Was it after several days or several weeks?   

**A:**  It was after several weeks.   

**Q:**  Did you report the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung or did they call you?   

**A:**  They called us and said we heard that there is the law case. You are not allowed to have the law case at the time of the Dalai Lama's ceremony. We, the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung is responsible for the life safety of the Dalai Lama and then they mediated and then we agreed to it, but other side didn't agree. In the beginning, Drepung laji mediated which all of us disagreed.   

**Q:**  When was the laji's mediation done ?   

**A:**  It was just after the Dalai Lama's tsentag visit.   

**Q:**  How did the laji mediated?   

**A:**  We had 8 chöra in a year. So the laji said that we should pay the salary half in the gomchor and half in the chöra. Acually, laji's mediation was done fairly. But we said that it is not okay to pay the salary half and half. If you pay all the salary in the gomchor. Then it's okay. Otherwise, we won't agree. Later, Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung also mediated in the same way.   

**Q:**  After this Namseling mediated and you didn't agree, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung got involved, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung did the mediation, we told them that we didn't accept the laji's mediation which said that the salary should be paid half and half in the gomchor and chöra. But this time, we will accept the salary to be paid half and half because Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung is responsible for the life safety of the Dalai Lama. Then they told us to come in a few days to pick up the mediation document, dumtra [Tib. 'dum khra], we will send you a mesage. I went on the day they told us to come carrying a khata Ashe. I took off my monk's shawel and put the khata on it and recieved the mediation document on the khata. The pechawa didn't take off their showels and they had no khata. We accepted this, but the pechawa didn't accept this.   

**Q:**  Did they write in the mediation document about settling the matter?   

**A:**  Yes. They wrote about the salary to be paid half and half in the gomchor and in the chöra.   

**Q:**  Did you talk verbally to each other when you were called to the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung ?   

**A:**  One day, we were called to the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung and they asked us about the matter and we told them about the matter. On that day, there was no answer from Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung and told us that they will call us later on. Then after they made the mediation document, they called us.   

**Q:**  You didn't accept the laji's mediation, but you accepted the mediation done by the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung. So how did you change your mind in the time between?   

**A:**  It was because Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung was a new office responsible for the life safety of the Dalai Lama. So if we didn't agree, then it would be a disregard to the Dalai Lama's life safety and this will not be okay. So we accepted, but the pechawa didn't accept.   

**Q:**  Did you internally discuss about accepting or not accepting it?   

**A:**  Yes we did. The mediation document was a long rolled up document of dewashung and I showed this to the common monks in the monastery involved in the law case and to each of the 16 khamtsen. Some said it is okay, some said it is not okay. There were different talks because some were knowledgeable and some were not. But we, the representatives said it will not be okay if we didn't accept this mediation from the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung and we, the monks involved in the law case agreed to it.  Then after the pechawa refused this, then we were really very angry. So after this, our mind became like upside down [Tib. mgo mjug log] and we thought if they are not careful they will get it [Tib. ltas mo ltos] and then we had a very strong solidarity. So about 300 lagyüpa who were involved the case met in chöra.   

**Q:**  What month was that?   

**A:**  This probably took place after the Ganden Ngamjö (25th of 10th month) in 11th month. The salary was paid in the gomchor on the 10th month 30th and it was after that.   

**Q:**  Did they pay the salary in the gomchor after Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung's mediation or before that?   

**A:**  It was before Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung. On that day about 300 monks gathered and I said, "Up to now we have been always going to the Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung and every where carrying khata in our hands [i.e. we tried to settle this peacefully]. Before that, we have said that it is not allowed to have fighting between pechawa and lagyüba and you are not allowed to behave show offish and provoke fight in the alleys. You should sue the law case as it is and even the case is not settled, you should go to the tsog. So now we must take united action regardless of consequences. We must make an agreement here that all of us will act in unison by handing over the seal to all people [Tib. thel rtse lag skor] and then put the seal on the agreeement. If you are not in agreement and have hesitation, then you can just leave it. The reason for handing over the seal around is that now our opponents in the dispute are sitting in the Gomang Tratsang Rapsel [Tib. rab gsal] [a room with large windows] room now. Rapsel is the room where the common works of the Gomang Tratsang is done and eat the food served by the tratsang. But these people have already become the enemies of the majority of the monks, so they are not allowed to sit there drink and eat. We have to expel them from there.   

**Q:**  Before you said that did you discuss about killing the abbot on that meeting?   

**A:**  We were about to discuss about this. All of us agreed and said, we will hand over the seal all around to all of us and seal it and do what needs to be done. Then we called another meeting to discuss on the matter how we should expel them from the Rabsel. It was at this time that the discussion came out that fo course we should expel them and we should kill the abbot. In reality, it was the abbot's fault and all of this happened because he was the head, but this abbot was a religious abbot, he was not skilled in secular [Tib. 'jig rten] affairs. So I said,"its not all right to kill the abbot because he was chosen from among 5 geshe candidates and approved by the Dalai Lama, so we shouldn't kill him. So if we kill him and disturb the mind [Tib. thugs dkrug] of the Dalai Lama, what would be the result because the Dalai Lama is the lord [Tib. dpon po] and also the lama of the 13 areas of Tibet each populated with ten thousand families. Actually, the real reason for this was that he had been my pechai gegen for 4 months, I thought of this, but I couldn't tell the others this was the reason so I used the other reason. So now, leave aside the talk about the killing the abbot. Rather than this, tomorrow lets go to Rabsel.   

**Q:**  When was that when the Enchöndze tshondu was held and you went there?   

**A:**  This was quite early before the laji called us and before the Dalai Lama's tshentag. The enchöndze being close to us [Tib. nang tshags] and the monks were from the same tratsang, they called us at the first time and attempted to mediate and then the second was the laji's mediation, the 3rd was Namseling and 4th was Nangsi Shabphar Lekhung.   

**Q:**  I heard Enchöndze and Takharel said there were too few geshe so they offerred to make more pechawa and from among three gidru, they were going to make two become pechawa.   

**A:**  No, Tagkharel didn't say that. At that time , they had the karam gyorpön [Tib. bka' rams skyor dpon] and he said that. They didn't tell us, but this was what the pechawa had written in their petition. They were saying because there is not many pechawa, therefore they are going to pay the salary in the chöra. And they wrote in their petition that they are going to make two pechawa from among three gidru. But there was no talk about this in our dispute. If they didn't use this reason, they didn't have reason to say that they want the salary paid in the chöra. The reason we want the salary to be paid in the gomchor is because there were many ex monastic officials with special privileges like the ex-gegö and ex-abbot who have to ask the permission to the abbot and the gegö for not attending the tsog and chöra. If they pay the salary in the chöra, they would lose their special privilege. This was the cause of the law case. The pechawa on the other hand, talked about the need for more people studying pechawa.   

**Q:**  The next day you went to the Rabsel?   

**A:**  There were many people milling about outside at first, but only 6-7 of us went into the Rabsel. We told them, "this Gomang Tratsang's Rabsel is the place for doing the common work and eating the common stuffs [Tib. spyi rdzas] of Gomang Tratsang." There were three of them; umdze, laja and the Samlo Drepa. Then I said, "you 3 are the enemies of the common monks of the Gomang Tratsang and became our opponent. Because of this you have no right to put down your bowls and talk. So take your bowls and come out!" [laughter] As soon as I said this, then the common monks [Tib. grwa pa dmangs] entered and pulled them down. There were many others like the 5 bugba laja and 2 clerks and two uchö. All of them stood up and said "please don't do this. We will be okay [Tib. sku mkhyen de 'dra ma byed/ nga tsho 'grig gi red] and they were showing their thumbs to all of us [as a pleading gesture]. At first, the monks said put your bowl in your monk's robe pouch and leave. But they didn't come out. Then the monks said, "if you don't come out, we'll throw you out of the window". [laughter]   

**Q:**  Were you really going top throw them?   

**A:**  I swear by the Buddha Statue in the Jokhang, [Tib. jo ri] there were many monks, so I can't say that they won't throw them out. At that time, one lucky thing happened. Otherwise, there will be at least 15-20 people will be killed. After all of us came in the Rabsel, we could shut the backdoor and main doors. The common monks shut the door because they thought that the abbot will flee, but we didn't know about that clearly.   

**Q:**  Later this helped to protect the abbot, right?   

**A:**  Not only helped to protect the abbot, this prevented the mass of monks from entering and saved people being killed internally. If the doors wern't shut, I heard that in front of the back door and the main door, the monks were packed there. So the monks would have come and many were carrying rocks as weapons and there would have been bloodshed or deaths and I also might have been dead and from among the other group, some would have been killed and the abbot also would be killed. Among us, the first who went there didn't have these things like rocks.   

**Q:**  Did you lock the back door and the main door?   

**A:**  We bolt[Tib. a shing rgyag] the doors.   

**Q:**  Did they bolt the doors after they took out the three people and tied them up?   

**A:**  The doors were shut before they took out the 3 officials. When the monks gragged them out, the chabu and those people said please don't do this, we will talk and it will be okay and we said it is okay and then all of us came out. Then near the Rabsel, there was the temple called Mintrug Lhakhang [Tib. mi 'khrug lha khang] and we went there with the other officials and as soon as we were about to start talking, we heard a loud yelling and the sound of people stepping [Tib. di di di] and so many monks caused the disturbance [Tib. zing cha brgyag] they had taken the 3 people out of the Rabsel and tied them to the pillars.   

**Q:**  Trindor: Did you have guns? I heard that some one dropped a gun in the rungkhang.   

**A:**  No. we didn't. They tied the three to the pillars and beat them. The monks from our side even slapped the tratsang gegö who came and was telling them to stop beating them and the monks said, "why didn't you meddle into this until now. We don't want you people to meddle into this" The abbot, Samlo dreba and the laja were all in the same shagtsang. Gendün Nyima was in a different shag. At this time, Samlo Khamtsen came with a khata and told us, "please stop beating them and release them". We were saying that it is not okay for them to go back to their shag and we are going to keep them for a few days under house arrest in the Rabsel. And then we left. The next day, all the leaders of the Gomang Tratsang and the laji both petitioned to the Yigtsang about this. The officials stayed in the Rabsel for a few days under detention and in the meantime the Yigtsang launched an investigation of the events. One day we were interrogated.   

**Q:**  You were called to Norbulinga or Potala?   

**A:**  We were summoned to Norbulinga. The trunyichemmo were Jogtang [Tib. lcogs steng] and Gyamtso Tashi [Tib. rgya mtsho bkra shis].   

**Q:**  Who was the secretary, Yigtsang Nyerpa [Tib. yig tshang gnyer pa] then?   

**A:**  He was the tsidrung of Khenche Lheding Ngawang Tragpa's [Tib. mkhan che lha lding ngad dbang grags pa] shagtsang. It took one and half day for interrogating us, the lagyüba.   

**Q:**  What did they ask and what did you say for one and half day? Tell us in detail.   

**A:**  We explained about the special privilages, and how things started and developed. They settled it on the 13th of the 12th month and on that day 24 monks were expelled; 16 from the common monks and 8 from pechawa. The one who read the verdict was the Gyamtso Tashi [Tib. rgya mtsho bkra shis] Tsendrön. At this time, it was about the time for the Dalai Lama to move from Norbuling to the winter quarters at Potala. Then after this was settled, 2-3 days later the Dalai Lama moved to Potala. Those monks doing prostration as the punishment started their prostrations in Norbulinga and finished it at Potala.   

**Q:**  You were going to tell us about the examples of expulsion of shengo and abbot, right?   

**A:**  I had been in Drepung for a long time. In the past, the expulsion and punishing Drepung tsogchen shengo had never happened earlier. But once the two assistant to the tsogchen shengo in the Mönlam, chagdampa [Tib. phyag dam pa] did some very bad things and they had a law case in the Tibetan local government. In the beginning, at Mönlam they found some lay people drinking liquor which is prohibited to drink and make during Mönlam Festival. The chagdampa summoned the liquor drinkers and levied a very heavy fine. They didn't beat them with switches. Then later, the chagdampa told the drinkers again to bring a lot of money for what is called the gift for expressing gratitude, thuje legbül [Tib. thugs rje legs 'bul] for settling this case very quickly. Consequently, the drinkers got the secretary of the Kashag, Kadrung Dumra [Tib. ldum ra] as their backer. The drinkers were some kind of servants of Shatra [Tib. bshad sgra]. So the shengo in the end was demoted to a common monk and lost his ex-shengo status.   

**Q:**  The 2 chagdampa also became common monks, right?   

**A:**  The 2 chagdampa were already common monks, after the Mönlam and Tsongjö, so they didn't lose anything, but they were demoted and told that they were not allowed to sit above any group of 3 people [Tib. mi gsum tshogs pa'i gral 'gor sdod ma chog pa].   

**Q:**  Did they say that the chagdampa drank liquor?   

**A:**  No. It was for levying too much fine on people drinking liquor and having too much thought of embezzling [Tib. za sems che drags pa] During my years of work, I saw chagdamba demoted for two years and the shengo was demoted once.   

**Q:**  What was the shengo trouble?   

**A:**  The main thing they did was not right [Tib. ma 'grig pa] on the matter of drinking liquor. The other thing was the shengo was going for the patrolling at night, he arrested and almost beat Kadrung Dumra or his servant with switch.   

**Q:**  Did the shengo beat the daughter of Kadrung Dumra?   

**A:**  This might be the first time when they beat Kadrung Dumra's daughter. Normally, women were not allowed to wear leather shoes during the Mönlam. If they were caught, their shoes would be taken and they would be tied up at the corner of the cauldron in the rungkhang. And the reason for the abbot got demoted was not like that. He was close to Reting, he had taken his geshe exam with Reting at Mönlam. So Reting made him the abbot. The abbots have to perform in turns the longevity ritual for the Dalai Lama [Tib. sku tshe tshe sgrub]. So this abbot's turn to do this came, but the abbot was building his new shag and during the ritual period, he moved from his old shag to his new shag. This was during Talungdra period and since Talungdra didn't like Reting, he was blamed for moving his shag while performing the longetivity ritual for the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Was he the Gomang abbot?   

**A:**  Yes and he is from Samlo Khamtsen and his name is Chönphel Gyelpo [Tib. chos 'phel rgyal po]. The abbot was demoted and became a common monk.   

**Q:**  What about the Deyang's incident? When was it?   

**A:**  It was long time ago and I'm not sure of it. I heard that the main thing was that the new and old gegö confronted over something.   

