# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.14 : Tape 14  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College. In this interview he briefly discusses the kitchen servants (thabyog) of the khamtsen and mitsen, and the presence of jama in the mitsen.   

---  
### Tape 14  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_14/M_0003_14.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I would like to ask you that in which mitsen were you in?   

**A:**  I was in Tsokhag [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ་བ] Mitsen.   

**Q:**  In Tsokhag Mitsen, did they have thabyog]?   

**A:**  They didn't have thabyog, they have one hired person for fetching water.   

**Q:**  Was the person hired in the mitsen a layman or a monk?   

**A:**  The person hired in the mitsen is a layman.   

**Q:**  How many thabyog did they have in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Actually, there were 4 thabyog. Namely, there were supposed to be 9 thabyog. It was said 8 people for fetching water and one person for making fire [Tib. qu mi brgyad dang me gtong gcig].   

**Q:**  Actually, how many thabyog were there?   

**A:**  I don't remember very clearly. There were 4-5 thabyog. Normally, when they receive the alms from the monastery, they would receive 9 people's alms share. In the monastery, when they would give a kind of feast called tönchen [Tib. སྟོན་ཆེན] where meat and droma dresi was served, they will give them 9 people's share.   

**Q:**  You were talking about Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] Khamtsen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many thabyog were there in the tratsang?   

**A:**  In the tratsang, there were 9 thabyog and there was one layman called daily worker, nyinlepa [Tib. ཉིན་ལས་པ].   

**Q:**  What dose it mean by nyinlepa?   

**A:**  Nyinlepa means that they have many works to do like putting the mattresses for the two uchö and serving them tea. His work was not as same as the thabyog.   

**Q:**  Was he a layman or a monk?   

**A:**  He was a layman.   

**Q:**  He was called nyinlepa right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you know how many thabyog were there in the tsogchen]?   

**A:**  There were a large number of thabyog in the tsogchen. There were 8 permanent thabyog [Tib. གཏན་སྡོད་པ] who were permanently staying there. There were more then 20 people who were fetching water. In the past, there were 8 thabyog who were the main thabyog among the thabyog called the "4 apha" [Tib. ཨ་ཕ་བཞི]. As I said there were 8 permanent thabyog who were the main thabyog. They have to work for the Drepung tsogchen shengo when they were made to work, but they didn't have to do the works related to political and economic matters. For example, they have to go wherever the tsogchen shengo called them. If the shengo want to arrest somebody, they would send the thabyog to arrest the monk. At that time, they will sent the thabyog to arrest monks like nowadays, the Public Security members [Ch. gong an] were sent to arrest people.   

**Q:**  Did the thabyog hit them with switches?   

**A:**  Probably, they would hit the monks with switches.   

**Q:**  Was there jama in the mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a jama.   

**Q:**  How many jama did they have in the mitsen?   

**A:**  There was one jama.   

**Q:**  How many jama did they have in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  In the khamtsen, there was the mangjai jama [Tib. མང་ཇའི་ཇ་མ] who had the name or the title and was the higher one. The nyungjai jama [Tib. ཉུང་ཇའ་ཇ་མ] was the cook who cook everyday for the khamtsen gegen, the chandzö and the nyerpa.   

**Q:**  The khamtsen jama was called mangjai jama right?   

**A:**  The jama who make tea in the tsog was called Mangjai jama.   

**Q:**  How many jama were there in the tratsang?   

**A:**  There was one jama and a servant of the jama, jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག].   

**Q:**  Were their jama in the office of the chabu, chabukhang [Tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག་ཁང]?   

**A:**  No, there was no special jama in the chabukhang. There was the steward of the tratsang, Gomang Nyertsang [Tib. སྒོ་མང་གཉེར་ཚང] who would make the tea and the food for them. For the chabu, when there were important things to do, they will hire people for making fire.   

**Q:**  Gomang Tratsang have one jama and one jayog right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  One jama in the nyertsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  That jama will make the tea for the chabu, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the nyertsang jama would make the tea for the chabu also. Usually, the firewood for the chabu was supplied from the nyertsang.   

