# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College, and Hamdong Khamtsen. In this interview, he discusses the ranks of officials in the monastery including the roles and duties of lama shunglenpa and the lama migtsema. There is also a description of a family loan book, a description of the summer tsampa, and how the dobdo club (dobdo tobtsang) was organized. There are also details on the differences between the dobdos and other monks, and details of their work.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_07/M_0003_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Are the phodrang depa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ], Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་གསར] Deyang chatsül depa chatsül depa [Tib. བྱ་ཚུལ་སྡེ་པ] included in enchöndze?   

**A:**  Yes. In Drepung, the highest is the tsogchen shengo, the abbot and phodrang depa was also powerful.   

**Q:**  These were all enchöndze, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were the abbot and the ex-abbot also enchöndze?   

**A:**  Yes. They are actually higher than enchöndze. The old monastic officials, lene [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] were included in enchöndze. When they are actually incumbent they are higher than enchöndze. Tashi Khangsar and chatsül depa don't have a rank and they were not high, they just have the name of their job.   

**Q:**  Tashi Khangsar was the Namgyal Tratsang's representative and he has the key to a storehouse right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where is the store room locarted?   

**A:**  It is located under Drepung Phodrang.   

**Q:**  Was this belonged to Namgyal Tratsang or Drepung tsogchen?   

**A:**  This store room is taking care of mainly by Tashi Khangsar and phodrang depa. The office of the Tashi Khangsar is located in the Drepung Phodrang.   

**Q:**  Do they have a store room there to keep the tea leaves and butter?   

**A:**  Probably, they had.   

**Q:**  From where do they get the butter? Did they get from the jiso?   

**A:**  It is not from Jiso. I wonder where do they get the butter. Probably, they had the dewashung endowments from the early times because this is for the tonggo to the three great monastic seats. Tashi Khangsar only gives the regular tea [Tib. རྒྱུན་ཇ] for the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  The storeroom was not belonged to jiso, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It is belonged to Namgyal Tratsang.   

**Q:**  But the expenditure is from dewashung, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There were several storerooms and the jiso had it's own storerooms, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the government gives the mangja, then the tea and the butter is supplied by the government store and the key was kept by Tashi Khangsar right?   

**A:**  Yes. The storeroom is located in Phodrang. I heard they take out things from Phodrang. I am not sure.   

**Q:**  This was from the government and there was no connection with the jiso, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Jiso was different.   

**Q:**  If the jiso is giving a mangja, does the Tashi Khangsar have to come?   

**A:**  No, he only comes when the government is giving a mangja. If it is from the jiso he doesn't come.   

**Q:**  You did the Hamdong Jama for the assembly, tshogshung [Tib. ཚོགས་གཞུང]. What is the other one called something like Gyünjai [Tib. རྒྱུན་ཇའི] jama?   

**A:**  It was called Nyungjai Jama [Tib. ཉུང་ཇའི་ཇ་མ] which means the jama who deals with regular tea served when few people like khamtsen gegen, chandzö etc who were doing the works assemble together.   

**Q:**  What was the main job of the lama shunglepa [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ]?   

**A:**  Drepung tshogchen's lama shunglepa is in charge of all the activities of the geshe such as; 1. when the Geshe take their tsenyi exam [Tib. དམ་བཅའ་བཞག]. 2. when two Geshe stands up among thousands of monks in the assembly and debate tsenyi, tsoglang [Tib. ཚོགས་ལངས]. 3. when they do the gelong's confessional assembly, sojong [Tib. གསོ་སྦྱོང] in the tsogchen, lama shunglepa had to recite a prayer by himself. In Loseling, they call lama shunglepa and in Gomang this person is called Lama Migtsema [Tib. བླ་མ་དམིགས་བརྩེ་མ].   

**Q:**  Sojong is done once in a month, right?   

**A:**  No, it is twice both in Drepung and Sera.   

**Q:**  In the sojong, do the monks confess their wrong doings?   

**A:**  Among the monks there are gelong and getsül and they would repent [Tib. བཤགས་པ་ཕུལ] one's wrong doings violating the different vows. The gelong have 253 vows and the getsül have 36 vows. The term sojong means; "So" means to revive the discipilines that have been declined [Tib. སྒྲིག་ལམ་ཉམས་པ་གསོ་བ], "jong" means to cleanse the negativities [Tib. ལས་སྒྲིབ་སྦྱོང་བ].   

**Q:**  What do Lama Migts ema and lama shunglepa do when there is chöra?   

**A:**  Lama Migtsema and lama shunglepa have no work at chöra.   

**Q:**  What does Lama Migtsema have to meddle into [Tib. ཇུས་གཏོགས] at the tshogchen when there is mangja?   

**A:**  They had a lot of things to meddle into. First of all, in the early morning, the laymen thabyog have to go and call the Lama Migtsema to get up and come to the rungkhang. The thabyog also call the shengo and others. Then the Lama Migtsema would get up quickly and chants a short prayer called Migtsema from the tshogchen roof. Then the child monk would yell the chuke [Tib. ཆུ་སྐད] from the roof. Then in the assembly hall, dukhang [Tib. འདུ་ཁང] the Lama Migtsema comes to the dukhang and he gives the order regarding when to serve the first tea and the second tea. He is in charge also of the tea serving in the dukhang. He tells young monks, you go and get the tea. And he carries a big stick for beating monks during the tea serving.   

**Q:**  What dies the jama do at this time?   

**A:**  The jama would stand in the rungkhang and over see the cauldron.   

**Q:**  What does the tshogchen jayog do?   

**A:**  There is no tshogchen jayog. There are two young monks called chabril. If there is a mangja with alms tomorrow, Lama Migtsema gives the signals with his prayer in the evening before. This is called "signal that there is" [Tib. ཡོད་བརྡ་གཏོང].   

**Q:**  So he was like the leader when they serve the tea, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What does the Nangma [Tib. ནང་མ] do?   

**A:**  The nangma goes as the shengo's substitute in the tshog whenever the shengo is unable to go. He has a lot of power and deals with the matters like taking the possession of places etc and to beat the monks etc.   

**Q:**  When they serve the mangja, was the nangma involved in it?   

**A:**  Yes. He would carry a stick and over see the tsog and if the monks didn't adhrere to dsicipline, he would beat them up.   

**Q:**  Does he go to the rungkhang?   

**A:**  He has no work in the rungkhang.   

**Q:**  Who is in charge of getting the materials like butter and tea leaves to the rungkhang for mangja?   

**A:**  For butter and tea, Tashi Khangsar, 2 jama, Chatsül deba, the two representatives of the abbot get together and they were the in charge.   

**Q:**  Who orders around the thabyog?   

**A:**  The jama mainly does this. There were many thabyog in the tsogchen, little over 20 of them. This is same in the tratsang.   

**Q:**  There is a jayog in the tratsang, right? How many jayog were there?   

**A:**  There is one chayog in the tratsang and the chabril had a a servant called chabyog [Tib. ཆབ་གཡོག].   

**Q:**  What else the Lama Migtsema have to do?   

**A:**  When the monks assembled and the dukhang door was closed, Lama Migtsema yells "open the door" and the main prayers starts. It was said that the Migtsema can collect alms from all 4 tratsang, but he has to go in person to collect and can't send a substitute.   

**Q:**  When you were drunyer, you said that you lend out about 3,000 -4,000 khe of grain loans to about 300-400 households. Were the new loans, sartang [Tib. གསར་བཏང] and the remaining old loans, yangdey [Tib. ཡང་བསྡད] included in this ?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, when you give a big loan, how much khe do you lend out?   

**A:**  How much new loans do you usually lend out in grain per household.   

**A:**  Comparing with Loseling, we didn't lend much. For new loans, big ones are 25-35 khe, middle level is 10-15 and the small ones are 5 khe. Loseling gives out much more and they were larger tratsang. We don't give more than 50 Khe. That is the largest.   

**Q:**  Can you give us an example of what a family loan book would be like?   

**A:**  It starts with the name of the lord, [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] and the area, the name of household and name of the father and the mother. Then the amount of old loans, yangdey, then the new loans, sartang of this year, then they add up these two at the end they write the amount of principal and the interest they owed for that year the amount they recieved in that year. The loan was repaid several times like paying 5 khe now and 5 khe a little later. These are then all added up and subtracted from the loan total and then write the remaining what is left. The chabu looks at the ending number which became the yangdey. [he writes an example of a pledge]   

**Q:**  Did you make like a form?   

**A:**  No forms. Each household had a piece of paper like this.   

**Q:**  Do you give a little bit new loans every year?   

**A:**  Yes and they make new books every year. When the chabu comes, they would give the book to them. They (drunyer) write the yangdey of the last year on this year's book.   

**Q:**  Were there 2 granaries in Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ]?   

**A:**  Yes. Gomang had many granaries. We three drunyer have the larger granary. The other 2 drunyer have a second smaller one in Jangragang [Tib. ལྕང་ར་སྒང] . There is a third granary at Khardrong Shiga for keeping shiga's grain. When the chabu is present, they transfer the excess grain from their granary to the Khardong shiga granary. From there, the jiso moves it to Drepung as he needs. When the chabu is there, all the grain from the 2 drunyer's granary and the shiga is accounted for. At their own granary, the 3 drunyer each have locks on it and there own keys for their lock-they jointly administer it.   

**Q:**  When you lend the summer tsampa, yartsam [Tib. དབྱར་རྩམ], do they repay tsampa or barley?   

**A:**  They pay barley. We would also write yartsam along with the yangdey in the list and charge interest for that. We could not lend the yartsam every time. We lend it when we have quite a good amount of grain.   

**Q:**  If you lend one khe of tsampa, do you collect 1 khe of barley for that?   

**A:**  We charge 4 dre interest for 1 khe of grain. If the interest is 25% [Tib. བཞི་ལྔ་འདྲོ], we collect 1 khe from 4 khe principle and we collect 1 khe and 4 dre from 5 khe principle. If it is 20 % [Tib. ལྔ་དྲུག་འགྲོ] we collect 1 khe from 5 khe.   

**Q:**  If you collect 1 khe of barley for 1 khe of yartsam, wouldn't the miser suffer loss?   

**Q:**  We call it yartsam, but we give them barley for making tsampa. Actually, the so called sartang is meant to be use as the seed on the field given as the pawn, dzugshing [Tib. འཛུགས་ཞིང].   

**Q:**  When would they repay the yartsam?   

**A:**  They pay in autumn.   

**Q:**  You did the drunyer for 15 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I did the drunyer in Jangra granary for 4 years and then in Khardong bigger granary for 11 years.   

**Q:**  Did you start doing drunyer after you finished the tratsang chayog?   

**A:**  Yes. When I was young about 15 years old, I did the khamtsen chayog for 3 years. Then at age 19 I did the tratsang chayog for 3 years. Then after that, I did the drunyer for 13 years alone. And then for the last 2 years I did the Khamtsen jama while doing the drunyer.   

**Q:**  During that time, you got two salaries, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How could you do both jama and drunyer at the same time?   

**A:**  Yes. I had to get a substitute to do the jama while I was doing drunyer at the time when there is important work. Jama had a heavy responsibility because he have to go hither and thither everyday to the presence of all the heads of the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did you pay wages to your substitute?   

**A:**  I didn't need to pay wage if I leave him there for a month or so.   

**Q:**  Did you have to ask for permission to the Hamdong Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes I had to ask the khamtsen tsondu for the permission where there were 30 people to leave and have a subtitute for a month or two.   

**Q:**  If you sent a substitute for the drunyer job do you have to ask permission?   

**A:**  If I sent a substitute for the drunyer job, I don't need to ask for the permission?   

**Q:**  Do you have to ask for the drunyer job every year or you can do it continuesly?   

**A:**  Once the drunyer is appointed, you don't need to ask for it for 5 years term. After 5 years, if the drunyer was quite good and you ask for doing it, they would give you the job as before. If it is not good, they won't give you the job saying that your term is over. I did the drunyer for three terms.   

**Q:**  Last time, you told me that your gegen sent you to do the jayog, was it tratsang jayog or the khamtsen jayog?   

**A:**  It was tratsang jayog.   

**Q:**  You did this for three years, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When I was the khamtsen jayog, I was just a child and I did it for 2 years.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you were the tratsang jayog?   

**A:**  Probably, I was 19-20. And I might be 16-17 when I was the khamtsen jayog and I didn't have any duty other than to go wherever I was sent to. Tratsang jayog had a heavy responsibility because, I have to take care of the dukhang to avoid fire and theft etc.   

**Q:**  Why did you ask for drunyer work?   

**A:**  Being a simple monk, my aim was to get the salary which was 12 khe of grain and 5 sang per year.   

**Q:**  Were you alone living in a seperate shag?   

**A:**  Yes I was in a separate shag. When I did khamtsen jayog, I was with my gegen and I turned over all my income to him when I was the tratsang jayog.   

**Q:**  Were there any different point of views in your shag because you weren't a dobdo and your gegen and your brothers were dobdo?   

**A:**  Yes a little bit. My gegen and other gidru would smoke and drink chang a little bit and I wouldn't do that. So I thought it would be better to live separate because if I live with the dobdo, we won't be able to get along well on the ways of doing things.   

**Q:**  Were your brothers in the dobdo Tobtsang, [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many tobtsang were there in Gomang?   

**A:**  There were 2.   

**Q:**  I heard that in Drepung, Gomang had the highest number of dobdo.   

**A:**  There were the older tobtsang [Tib. རྒན་པ] and the younger tobtsang [Tib. གཞོན་པ]. When I was a young monk, in one tobtsang they had about 30-40 dobdo.   

**Q:**  How was the tobtsang organized? They need a capital and also a leader, right?   

**A:**  First, some dobdo start talking and they made a tobtsang organization, Then they set out to find a older experienced dobdo who was called drepa [Tib. བགྲེས་པ]. They ask him to be the senior, gengo [Tib. རྒན་འགོ] of our new tobtsang. And the gengo would be in charge of power, strategy and work [Tib. དབང་ཇུས་ལས་གསུམ]. Once they joined the organization, they don't have to put in much money. Probably, one tranka was enough to register their name and they were in the tobtsang. Then there were fines if you fail to show up at jump practices and compeitions and the leader would get this for his use. Then sometimes they pool money from each dobdo for the jump or other things. Then when it was close to having a competition, then they get sponsor also and they watch the jumps and give money and khata.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between dobdo and other monks? What were their chatacters other than jumping etc.   

**A:**  In general, dobdo is something wrong, but in the old society, they need the dobdo. Sometimes, we also need dobdo for doing some important jobs and in the places where there is fighting, most of the dobdo would be there. They listen to the gengo and adhere to the discipiline of the tobtsang. There wasn't any other special characters.   

**Q:**  Do the dobdo fight among themselves?   

**A:**  Yes, they fight a lot and even when they get into a law case, they have a alot of excemptions [Tib. དམིགས་བསལ]. In the past when I was young there were big fights between dobdo and non-dobdo. And the shengo beat them with switches. At that time, I was not a monastic official.   

**Q:**  Usually, the dobdo just go to the tsog and they don't study pecha, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They don't even know the prayers that was recited om the tsog, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They don't study at all and don't pray. They don't usually go to tshog unless there is big alms.   

**Q:**  Mostly, they stay idle [Tib. ད་ག་སེ་བསྡད], right?   

**A:**  Yes. The dobdo in the early times and the dobdo just before the revolt had different conducts. In the past, the dobdo used to go to the tshog and chöra whether or not there was alms. After the tshog, they would pratice jumps. The lamas and the lene in the early times looked more favorably on the dobdo since they went to the tshog. But, later the lene hated them because they only came to tshog when there is large alms.   

**Q:**  Regardless of early times or later, the dobdo smoke and drink chang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they do. There were just a few dobdo who don't smoke and the drink chang.   

**Q:**  What do pechawa think about the dobdo?   

**A:**  They think they are bad, but not so bad as to expel from the monk's order. The best are considered to be the pechawa who pass the geshe exam. Then the monks in between like us who are neither geshe nor dobdo and the dobdo are the worst.   

**Q:**  How did they eliminate the tobtsang?   

**A:**  The different tratsang and monasteries were opponents in jumps. Loseling and the Tratsang Je were opponents and the Gomang and Tratsang Mey [Tib. སྨད] were opponents and Drepung Deyang and the Sera Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] were opponents. When I was a child I heard that at one of these competitions at Kyangmo [Tib. རྐྱང་མོ] Shiga in Kyomolung [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང] a number of monks were killed in fighting. So one of the main reasons for their elimination was their fighting at jumping place. Later, I heard that there were fights when they jump and there wasn'r any killing. When the Dali Lama was giving audience when he was taking his Pharhin, [Tib. ཕར་ཕྱིན] Grade, some dobdo came in their dobdo's dress and the Dali Lama asked what kind of clothes are those. And he was told about dobdo and they have tobtsang etc. So the Dali Lama said that the monks wearing all kinds of clothes like these is not good and if they jump and do those things, this will harm the Buddhism, so we have to stop this. And that is how it occurred.   

**Q:**  Did the laji stop this or the Yigtsang?   

**A:**  The Yigtsang ordered the tobtsang to stop in all the monasteries at the same time.   

**Q:**  When was this in reference to 1959?   

**A:**  I think it was 6-7 years before it.   

**Q:**  At that time, had the Chinese arrived?   

**A:**  Probably, there were dobdo just after the Chinese arrival.   

**Q:**  Did the dobdo oppose it?   

**A:**  No they couldn't.   

**Q:**  Did they still set up the dobdo organization secretly?   

**A:**  Yes they did, but secretly. They didn't dare to set up the organization conspiciously. In the lene also knew that there was the dobdo organization and they would go to the parks to jump in grous.   

**Q:**  You were drunyer for 15 years, were there small incidents or law cases like the family got extinct or exhausted [Tib. སྟོངས]? Please tell us.   

**A:**  There were several household that became exhausted. If a household became exhausted, then according to the custom called "joined chains "jagthag langdrel" [Tib. ལྕགས་ཐག་ལག་སྦྲེལ], if a family became exhausted, then their debt gets divided between the other families under the same lord who took the loans at the same time. Usually if a person takes a loan, he has to have a guarantor. But in the villages, we made the pledge for all of the miser under the same lord in the sort where all were made responsible for the other's loans (as guarators). There may by 40-50 households under one seal of the joint pledge all acting as guarantor of the other. So if one ran away, then the debt is divided among the others. The new debt and the old is divided among the others.   

**Q:**  If 30 out of 50 families take loan, then the loan pledge is jointly put for the 30 households in one gengya, right?   

**A:**  So if some one became exhausted, then just those 30 are responsible.   

**Q:**  Who would put the seal on it? Was it the gembo?   

**A:**  Whoever among the debtors in the joined pledge can put the seal.   

**Q:**  Was it an iron seal?   

**A:**  Yes, when they come to take loans they bring their seal.   

**A:**  Can this be done by one's own miser only?   

**A:**  No, it can be of anyone's miser. But it has to be only one lord's miser on the joint pledge who were from the same place. If one individual come for loans from other places then he must have a guarantor. Sometimes there are 3 or 4 people who come to take joint loan and the jagthag langdrel is done. Usually, jagthag langdrel is done above three persons.   

**Q:**    

**Q:**  Where is the authority to do this come from? Was this written on the document?   

**A:**  It became kind of custom from the early times.   

**Q:**  Can the other people in the jagthag langdrel say "no,I won't pay for the other persons"?   

**A:**  No, once it was an old custom they, they have to pay.   

**Q:**  Does this include both old and new loans?   

**A:**  Yes yes.   

**Q:**  If the old loan is like sevaral thousands of khe, was it still divided?   

**A:**  Yes it is. But this doesn't happen often. There were just a few households who became exhausted. Mostly when it happened, we divide the debt. But if someone takes over the land and the house of the exhausted family, then the new person gets the land, the tax and the outstanding debts and he have to pay it.   

**Q:**  Did this happen during your time?   

**A:**  Yes, there were few household became exhausted.   

**Q:**  Did you divide the loan or you handed over the loan to the person who got the land?   

**A:**  Mostly, the loan was divided and there were also some loans handed over to the person who got the land.   

**Q:**  During your drunyer terms, did some person insist saying I can't give back the loan and caused trouble for you?   

**Q:**  Some person do insist saying I can't give back the loan because they didn't really have the means to pay it and they do not request to do the domthag chö for the remaining loan. But if some one shows his back, [Tib. སྒལ་པ་བསྟན] which means act rebellious and refuse to pay the loan, since we are from one of the big tratsang, we can beat them up. In my time, I didn't beat people much and I have had experience of telling one household,"unless you pay the debt well, I will tie you to a pillar in the house and leave you there". I've also tied him to the pillar in the house a little bit, but then the miser neighbors would come and plead to let him go saying, he'll pay the debt. And then I've let them go.   

**Q:**  Had anyone really showed his back and refused to pay the loan in your time?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Are there fights between different lenders over who will get the loan paid first?   

**A:**  No, I haven't had that happened between Loseling and Gomang.   

**Q:**  What about the dzugshing disputes?   

**A:**  Yes there were, but I have not had any of these.   

**Q:**  Was your shag the same size as now when you were small?   

**A:**  No it was very small. About half size of my present shag. Only a size of one pillar. Outside of that, there was a kitchen and room was inside the kitchen.   

**Q:**  Was there any special reason for making all the 3 sons monks?   

**A:**  No special reason. We had a big family and there were many children from the same father. And my father made all the sons monks and it was all done at one time. There were three daughters and later he made two daughters nuns, leaving one to get magba, but she died early. There was also an elder brother who had a wife and a daughter and that daughter took a magba and she held the family.   

**Q:**  By making three of you monks, there wasn't any help for the household, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Not at all. They helped us out with enough tsampa in the shag.   

**Q:**  So your household's living condition was okay, right?   

**A:**  We were a middle standard farmer.   

**Q:**  You said that you go to the tsog and chöra everyday though you were not a pechawa, right? When you were sitting in chöra, what do you do? Did you just sit there idle? [TN Note: the following part is not in the tape]   

**A:**  I just sat there. I didn't understand anything.   

**Q:**  Were there special seating arrangements?   

**A:**  Each grade had its own place. There were 16 grade. After this, there were joint prayers and at this time all sat together and did the prayers.   

**Q:**  What grain salary did you get in Gomang?   

**A:**  From Trasang: in the early times we got 1 khe (later 3 khe)--no special time to give it, usually they tried to give it at a time when there were fewer monks in the monastery. Really, It's terrible. The power over this is the chabu. We got paid in grain, we didn't have to go get it from shiga. From Jiso: we get 2 khe, but these were smaller khe consisting of 13 dre and a handful each (instead of 20 dre). This was given at a set time in Spring and Fall. From Rigdra [Tib. རིགས་གྲྭ] : In the past they gave roasted barley. Later they started to give tsamba. There was no set amount, some years were bigger than others. In a big Rigdra, they would give 3 ladlefulls, at smaller ones only 2 ladlefulls. This was given in the 7th lunar month. Just after the Opera Festival, Shotön [Tib. ཞོ་སྟོན]. They also give the monks salt and soda [Tib. བུལ་ཏོག]. Somtimes, 4 dre and sometimes only 2-3 dre. It was different every year. At this time, we also get tea in the tshog. Although I don't go.   

**Q:**  Did you get any salary directly from the shiga that was lent out as bowma?   

**A:**  No. In Gomang we didn't.   

**Q:**  Can a monk survive on this salary alone?   

**A:**  It would be very hard. So some go to village, or hold dzong or some work on shiga, some do business. The poorest monks carry goods on their backs and go to sell them to the villagers. Some work as coolies between the monastery and Lhasa. In general the monks income was poor. But Mönlam Prayer Festival is our best hope. It is like our Fall harvest.   

