# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College, and Hamdong Khamtsen. In this interview, he discusses the loan process that is overseen by the grain steward including documentation of the loan process, collections, amounts of debts owed, details of interest and principle to be paid, and interactions with individuals during the collection of debts.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_05/M_0003_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You make a list for the loans of each family and keep this up to date each year, right?   

**A:**  There are two kinds of entries: the new loans of this year, sartang [Tib.གསར་བཏང] and old loans, yangdey [Tib. ཡང་འདས]. Some of these loans are from many generations ago. It is for monastery, kudrak and miser of the government all had it and then there was the payment arrangement, gyeje [Tib. rgyas bpyad].   

**Q:**  What do you mean by the payment arrangement, gyeje?   

**A:**  This means the debtors who owe old loans would request the tratsang chabu to be allowed to pay back the principal of the loan in a specified number of years in equal payments like 10 khe in each year and there is no interest charged. Many people couldn't pay back their loans and had these build up. To get gyeje, a household has to go to the chabu and ask him to please allow to have gyeje as I am having a very hard time now with the old debt. It the chabu says yes, then it will be done. At the time of doing gyeje, all of the household's yangdey debts will be added up, perhaps these will be 5-6000 khe. We will look at how much and set up a payment arrangement for X amount of years. While this is being paid off, they were not allowed to charge the interest. At one time, the Legjö Office [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས་ལས་ཁུངས] had sent an edict with the Kashag seal about this saying that all the yangdey debts from generations to generations should be consolidated in the gyeje form.   

**Q:**  Who has the power to do this.   

**A:**  The chabu. When we did the gyeje, we divided the households into 3 types: 1. for the good income, we make them to pay more grain per year; 2. the middle standard pay a little less than that and 3. poor households, pay back only a little. All of these would get the gyeje, but with different payment amounts and times. The grain nyerpa, drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] doesn't have much power in giving out loans, but has a big influence when dividing the households into three parts for doing the gyeje because they knew all about their living conditions. As for the custom in gyeje, before making the new gyeje, first they would give an exemption [Tib. ཆག་ཡང] from the principal of old loans somewhat depending on the family circumstances and when doing this, the drunyer have to be honest. And then they make the payment arrangement for the remaining principal.   

**Q:**  Was this an old custom or new one with reform office?   

**A:**  Although from the early times, dewashung, gerpa and chöshi had the custom of doing the gyeje, but later it was in [1957-58] when the Kashag made the order, so nobody is allowed to leave the loans without doing the gyeje. If somebody didn't do it, then it will be violating the Kashag seal. It was for lightening the burden of the miser.   

**Q:**  Did you do this right away?   

**A:**  Yes we did. I was there from the beginning to the end. This was done by all the three; dewashung, gerpa and chöshi.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there many yandey, old loans?   

**A:**  Some people had 3-4-5-6-7,000 khe of old debts from generations to generations. We would add the new loan to the old loan along with the interest and then subtract what the person paid, the remaining would be the yangdey. The next year, the same thing would happen and in this way the yangdey increase yearly with higher and higher interest payments. The drunyer reports all this to chabu before making the gyeje. Example family owns 500 old debt and borrow 100 new. At Fall they now owe at 20% interest and the total becomes 720 khe. They pay 200 khe that year and leave 520 khe which is called yangdey and this had become 20 khe more than the previous year.   

**Q:**  Until they did the gyeje, the yangdey and the sartang both have interets, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If there is a 200 khe of old and new loan and the household says can only pay back 150, did they have the authority to say that?   

**A:**  If there is a 200 khe loan and the household says can only give back 150, 50 khe are left. The household will plead to the drunyer to have this 50 khe delayed for this year, domthag chö [Tib. བསྡོམ་ཐག་ཆོད] and the drunyer can decide to allow this to add on the yangdey for that year. This could be decided by the three drunyer. They would give the new loans every year.   

**Q:**  In the next year, if the debtor again plead the drunyer in the same to have the domthag chö, would he agree?   

**A:**  If it is a better household, the drunyer would insist that they must pay the full amount, but they would agree to the poorer ones. These old debts are called high interest loans [Tib. སྐྱེད་ལྕིའི་བུ་ལོན] where the interest can't even be paid and in the next year, the interest was added on the principal and they charge interest for the interest also, kyela kyegyag [Tib. སྐྱེད་ལ་སྐྱེད་རྒྱག].   

**Q:**  How did they charge the interest for the interets?   

**A:**  For example, if some one took 70 khe of loans in the previous year, the interrest would be 14 khe and the tolal become 84 and when the debtor couldn't pay it, in the next year the interest is charged for 84 khe which included the interest of the previous year and the interest became the capital. That's how the interest is charged for the interest   

**Q:**  In the Spring when they go out, their aim is to give out all their grain as loan? Do they first give it to their own miser, then to the outside miser? How do they make those arrangements? How much did they have in the two granaries in Phenpo to give loans?   

**A:**  There were about 3-4,000 khe of grain. There is no fixed amount. We Gomang Tratsang would collect about 7,000 khe of grain from Khardrong [Tib. མཁར་གྲོང] Shiga and Jangra, [Tib. ལྕང་ར] Shiga must be the same though it is not a big shiga. In Spring when the chabu comes, if we would lend out about 4,000 khe and we bring 3,000 khe to the monastery for giving to the monks.   

**Q:**  Do they first give it to their own miser, then to the outside miser?   

**A:**  When we give out loans, we would treat our own miser a little better with little less interest. When we give loans, we see how much they paid back in the past year and if they didn't pay back much in the last year, we say that you haven't paid the loan in last year. If they had paid well in the past year, we agree to give them loans because they paid well in the last year.   

**Q:**  Do they prefer the whole loan to be paid back with the interest or just part and interest added on the principal?   

**A:**  It depends on the household's living condition. If they have a good living condition and they didn't pay even they have, so we would try to force them to pay back that year and ask them why didn't you pay the loan which is used for the common monks. As for the middle standard, if they paid reasonable amount [Tib. gang la gang 'tsams], we would agree to that. If its a poor household, we give consideration and among the drunyer, there were different people. It is not okay to force people to pay even if they didn't have because in the beginning they had to take loans because they didn't have the means to make their living.   

**Q:**  Do you have the custom of a field left as a collateral pawn for a loan, dzug shing [Tib. འཛུགས་ཞིང]?   

**A:**  Yes, there were, but it is not that certain [Tib. གཏན་འཁེལ་བ]. Normally, after the harvest, they tie the grain and pile up the stalks in jog [Tib. ལྕོག] and we go and count these and make a list at this time. When it is taken to the threshing ground, it is a long jog and we then put our earth seal on the grain stalk. We can't always be at the threshing place, so they were able to take some out from underneath the earth seal and thresh it without us knowing. And they just leave a little bit like a token [Tib. མིང་བཏགས་ཡས] Then another problem with dzug shing is that practice called, gyag nyidzug [Tib. བརྒྱགས་གཉིས་འཛུགས] which means that a farmer puts one field for dzug shing for many different loans. I have seen some who have done this with 25 lenders. This is regarded as something bad. Then there would be all kinds of problems when the debt collectors comes from all these lenders and claim for the same field.   

**Q:**  The amount of loans to be given out in a year is up to the chabu, right? Do they come and look at the storeroom and then make the plan of the amount to lend?   

**A:**  He doesn't make the plan.   

**Q:**  Who would make this plan?   

**A:**  Nobody can do that and even the drunyer wouldn't be able to guess. The drunyer would look at the grain in the granary and give the loans. When they are giving out the loans they know how much is remained in the store.   

**Q:**  Would there be remaining every year or would they use all the grain for the loans?   

**A:**  There would be remaining every year regardless of the amount and accord with the remaining, they bring the grain to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Secondly, you leave the seed, right?   

**A:**  The shiga and the drunyer is separate. No matter, how much grain the drunyer have is useless for the shiga. Similarly, no matter the how much grain the shiga have, it is useless for the drunyer.   

**Q:**  You don't have any connections, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we have our own separate accounting. If the shiga got a good yield, they would bring the grain to the monastery.   

**Q:**  What is the main source of the salary?   

**A:**  It comes from the shiga and also from the granary for giving loans.   

**Q:**  Among theses two, do the granary produce more grain?   

**A:**  Yes. When we compare the yield from the fields and income from the loans, the income from loans was more.   

**Q:**  At that time, in Gomang they give one khe of grain as the salary, right??   

**A:**  It used be 1 khe, but later at the end, we get 3 khe for a year.   

**Q:**  How do you collect the loans in Fall?   

**A:**  We three go together. Even the granary has three locks. One for each drunyer. [Trindor says they actually separate into 3 and go to different household].   

**Q:**  Do you go to the miser's houses or do you tell them to come?   

**A:**  We tell them to come, but we usually have to go to them several times to get the grain. When we go, there were six of us; 3 drunyer and 3 servants called deyog, [Tib. འདེད་གཡོག] would get separated and go and we tell each household to come in two days at a certain time appointment to pay the loan. We first go and deliver the message when to come. Those who don't show up they then have to go to their houses.   

**Q:**  Who would deliver the messages?   

**A:**  The drunyer and the deyog both go to long distances on horse back to deliver the messages. We go separately.   

**Q:**  Do the household give you tea?   

**A:**  Only the better families give tea. Only a few give us tea.   

**Q:**  And no gifts, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Only the better offs serve tea. The others couldn'to do that because some of them have 10 debt collectors come in one day, so how can they serve tea. When we go to the threshing ground to inspect the grain they got from the dzugshing, the better offs give us food and tea. The poor ones didn't have that condition.   

**Q:**  In Phenpo, you give out about 3-4000 khe of grain loan in a year, for how many household would you give this amount as an average?   

**A:**  We give out about 3-4000 khe of grain a year to about 300-400 households.   

**Q:**  Was there any division on the lands among the different lenders such as jiso, Loseling and Gomang etc?   

**A:**  No. When we make the appointment for the peasants to come to pay grain, it was always on Saturday or Wednesday. We give message to those households that are larger and have large loans. The others we don't give message to. If they are unable to pay the entire loan, they have to pay at least 1 khe. (to their main creditors). If they didn't give this at least amount, its considered bad saying that they didn't even pay a part of the loan [Tib. སེལ་ཁུངས].   

**Q:**  When they give out loans in Spring, do they ask who you have loans from other sources ?   

**A:**  No. We don't ask. We know who is a poor household and who has to take loans from many lenders.   

**Q:**  Do the different lenders divide the places to give loans in Spring?   

**A:**  They don't divide the places, but they have their own places to give loans [Tib. ཁུངས]. But from the borrowers point of view, they take loans from the richest and biggest lenders since they are more likely to be lenient if they have a bad year and cannot pay back whereas a small lender may need all the money at once.   

**Q:**  Do all the monasteries go to lend grain at the same day in Spring?   

**A:**  No, they go on different times, but they have to go before planting.   

**Q:**  How long do you stay in the village in Spring and in Fall?   

**A:**  In Spring only about 15-20 days. People crowd into gets loans. We do it like an assembly line. The chabu makes the pledge and after it is signed and the senior drunyer acts as secretary (I did this) and the drunyer makes an internal list of the loans called setra [Tib. གསེས་ཁྲ]. Acording to this list, the other two immediately measure out the grain to the farmers. Then the list for collecting the loans, dedra [Tib. འདེད་ཁྲ] is made back at the tratsang by copying from the pledge. The dedra is a piece of paper with the loans amounts written on it. When the page is finished, then another page is glued to it and the chabu's seal is placed on the joint. This is done until all the loans are listed.   

**Q:**  When do they give these books to the miser?   

**A:**  We then make a book for each family which we keep it and not the miser and when the work is over, we have to give these books to the tratsang and when something went wrong they check the book.   

**Q:**  So the family who borrows has no record of this at all?   

**A:**  They have nothing. A few who know how to write may keep their own notes on this but it is very few. Maybe one family has 20-30 creditors, so some don't even know to whom they have to pay loans. They only know when the debt collector shows up to collect.   

**Q:**  Is the loan collector, depa [Tib. འདེད་པ ] and drunyer same?   

**A:**  It is same, depa is the outside name but in the monastery we are called drunyer.   

**Q:**  When you go as drunyer, do you wear monks robes or lay clothes?   

**A:**  I wear lay clothes.   

**Q:**  What about the horse, whose is it?   

**A:**  The horse and saddle, etc are our own. When the chabu comes, the miser provide the horse.   

**Q:**  You use your salary to buy those things, right?   

**A:**  These all comes from the salary which was 12 khe of grain and 5 sang and the salary and alms in the tratsang. We don't get from the tsogchen.   

**Q:**  How many extra alms shares do you get?   

**A:**  I get no extra salary for this.   

**Q:**  How does the chabu pick the drunyer? Does he think that this person have some money to buy horse etc?   

**A:**  No, they don't think in that way. Some drunyer need horse and others don't if they are nearby Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Do the servant, deyog [Tib.འདེད་གཡོག] have salary?   

**A:**  No. We each have to hire the deyog. Its like one's gidru or relative etc. If we give food, or wages, it comes from ourselves.   

**Q:**  So the drunyer suffer kind of loss, right?   

**A:**  We don't suffer loss. The drunyer were all honest people. If you don't be honest, the law of this life and future life and the karmic cause and effect [Tib. ཚེ་འདི་ཕྱི་ལས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས] is really profound [Tib. གཏིང་ཟབ་པོ]. If the drunyer is not honest, they can do very bad things on the way of measuring the grain. Fortunately, I was the senior drunyer working on written things [Tib. ཡི་གའི་ལས་ཀ] so I didn't need to do that. One trouble is that the grain is wet when taken in in autumn and then it dries in Spring so there can be a shortfall for the drunyer if you don't count the amount of drying. If one consider about the grain had become dry and measure it quite high which you can do it for somebody and cannot do it for some people because there were many different people.   

**Q:**  They would say please measure it lower, right?   

**A:**  They were allowed to say that. If you measure it too high, it would be against the law.   

**A:**  When they measure they level it once forward and once backward and how they do this makes a big difference in how much grain goes into a bo [Tib. འབོ]. There is a difference about how hard the leveling stroke is done. If its done lightly, then more grain stays in the bo. If done hard, then less stays in the bo. If you don't be honest, the law of karmic cause and effect and present life and future life will not let you go through. Temporarily one can act cunning and do something and this can be done by bullying the poor and would not be able to do it to the better offs because they won't come to take loans. So the drunyer should be a very honest person.   

**Q:**  It is impossible to have all people honest, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Among the drunyer there were all different people.   

**Q:**  How does this benefit the drunyer by the different ways of measuring the grain?   

**A:**  Some of the reason for this is as I mentioned above they measure the grain highly to make up the difference from the grain drying out. But if they do it too much, then the miser would suffer the loss.   

**Q:**  When they measure the grain, do some drunyer get gifts from the miser for measuring the grain well?   

**A:**  It is impossible to do that on collecting the loan even they think about doing that. The reason is that when they are measuring, there are a lot of people looking and no opportunity to do more for one and less for another. But when people pay the lease, they would bribe money to the grain measurer for measuring the grain well.   

**Q:**  The drunyer would not meaure the lease grain, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It is measured by the shiga.   

**Q:**  What other kinds of embezzlement [Tib. ཟ་སྒོ] do the drunyer get?   

**A:**  There is some embezzlement when the debtor come to request the drunyer to delay the payment and add the remaining onto the old loan, domthag chö. At that time, they give meat and tea etc.   

