# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.10 : Tape 10  
##  : with Wöse Chögyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chögyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College. In this interview he discuses in detail the serving of thukpa, and the regulations for this event within the monastery. Also included are details of the income and expenses of the shengo. Details are provided on the ranks of monks, with particular attention given to the hierarchical structure of the monk positions. There is also a description of the Assembly (tsondu) with its 14 members and finally, reference to Gendün Nyima's [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཉི་མ] household (shagtsang).   

---  
### Tape 10  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_10/M_0003_10.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Did they fight in the assembly hall, dukhang [Tib. འདུ་ཁང] for a long time? We heard the pechawa had to serve rice gruel thukpa because the Amdo didn't serve the thukpa and left and the böba stayed there. Was it true?   

**A:**  No, it was not like this. It was a short time fight and they continued serving thukpa in line. The Amdo didn't leave. It is impossible to have happened like this.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any big disturbance in the tsog, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was a fight between several thukpa servers. But that night there was a big fight invloving a lot of monks outside the monastery where it was said that there were 22 people. There wasn't any fight in the tsog where 22 people were involved.   

**Q:**  Do the shengo call them to the tsogchen stone floor and beat them with switches?   

**A:**  Yes. Near the tsogchen stone floor, there was a place where the shengo sits and they beat them in that place. There is a triangle stone in the stone floor where they beat people with switches.   

**Q:**  What is that stone near the stone steps in the stone floor which looks like the stage for mounting horses [Tib. ཆིབས་བཀྱག]?   

**A:**  The stone in the middle is the Dalai Lama's throne where the present Dalai Lama sat when he took his geshe exam. Trindor: Oh I see! Once a foreigner sat on this stone and a young monk told him, "don't sit on it".   

**A:**  On the two sides there are two small stones for the two tutors to the Dalai Lama. And they would put some other cushions on it.   

**Q:**  Was there this kind of pushing and shoving in the tshogchen at the time of serving thukpa and mangja?   

**A:**  There was not much that kind of fight though there should be because there are the dobdo of the 4 tratsang during the ceremonies of the Dalai Lama, but there hasn't been a big well known incident there. There is no pushing and shoving in the tshogchen. When the thukpa servers come to the rows, the chabril have a lot to behave imposing [Tib. ཉམས]. The tukpa container, sola [Tib. ཟོ་ལག] in Gomang has no straps, so it is wrapped with monk's shawls which they borrow from some young monks sitting at the end of the row. They would keep there tsamba bag in their monk's robe's pouch [Tib. ཨམ་ཕྲག] and place the thukpa container on it. At this time, the chabril would carry a pencase, nyugtro [Tib. སྙུག་ཁྲོག] and he hits the sola with the nyugtro and says , "serve the thukpa" [Tib. ཞུས་བཞེས་ཐུག] and then he says "serve fast" [Tib. མ་ལག་རྒོབས] and then they serve the monks in the first row and then he says, "turn to the east" [Tib. ཁ་ཤར་སློག" and they serve the thukpa there and he says, "get out" [Tib. མར་ཐོན] and when they get out, the Amdo and böba grab each other by the back of their neck and smash them against the wall and try to get out, this is where the Amdo and böba compete their ability. In other tratsang, the thukpa servers could get out through the other rows, but in Gomang, when the thukpa servers exit, they had to go through the same door from where they came in. When they first come in carrying the thukpa, they hit the ladle on the pillars to show off and the first and the second place servers would hit more hard.   

**Q:**  Tell us about how they bring the thukpa from the rungkhang and how they first serve the thukpa.   

**A:**  In Gomang, there are 13 rows in the dukhang. When the tea and thukpa servers first come in, 6-7 people go in the first row and then 5 people go to serve the other rows and 2-3 people in some other rows. Usually, the tea have the grease [Tib. ཞག] and the thukpa have not. After they served the thukpa in the rows, they would accumulate the sola in two lines at the end of row.   

**Q:**  To which row would they go to get the first serving of the thukpa?   

**A:**  First they go to the front row.   

**Q:**  Who would call the dobdo to stand up to serve the thukpa?   

**A:**  No. They don't call. The dobdo would pull and rush [Tib. འཚང་ག] severely.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any kind of limit to stop them from pushing?   

**A:**  They get up by themselves to serve thukpa at the end of the 2nd tea. As soon as the second tea is served, dobdo would get crowed there in the corners of the rungkhang. They would get beaten, but they still remain there.   

**Q:**  You mean they didn't let them enter the rungkhang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When they saw them staying in the corners of the rungkhang, they would beat them severely.   

**Q:**  Who would beat them?   

**A:**  At the rungkhang door there were jama and nanga and they would beat them. After that, when they beat the gong to say its time for thukpa, they [dobdo] are allowed into the rungkhang. The stove for making thukpa was about this high and before that, there were about 50-60 servers all around the stove and the first one who scoop out their thukpa have to step on the people's backs and heads to try to get out because all the servers were crowed there. And of course, the servers who get the first and the second place might have been hidden themselves some where in the corners of the rungkhang.   

**Q:**  Do the servers who get the first and second place go right away to the front row?   

**A:**  At the end of the front row, it was blocked by a jayog. He lets the first 5-6 servers in the front row and then 2-4 others were sent to other rows.   

**Q:**  Where do the first and the second place go?   

**A:**  They had already been to the front row.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't the jayog stop them?   

**A:**  Although we, the jayog would stay around the front row, but wouldn't have time to stop them and they would go directly to the front row and they get the first and the second place. I heard that the monks in the front row would not take much of the first and second serve. They think that it might not be clean because the servers might have hidden the thukpa some where. Once I saw a monk came to the first row before the gong was beaten. He was beaten a lot for this violation. In the past, some monks who didn't get sola for putting thukpa, they took the thabyog's bucket for carrying water   

**Q:**  Supposing there were 50 thukpa servers, after you couldn't stop the first 5-6 servers, they go to the front row and serve the thukpa and then they come back. Then do you let the remaining 40 some servers wait in line and then you send them in to serve the thukpa one after another?   

**A:**  There is a line up of two lines of the thukpa sola which is stopped there and at this time, the chabri would give a speech, [Tib. tsgogs gtam] "the rich sponsor have offered the materaials in kind like using the endless heavenly treaure, so you should serve it to the front, the end and the middle so that there would not be any shortage. If there is shortage, it is like having shortage of gold and if there is left over, it is like left over water. I have given you the order." [Tib. sbyin bdag 'byor pa can gyis rgyu cha lag 'don gyi tshul la/ mi zad nam mka' mdzod la mnga' brnyes pa lta bu zhig yod red/ dral 'go gral gzhug btha' dkyil bar gsum la/ chad lhag med pa yin thag thag zhus shog/ chad na gser chad pa yin/ lhag na chu lhag pa yin/ bkod pa bshad yod dag]. Then they start serving thukpa sometimes from the east or sometimes from the west or sometimes from the middle.   

**Q:**  I heard that when the dobdo go to get thukpa they leave their cloak, dagam [Tib. ཟླ་གམ] there and in the time between, they poured out full sola of thukpa in their cloak to be taken away. This is like stealing, right?   

**A:**  They weren't allowed to do that.   

**A:**  They were not allowed to that,but were there people doing this?   

**A:**  It's dark at the east and west ends of dukhang where the dobdo sit, so they pour some more thukpa. I don't know if they had poured a whole sola of thukpa. But if the jama or chabril happened to catch them, they get beaten severely. Normally, they were allowed to serve only two ladles of rice gruels thukpa and it is hard to hold in the wooden bowl. There is a saying, he had fermented the thukpa [Tib. "་ཐུག་པ་བསྙལ] which means he got extra thukpa and kept there. [usually the term [Tib. བསྙལ] used for fermenting chang]   

**Q:**  Do the dobdo eat thukpa from the ladle while in line or throw some to the young monks who lend them the monk's shawl?   

**A:**  They were not allowed to eat it because all the monks are watching. But they throw pieces of meat to the young monks because they lend them the shawal. Usually, they would tell the young monks,"lend me your shawal, I will throw pieces of meat". And they would throw pieces of meat, but not the thukpa. Even they threw this, it doesn't cause any big trouble. I also heard that in the Mönlam, in the area called Bugtsang [Tib. སྦུག་ཚང] in the Jokhang, they pour the grease of the tea not in their bowl but in the tea silver container Tashi Tsering: I saw in the Mönlam that the geshe would bring not only their bowl, but a aluminum pot with them to keep the grease and then they put the grease in the pot.   

**A:**  Yes. In the Mönlam, the geshe couldn't drink the tea because it was full of grease. So they put the grease in the pot.   

**Q:**  I heard that just before the New Year when they recite prayers for the Matria Buddha, chamön [Tib. བྱམས་སྨོན] for 8 days, some monks recite the prayers and they were given piles of the fried cookies, tönchen [Tib. སྟོན་ཆེན] but some would play flute. Was that true?   

**A:**  I can swear that I didn't see them playing flute. It was not a real tönchen, they hold the assembly and the Drepung jiso would give butter, salt and baking soda.   

**Q:**  How much butter do they give?   

**A:**  We get small square pieces of butter like this and it was given for 8 days.   

**Q:**  How much salt do they give?   

**A:**  They give one iron ladle called jagsar [Tib. lcagd zar] and a little baking soda. But the main thing was the butter.   

**Q:**  Trindor: I heard that in the middle they recite the prayers, but the monks sittig around would blow whistle and play flute, did they do that?   

**A:**  It's possible since Drepung tsogchen dukhang is a hall with 280 pillars with 24 long pillars in the center. Usually, the Gomang tratsang had 108 pillars. Now here we have 12 long pillars. At that time, the tshogchen is packed with monks.   

**Q:**  I heard that the young monks sitting at the ends do those things like playing flutes.   

**A:**  Probably, they do, but when I was a young monk I have never been to the places where they do that and when I became older, I came to the seats in the middle. Oh I think I cannot say that they didn't blow the flute because by that time, the discipline was loosen for the New Year and the monks were allowed to play. Although I have never seeen and heard, but it is possible.   

**Q:**  The reason for having many monks gathered was for the butter salary?   

**A:**  Yes. They come for the square butter. When the gidru gets the butter, they cut off a small strip of the butter by using a string and eat it with tsampa hand over the remaining to the gegen. [laughter] And this also had a name called "using horse tail" [Tib. རྟ་རྔ་བཏང]. Actually, they need horse tail, but it can be cut with any string also. Normally, there were 7 people who are in charge of overseeing the tsog; 2 shengo, 2 nangma, 2 chabril, lama migtsema. And the jama have to stay in the rungkhang. But there are too many monks in the hall with over 200 pillars, so they can't handle them.   

**Q:**  The shengo has big income but also you said they had big expesnses. What are these expenses?   

**A:**  First he has to give a rice gruel thukpa and alms to his tratsang, then also to his khamtsen and mitsen.   

**Q:**  How much alms did the shengo give in 1958 at the time of Gomang trouble?   

**A:**  Probably not too much, it might be like 10 tranka, 1 sang. But the rice gruel thukpa cost a lot because they have to use alot of butter. [rice gruel have 3 names; thukpa mingtag [Tib. མིང་བཏགས] pagtsöma, [Tib. སྤགས་ཚོས་མ] and damja [Tib. དམ་བཅའ]. The shengo's tonggo is 3 teas and 1 thukpa in the tratsang. And then the same in the khamtsen and mitsen. It is done while he is still in office. It is done in Gomang in the 10th month. It has to be done at a time when there are a lot of monks in the monastery usually in winter.   

**Q:**  Were there any other expenses?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Do they give the tonggo while he is in office or after he finished his shengo?   

**A:**  He gives the tonggo while he was in office.   

**Q:**  It was said that there are 9 mitsen under Hamdong Khamtsen, what are the 9 mitsen?   

**A:**  In one mitsen, there are three mitsen joined. I don't know clearly about this. In general, there are 1. tshoga [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ་བ], 2. hor, 3. juchö [Tib. འཇུ་ཆོས] 4. thorgö [Tib. ཐོར་རྒོད] [inner mongols] 5. tsembo [Tib. བཙན་པོ] 6. Washu [Tib. ཝ་ཞུ] 7. gulung [Tib. གུ་ལུང].   

**Q:**  What about lamba [Tib. ལམ་པ]?   

**A:**  Lamba takes monks from both Hamdong and Samlo, but it's not regarded as one of Hamdong's nine mitsen. I don't know whether they were in the Samlo Khamtsen or not. Gulung and Tsembo mitsen also have monks from both Hamdong and Samlo, but they were included in Hamdong as well as in Samlo's list of mitsen.   

**Q:**  What about gadong and böbashung?   

**A:**  They two were the mitsen of all the khamtsen. They only have pure böba monks and they don't have any Khampas, Amdo and Mongols. You can't get into böbashung if you don't have a good wealth. For Gadong, you don't need that much and their purpose is to become the shengo.   

**Q:**  I still have only 8 mitsen.   

**A:**  Tell me the 8 you have.   

**Q:**  Hor, Juchö, Tsokhag, Tsembo, Thorgö and if you count Washu as three mitsen, then there are 8.   

**A:**  Then there is Gulung.   

**Q:**  How about Samlo?   

**A:**  It was said that Samlo also had nine mitsen, but they actually didn't have many mitsen like Hamdong. Probably, some of the mitsen had become exhaused or extinct [Tib. སྟོངས] and some were merged together. Most famous was the Outter Mongolia [Tib. ཕྱི་སོག] called Khalka mitsen. Juchö is inner Mongolia. When we look at them they have only four mitsen. Gulung and Tsembo were also included in Samlo.   

**Q:**  How does the Hamdong Khamtsen gegen get picked by turn among the misten? I heard that the Mogolian mitsen get more chance of turns and the Amdo get less chance of turns. I am not clear about this.   

**A:**  All the nine mitsen get the same chance of turns to become the Hamdong Khamtsen gegen. But Washu mitsen included three mitsen so it gets the chance of three turns.   

**Q:**  In this year, if it is the turn for the Hor mitsen, do they send one cadidate or three cadidates?   

**A:**  No, they would consult internally among the mitsen and the khamtsen needs only one person. And first they were called common [Tib. སྤྱི་པ] nyerpa, Jibey nerpa and then they become the khamtsen gegen and the khamtsen is merged [Tib. སྒྲིལ] to the tsondu.   

**Q:**  This is also not clear. Some say that after they finished the khamtsen gegen, they get into the Hamdomg tsondu and some say that they get into the tsondu only after becoming the chandzö. And some say that after they finished the khamtsen gegen, they get into the Hamdomg tsondu, but they were not allowed to talk and only after becoming the chandzö, they are allowed to talk. How was that done?   

**A:**  Each mitsen had different customs. As for us in Hamdong, after doing the Jibey nerpa and then he become the khamtsen gegen and then he is included in he tsondu, but not allowed to talk. Usually, during the New Year when they hold the ceremony for distributing the fried cookies [Tib. སྟོན་ཆེན], the tsondu members have tables on which they could put their bowls where as the khamtsen gegen is allowed to put his bowls on the wooden tsampa container, pagphor [Tib. སྤགས་ཕོར] though they all sit at the same place. After finishing the khamtsen gegen, he is allowed to talk. In Hamdong Khamtsen we had only two rows in the tsondu and on each of the rows, there was one khamtsen gegen seated. One row is called Mongolian row [Tib. སོག་པོ་གྲལ] and one is called Khamba row. There are three mitsen included in the Mongolian row: Jujö, Thorgö, Tshoga. In the Khamba row , there are the three mitsen of the Washu; Tsembo, Hor and gungling mitsen. On the day, the khamtsen gegen's term of office is finished, there is a meeting called the Aupiscious Meeting, Tashi Tsondu [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས] where this ex-khamtsen gegen becomes the tsondu member and he is allowed to touch the keys. There was a bunch of keys of the boxes.   

**Q:**  After he finished his khamtsen gegen wouldn't he have to become the chandzö?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do the chandzö go by turns?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do they go by seniority?   

**A:**  After finishing khamtsen gegen, it is their turn to become chandzö.   

**Q:**  Do they become the chandzö in the next year?   

**A:**  Yes. After finishing khamsten gegen, it is not the case that they were not allowed to talk, but they didn't have much power and also sit at the end of the row, so they wouldn't talk much.   

**Q:**  The böba were not allowed to go to the tsondu, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We böba were not allowed to go to the tshondu meeting. The jama stays at the entrance where he blocks other people from entering the tsondu. This was his responsibility. Even if people had a very serious matter to report, they are not allowed to attend the meeting. They report the matter through the 2 chandzö who go in and make the report and then come back and deliver the message from the tsondu to them.   

**Q:**  They were going through the motions of the imitating the Kashag, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You were in Tshoga mitsen? So as a böba, did you have any monk's obligation called shamdotre [Tib. གཤམ་ཐབ་ཀྱི་ཁྲལ]?   

**A:**  In our khamtsen and mitsen there is a little bit shamdotre. Since I was in Tsoga mitsen, if there are important works in Hamdong that has to be done, the number of people required would be told to the misten by the khamtsen and the mitsen would send the new monks. This was the shamdotre. This is just for going to work for a day, but they don't require to give tonggo or things.   

**Q:**  Do you have to be the jibey nyerpa?   

**A:**  No. We böba don't have to do this.   

**Q:**  Was there a method to buy out [Tib. བླུ་ཡག] the shöndre?   

**A:**  If you become mitsen chöndze, then you buy out the shöndre.   

**Q:**  What do you have to do for that?   

**A:**  You have to give a mangja, one thukpa and little alms to the mitsen. The one called mitsen chöndze is a buy out of shöndre. And they do the similar in the tratsang also.   

**Q:**  Was there khamtsen chöndze?   

**Q:**  There was no khamtsen chöndze.   

**Q:**  Was there like a shamdotre?   

**A:**  There was no shamdotre in the khamtsen. If there is khamtsen work to do, the work will be divided among the 9 mitsen.   

**A:**  After finishing the khamtsen gegen, they get into the tsondu and they would do the tönchen and they serve droma dresi and one full carcass of mutton is for 6 people. When this carcass is divided, it has to be equal and this is the job of the jama who cut the carcass into different pieces. If the division was done wrongly, it is said that the jama will be punished.   

**Q:**  These were all embezzlements [Tib. ཟ་སྒོ], right?   

**A:**  Yes there were lot of embezzlements.   

**Q:**  The böba neither get the embezzlements nor have to do the works, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In Sera Hamdong, the well off monks have to perform the Lama Chöpa [Tib. བླ་མ་མཆོད་པ] tsog by turns as an obligation and they had to take lot of loans and become poor when doing this. For example, if a böba wants to join Gomang Hamdong, he has to give 1 khata and 8 sang. This goes into the khantsen treasury, bukhong [Tib. སྦུག་ཁོངས]. Later, this fee was raised to 1 khata and 50 sang and this was called the admission of böba, böshug [Tib. བོད་ཞུགས]. But the Mongolians, Amdo, Khamba they don't have to pay anything. The mitsen puts you on the list and that's it. No payment. But if it's a böba, they have to give the money to the khamtsen. Once they paid the money, the böba didn't have to pay anything till their death except they have to go to work.   

**Q:**  I heard that the khamtsen gegen have to give lot of tonggo and spend a lot of expenses like fire wood ets. How could they manage these expenses? What were their income?   

**A:**  They have lot of income. The jibey nyerpa get one extra alms share. And they get 12 shares from thondabarsum, [Tib. ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ] where they go to ask for alms shares to the beginning, middle and the end of the lines when the monks were standing in line to get the alms. The Hamdong Khamtsen gegen gets 30 shares. Then there is also thondabarsum for him as well. Then the khamtsen gegen gets 200-300 khe of grain as the salary from khamtsen bugkhong and the the chandzö also gets the same. The jibey nyerpa also gets a little bit salary .   

**Q:**  Was jibey nyerpa a position in the mitsen or in the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Jibey nyerpa actually was the khamtsen's nyerba, but is appointed from the 9 mitsen by turn. After doing the jibey nyerpa, their turn for becoming khamtsen gegen comes.   

**Q:**  Was there a mitsen nyerpa?   

**A:**  The misten also has its own nyerba. Since they become jibey nyerba it is as same as getting into khamtsen tsondu.   

**Q:**  Was their term 3 years?   

**A:**  No, it is one year. Hamdomg Khamtsen gegen had to spend all the firewood and also the tsampa for the pag they eat in the tsondu. They do not eat pag whenever there is tsondu and there were times where they eat pag.   

**Q:**  How do they get into the Gomang tsondu?   

**A:**  In Gomang, there were many different names of tsondu such as the tsondu of 14 members, tsondu 14 [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་བཅུ་བཞི]. And regularly, the five bugpa laja [Tib. སྦུག་པ་བླ་ཕྱག] consisted of four chabu and labrang chandzö, two uchö consisted of umdze and gegö, two nyertsang.   

**Q:**  Was the khamtsen gegen there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were the 4 nachen [Tib. གནད་ཆེན] there?   

**A:**  These four were among the five bugpa laja. There was no separate nachen when they held the meeting with 14 members. And there were three other khamtsen in the tsondu; Bati and Gungru and one nayog, [Tib. གནད་གཡོག] who always work on the food for the tsondu members.   

**Q:**  Was the abbot included in the tsondu?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Probably, they have a clerk, right?   

**A:**  In the early times, there was no clerk and later on there was a clerk.   

**Q:**  Some say that there was the 5 bugpa laja, 2 nyertsang, 2 uchö, 4 nachen come from Samlo, Hamdong, Bati and Gungru.   

**A:**  In the tsondu 14, there were three nachen.   

**Q:**  Among the 4 which is not there?   

**A:**  This seems to be the clerk. In the lower place, there were three people working as servants. called nayog [Tib. གནད་གཡོག]which comes from 16 khamtsen by turns.   

**Q:**  Among the servants two come from Bati and the Gungru, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And there was one called nayog [Tib. གནད་གཡོག] which comes from 16 khamtsen by turns. Still two is missing, but I don't remember.   

**Q:**  We counted the abbot among the 14.   

**A:**  In the tsondu 14, there is no abbot. Probably, one must be the clerk. There was one clerk in the past and later recently there were two clerks.   

**Q:**  It was said that there were 16 people after having two clerks. How do they select the people to the tsondu 14 in Gomang?   

**A:**  The four chabu were the best in their khamtsen and the laja was sent from the abbot's shag.   

**Q:**  If the labrang chandzö resigns, would it be okay if the khamtsen appoint one from among the böba?   

**A:**  Laja could be done by everybody regarless of Amdo, Khampa etc since it is appointed by the abbot himself. But there were no böpa among the 4 bugpa. The position of two nyertsang has to be asked to the abbot and they have a high rank and they have to give many tonggo. Three nachen comes by turn and Bati and Gungru were there every time. The nayog comes by turn. One clerk was appointed by the abbot and one came later on when Gomang Tratsang had the law case.   

**Q:**  Which law case do you mean?   

**A:**  In the early times there might have been a law case long before the case we had.   

**Q:**  What was that law case for?   

**A:**  In the past, böba was not allowed in the five bugpa laja, so they decided to have a böba clerk. This was the additional clerk. The clerk in the past could be done by anybody.   

**Q:**  I counted many times, but I couldn't get 14 members. I'm not sure how.   

**A:**  Namely, it is said that tsondu 14 gets 28 shares of alms and salary.   

**Q:**  They might have added one to get the shares.   

**A:**  No, they didn't add it. There were 14 indeed but we didn't know how to count it.   

**Q:**  How do they appoint the nyertsang?   

**A:**  The nyertsang is appointed by the Gomang abbot. It's a 3 year term. This person must have wealth to do this. There is good income coming in but have to give lot of tonggo to the monks for three years. The nyertsang has a lot of miser and shiga like Tölung Gepo [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་གད་པ྄ོ] Shiga, Jandön [Tib. ?] Shiga, Lhomag [Tib. ལྷོ་མ་བ] Shiga. They have to serve traja everyday. At each traja, they have to use 16 khe of butter. Each of the 4 teas uses 4 khe of butter [about 7 gyama nowadays, so the total would be 112 gyama or 56 kg]. Besides this there are a number of tonggo they have to give. At one time, the nyertsang's income and expenditure became unbalanced   

**Q:**  Oh yes. Please tell me how this happened. What happened with Gendün Nyima's shagtsang when he was the nyertsang?   

**A:**  If you want to grab [Tib. འཚང་ག] for the position of Drepung Jiso, you have to do the tratsang nyertsang because the nyertsang would go as the first candidate of jiso. Gendün Nyima's shagtsang did the nyertsang for 3 years. During this time, they gave a poor tonggo to the monks where the butter they served at traja was also mixed inferior butter like we have nowadays. And he also used the tea produced from Tsöna [Tib. མཚོ་སྣ]. I just heard about it and I didn't go to tsog so During their three years terms their income and the expenditure became unbalanced where the expenditure was little bit less than the income. So they ambiciously [Tib. ཧམ་པ་བྱས] asked for nyertsang for another 3 years. This time, there were more much expenditures than the income at the end of the term. So when they hand over the nyertsang to the new like the saying, "use the root as the capital and use the leaves for giving tonggo" [Tib. རྩ་བས་རྩ་བྱས། ལོ་མས་གཏོང་སྒོ་བཏང], there was a great shortage [Tib. ཆད]. His colleuge as the nyertsang was my close relative though we do not have much connections. These two had to split the loss between their shag and make it up. My relative paid back his share, but Gendün Nyima's shag wasn't able to pay it back and there was a great problem [Tib. ཁ་ཆག་སྣ་རལ]. It was because of this that they had to go to the Gomang abbot and he made it so that Gendün Nyima's gegen didn't get the title of ex-nyertysang "thon sin" [Tib. ཐོན་ཟིན] he became a common monk and did something with the money that was missing. Normally, nyertsang had a high rank and they wear the satin vest [Tib. གོས་ཆེན་སྟོད་འགག] and they get a big name of the ex-nyertsang. When the Dali Lama was in Tromo and Lukhangwa [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] and Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] were sitsab, Gendün Nyima's gegen went through the back door relation and got his nyertsang thönsin back. And he was also appointed as the candidate for the jiso and he grabbed for the position of the jiso, Gendün Nyima was related to Taglungdra, so they had the great confident that they would get it, but his opponent was the famous one nicknamed "tiger with torn up mouth" Takharel [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ]. Takharel had both wealth and backers. So Takharel got the jiso position and Gendün Nyima was lost in the competition and just got only a dry name of the ex-nyertsang and he also had a bad name saying that he didn't give a good tonggo. And then, he became poor and was shortage of a lot of money. So the abbot who was from the same mitsen with Gendün Nyima felt pity on him and gave him the tratsang umdze position.   

