# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.09 : Tape 9  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College. In this interview he discusses how elderly and sick monks were cared for within the monastic system, and how this was paid for and done. Also included are comments about the monks' perceptions in 1957-9 regarding the end of monastic life. In conclusion, there is detailed description of the history of Drepuung and a discussion of the selection of the Phodrang Deba and the Chökhang Deba. Note: Some of Goldstein's assistant, Trindor la's comments were not on the tape, but were added during the initial translation.   

---  
### Tape 9  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_09/M_0003_09.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  If there is an old single monk in the monastery, how would they make their living in the past?   

**A:**  If the monk is single and poor, the tratsang, khamtsen and mitsen won't look after or give relief aid. In general, in the past, the monk's alms/salary was good and if one is unable to get water, you can hire your neighbors. Now the old monks get a little bit different called old people's relief [Tib. རྒས་གསོ].   

**Q:**  Would the single and old monks have to depend on the neighbors?   

**A:**  Yes they have to, but if they didn't have a close relation, they won't help with food and things, but will help with getting water and doing some miscellaneous works around the shag. But if you have a mitsen and say I'm sick, the mitsen will send a person to help you as a nurse [Tib. ནད་གཡོག]. The khamtsen will also help with a nurse if you ask. They will send person but they will not give money or grain. All the monks have khamtsen, but some do not have mitsen. If the mitsen or khamtsen gegen who sends the nurse is nice and the old monk dies, he will take care of selling the old monk's things and give the skyburial carrier, tomden [Tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན] some money and offer butter lamps and say prayers and offer money to the common monks for the deceased. If he is not nice, he will merge the things to his own shag.   

**Q:**  If the monk died, would the nurse make the decision what to do with the things left?   

**A:**  No, the one who sends the nurse decides this.   

**Q:**  Do the khamtsen gegen decide this?   

**A:**  Probably the khamtsen tsondu decides this.   

**Q:**  How do they do all the works like hiring tomden etc?   

**A:**  The nurse will do it. If a monk dies in Drepung, it's a simple process to find a tomden. It was not like nowadays. The tomden comes whenever he is told that a poor monk has died. He would roll up the body in the monk's shawl on that night and the next morning he carries away the body. And they can give him a little bit if the monk has and even if there is no payment he would do it anyway and would never claim for the payment like people do in present time.   

**Q:**  Is the tomden a layman?   

**A:**  Yes. In Drepung, there is only one tomden who has a house near the skyburial. In Drepung beggars are not allowed to enter, the tomden was powerful and only the tomden was allowed to have a whip in his waist. The tomden goes begging for mangja, tshomja and traja wherever there is tea and alms. He also has one alms share in the tshogchen. He can beg anywhere in the monastery and since he was the tomden, people would give him. The tomden has a servant working under him and he also hire people.   

**Q:**  The tomden didn't have any fixed wages, right?   

**A:**  If a monk from a good shagtsang dies, then the tomden is given a chupa called gyabten [Tib. རྒྱབ་རྟེན] which is said to be for covering his back when carrying the body.   

**Q:**  Do they pay money?   

**A:**  Yes. If it is a better off household, the shagtsang would give the tomden food on that night and in the morning and they would send a pot of tea and tsamba to the skyburial. They would not give dishes [Tib. ཁ་ལག] like they do in present time. But if it is a simple monk, then they don't need to give the tea and tsampa also.   

**Q:**  If a monk dies, do they do the astrological calculation as to when the body should be taken out?   

**A:**  Yes they do, but they don't do it for a simple monk [Tib. གྲྭ་པ་གྲྭ་རྐྱང] dies today, they call the tomden on that night and he roll the body and leave there and the next morning the tomden carries him.   

**Q:**  They also do not hang the clay pot to burn tsampa mixed with butter to feed the spirit, surkhog [Tib. བསུར་ཁོག] and they also do not do the weekly rituals for even weeks rituals, düntsig [Tib. བདུན་ཚིགས] and the astrological calculation.   

**Q:**  Was there a person transferring the spirit for the deceased, phowa [Tib. འཕོ་བ] ?   

**A:**  Yes, there was. If the person taking care of making offerings for the deceased [Tib. རྗེས་འཇུག] is good, he would call the person to do the phowa, but if the person is not good, he wouldn't call him.   

**Q:**  Anyway, they do the skyburial, right?   

**A:**  Yes. If the monk is from the well off shagtsang then they would hang the surkhog, do the astrological calculation and hold the weekly rituals and would give the tomden money and a set of monks clothes. So the tomden would get a good income.   

**Q:**  If a layman dies and offer things to the monastery to request for the detication, ngöten [Tib. བསྔོ་རྟེན]? What does the monastery do with it? Do they sell them?   

**A:**  The monastery saves them and sell them once a year. The khamtsen keeps the money and the individual monks don't get it.   

**Q:**  If a layman asks for monks to perform the rituals, who choses the monks going for the rituals? Was it the abbot or the umdze?   

**A:**  If a better off person dies, they would offer a ngöten to the abbot and umdze and the would also give a list to the tsog requesting prayers, kyabtho [Tib. སྐྱབ་ཞུ] and the gegö would read it on the tsog. And will give alms to the monks.   

**Q:**  If the family offers a ngöten to the abbot, its his and if its offered to the umdze, its his, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. If it is offered to the abbot, it's his. But if it is offered to the umdze, it is called dönkul [Tib. འདོན་སྐུལ]. They offer money and khata to umdze to say prayers in the tshog and the umdze keeps it. Nowadays, it does not belong to the umdze and it belonged to the common monks.   

**Q:**  What about when people die and they ask for monks to perform rituals in the laymen households, would the tratsang select the monks or the household finds the monks?   

**A:**  If people die and had to ask for monks to perform rituals, they would not ask the bigger tratsang, they would ask the monks they know to come to perform rituals. In Lhasa you ask gyüdö gyümey monks to the tsog and they send monks in turn. In the monastery, they do not do it in turns.   

**Q:**  Who would transfer the spirit for the deceased?   

**Q:**  In the monastery, there were few good lamas who could do that. If one have to transfer other's spirit, oneself should receive many initiations, transmissions and explanations [Tib. དབང་ལུང་ཁྲིད་གསུམ] of transfering the spirit and one should have a great practice accomplishment, [Tib. ཉམས་ལེན་བྱིན་རླབས]. One cannot transfer the spirit by just reading a pecha.   

**Q:**  In 1950-1959, there was the mimang tshogpa in Lhasa, was there mimang tshogpa in Drepung?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there were some monks in it, but the famous known person was Alo Chöndze. At Mönlam Festival, they threw a paper saying "the people of Tibet should rise up" [Tib. བོད་མི་དམངས་ཡར་ལོངས་ཤོག]. I heard that there were some people led by Alo Chöndze and those people. Then mainly the PRC might have told them to do that and the local government arrested Alo Chöndze and some others and put them in house arrest in Tromtsikang's regiment. After that, his [Alo Chöndze] tratsang, khamtsen appealed to the government and he was released.   

**Q:**  Was Alo Chöndze from Drepung?   

**A:**  He was from Gomang Hamdong Khamtsen Washu Mitsen and he was the in the same mitsen with Amdo Jayang Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ].   

**Q:**  At that time, he had lost his celebacy and has a wife, right?   

**A:**  Yes he had lost his vows and he had a wife. At that time, he was the house manager of the Gomang Khangsar [Tib. ཁང་གསར] house in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were representatives from Sera and Drepung. Was there any monk from Drepung in the mimang tsogpa?   

**A:**  No, I have never heard about this. The reason for calling him Alo Chöndze was because his gegen was called Agen [Tib. ཨ་རྒན] so he was called Alo. And he was just a mitsen chöndze.   

**Q:**  In 1955, did the monks in Drepung take much attention about politics?   

**A:**  No, at that time, they were not doing that, but we just heard that there was Alo Chöndze who was house arrested. Then the tratsang, khamtsen and mitsen asked goverment to release him.   

**Q:**  They acted as a guarantor, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they guaranteed. [Trindor: [not on the tape] That he would make no more trouble. People said there was a letter from sky [Tib. གནམ་ཡིག], the letter was opposing Chinese. This was probably about 1956-57]   

**Q:**  In 1957, 58, did the monks think that the revolt will take place soon and the monastic system was about to end?   

**A:**  Probably not. Some higher leaders [Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད་མཐོ་བ] who take salary from the government probably thought the revolt would start, but the rest of the monks didnt think at all the revolt would take place. I didn't think about this and nobody said anything to me like the revolt is coming soon. The person who think about those things should have a political understanding. If not, they couldn't have those thoughts.   

**Q:**  [laughter] Till it [revolt] fell on your head, you never thought of it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We knew about some things after Chushigandru was set up and we asked what is the Chushigandru for? It was said that they were the Army to Defend Religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དམག]. This was their internal talk. [Trindor: [not on the tape] they were fighting the Chinese and there were some battles. In 50s Khambas were thought of well in Lhasa. Nowadays they say the following derogatory and sarcastic saying: "the 5 firsts of the Khambas"; 1. the Khambas were the first to give the Chinese khata when they came to Tibet; 2. they were the first to fight the Chinese in Chushigandru; 3. after they failed the uprising, they were the first to flee to India; 4. When the policy was relaxed, they were the first to return to Tibet; 5. when the policy became better in Tibet, they were the first to do trade. The Khambas forced a number of khambas to join their group. When the Khambas first came to Tibet they would say, "the Chinese communists are our parents to be grateful for; they throw dayang like stones and earth" "[Tib. རྒྱ་གུང་ཕྲན་དྲིན་ཅན་གྱི་ཕ་མ་རེད།དངུལ་རྡ་ཡང་ས་དབྱུག་རྡོ་དབྱུག་རེད] Another song in Lhasa was: "when the Chinese came from China, they were called communist. When the Chinese gave dayang, they call them officers" [Tib. རྒྱ་མི་རྒྱ་ནས་ཡོང་དུས། གུང་ཕྲན་གུང་ཕྲན་ཟེར་གྱི། རྒྱ་མིས་རྡ་ཡང་སྤྲད་དུས། དཔོན་པོ་ལགས་དཔོན་པོ་ལགས་ཟེར་གྱི] People actually used to call them Pombola].   

**Q:**  I heard that the Chinese used their policy and gave every monk 1 dayang alms and paid salary to the high Lamas. Is it true?   

**A:**  Not for all the lamas but I heard that there were many monastic officials with special authroity were paid different amounts of salary. And they also gave alms and a rosary to the monks at the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  What did the monks think about this?   

**A:**  The monks thought this was good. [laughter] Later probably in 1958 I myself saw that the Chinese gave one dayang alms and a medal of Mao Zedong, the monks took the dayang and then in the courtyard they smashed the medal with rocks] [laughter]   

**A:**  Also we used to get a daily newspaper in the monastery. [Trindor: [not on the tape] I think the Tibet Daily News [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་ཉིན་རེའི་ཚགས་པར] started 1953-54-].   

**A:**  A servant of the laji called Lama Chandzö received the newspaper and they distributed them to those who got the salary. Mainly the abbot and shengo were among them. The gegö and umdze of the tratsang didnt get the salary and in general the high lamas also might not have the salary, but I am not sure.   

**Q:**  Would you please tell me the history of Drepung like how Drepung was found?   

**A:**  I will tell you what ever I know.   

**Q:**  Have you been the shidü?   

**A:**  No. The shidü had a big income. The salary [Tib. རྒྱབ་གླ] was 50 khe of grain and have all the shares of alms and salary in the tratsang. And there was also many different things happened [on the income and expenditure], but no one says anything.   

**Q:**  Would the shidü get the shares of alms and the salary from the Mönlam?   

**A:**  No. They wouldn't get even the alms and salary in the tsogchen. The founder of Drepung was Je Jayang Chöje [Tib. རྗེ་འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཆོས་རྗེ]. I heard that a manifestation [Tib. སྤྲུལ་པ] of Nechung Deity gave a prophecy to Jayang Chöje. There were many holy springs in front of Drepung mountain at this time, so Nechung gave the prophecy that this is a good place to build the monastery. It was said that Jayang Chöje was a manifestation of Manju Shri, Jambeyang [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་དབྱངས]. The full name of monastery is Tashi Panden Drekar Pungba [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲས་དཀར་སྤུང་པ]. It got this name because there was a holy pilgrim site in southern India called Panden Drepung". So when we give some speeches on the tsog we mention the name of Drepung as, "Panden Drekar Pungba which is named similar with the Panden Drepung in southern India" [Tib. རྒྱ་གར་ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲས་སྤུངས་པ་དང་མཚན་དོན་མཚུངས་པ་དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲས་དཀར་སྤུངས་པ]. In the past this is where the Buddha gave his first initiation of Kala Chakra [Tib. དུས་འཁོར་དབང་ཆེན]. So it was from this that the name was taken. At first, there were only 8 gelong at the consecration of the monastery.   

**Q:**  At first there was no tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The first building is now called Jayang Lhakhang [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ལྷ་ཁང] which was built by 8 gelong located behind the tshogchen. In this, there is a naturally protuded image [Tib. རང་བྱོན] of Manju Shri. Later, the 8 gelong held the first tshog in this small chapel by sqweezing it and it was said one of the 8 died when sqweezing.   

**Q:**  Trindo: Wasn't it said that his leg was broken?   

**A:**  It was said he died and he also might have broken his leg. We wouldn't know for sure. So there were only 7 gelong. This is the bais from where 7,700 monks comes from.   

**Q:**  Was this kind of the prophecy?   

**A:**  Trindor: This is what Tsongkhapa [Tib. ཙོང་ཁ་པ] said there will 7,700 monks in the future and the monastery will flourish [Tib. གྲ་རྒྱས་པོ].   

**Q:**  In the biginning, was Tsongkhapa alive then?   

**A:**  He was in Ganden then.   

**A:**  [Trindor: [not on the tape] there is still a iron stick [Tib. ལྕགས་རྒྱུག] used by the first gegö]. In Buddha's time, some body offered a glass mala [Tib. ཤེལ་གྱི་ཕྲེང་བ] to the Buddha and he gave Tshongkhapa [who was then known as Gelong Thongna Gawa [Tib. མཐོང་ན་དགའ་བ]] a conch horn and said. "given this dharma conch horn and the prophecy, the doctrin of Tshongkhapa will flousrish" [Tib. ཆོས་དུང་གནང་ནས་ལུང་བསྟན་བདེན་པའི་མཐུས། བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་བའི་བསྟན་པ་རྒྱས་གྱུར་ཅིག] and then Tshongkhapa hid this conch horn in Ganden as hidden treasury and then Tsongkhapa took out this conch horn and gave it to Jayang Chöje. Even now, we can see it. It is in front of the Jayang Temple [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ལྷ་ཁང]. In the past, this conch horn is not allowed to blow every time. On the 2nd of the 7th lunar month, it was the commemmorating the day of Jayang Chöje took his geshe exam which is called Rigdra Chenmo and they would blow this conch horn once and the evening of the Ganden Ngamjö, they would blow it once and on the First day of the Tibetan New Year, they would blow it once.   

**Q:**  Trindo: This conch horn was called the hidden treasure horn [Tib. གཏེར་དུང] and it was said that the chökhang depa [Tib. མཆོད་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] and shengo would open it and when the Dalai Lama comes, he can open it when ever it wants, right?   

**A:**  Yes. On the past, when the Panchen Lama came , he took it out. In the past, there used to be 7 tratsang in Drepung.   

**Q:**  Which was the first tratsang?   

**A:**  I don't know which is the first, but in terms of the sizes, now there are 4 tratsang; Gomang, Loseling, Deyang, Ngagpa. In the past, there used be the three tratsang; Shagor [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར], Gyepa [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] and the Düwa [Tib. འདུལ་བ], but there is no more tratsang, but they have the names of the labrang because they have their abbots. Including Ngagpa we have 8 abbots in Drepung.   

**Q:**  Do you know about the rotation of shengo getting appointed from different tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes I know. There are 4 tratsang and these go in turn for shengo. They need two shengo in a year and Ngagba and Deyang get less turns. Loseling and Gomang gets more shengo. These two tratsang have shengo every year except once every three years there is no shengo from these two tratsang. Loseling has more khamtsen from where the candidate of the shengo goes. In Gomang, shengo can come only from 2 mitsen; Gadong, [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] and böbashung. The Drepung shengo can only be done by pure böba. In Sera, I heard that all kinds of monks like Khampas, Amdo and Mongolian can be shengo.   

**Q:**  Was there any reason for that?   

**A:**  I don't know the reason.   

**Q:**  The reason might be because the shengo had to be in charge of Mönlam.   

**A:**  In Loseling, the candidate come from many sources; one candicdate comes from Nyaling Tshosum [Tib. ང་གླིང་མཚོ་གསུམ]" nyango [Tib. nya 'go ?], Ling [Tib. གླིང] Tsomai [Tib. མཚོ་སྨད] in turn. And one candidate comes from bödbashung and one from Dinga [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁ྄] mitsen. Both Gomang and Loseling have bödbashung. The way of appointing Drepung shengo was a extraordinary one among the three great monastic seats and it has different way of chosing the candidate and holding the inauguration which was approved by the Great Fifth Dalai Lama, so the shengo candidates has to go in person to Norbulinga well dressed and ride horses and hang tassels on their horses and the Dalai Lama would approve the shengo where as for Sera and Ganden, they just have to submit their names.   

**Q:**  All the candidates have to go and at that time, it was not confirmed, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Drepung sends 5 candidates from each party to Norbulinga for the examination. First they had to show their physical appearance, mibab jenshu [Tib. མི་བབ་སྤྱན་ཞུ] in Norbulinga where they walk back and forth so the Dalai Lama and other officials can see what they look like. Then the second thing is that each of the 5 must give a speech called Tsogtam [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ] before the Dalai Lama. The 3rd is they have to read a letter in the dewashung Drungja where the Dalai Lama is seated on the throne. Each have to read loudly a page with about 8 or 12 words which was given right at that time by the trunyichemmo. Here they could show their style [Tib. བྱེད་བཟོ].   

**Q:**  How many times, did they have to go to Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Three times in a day.   

**Q:**  Do the mitsen goes in turns like this year is bödbashung and the next year goes from Gadong?   

**A:**  Yes you are right. They have their own turns.   

**Q:**  Who would put forward the candidates? Would the khamtsen put forward it?   

**A:**  The shengo are in general chosen by khamtsen and there is nothing to with the tratsang. The leader of the selection are the 2 election abbots, Wödu Khenpo [Tib. འོས་བསྡུ་མཁན་པོ] who go in turn from the 4 tratsang. The candidates also have to take a reading test in front of Drepung Laji where all the abbots have gathered and the abbots would point their fingers to show the number of lines that they have to read. They don't do a tshogtam, but have to read a letter. At this test they don't have to be all dressed up. The Wödu Khenpo submit the names of the candidates to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  There were 5 candidates, right? If in this year it is the turn for bödbashung, how many candidates do they have to submit?   

**A:**  It is always 5 persons.   

**Q:**  The candidates names are under the control of the mitsen whose turn it is?   

**A:**  Yes. The mitsen itself uses it power and would make this 5 candidates. The tratsang and the shengo didn't have any right to meddle into it.   

**Q:**  If it is the turn for Gomang and Loseling to send the candidates, Gomang bödbashung send 5 persons and the Loseling bödbashung send 5 persons and from this 10 person 5 goes to Norbulinga, right?   

**A:**  No. All the 10 candidates goes to Norbulinga.   

**A:**  After the tests were done in Norbulunga, the two abbots had submitted the list of 5 persons to the Dalai Lama. Then the Dalai Lama would look at these 5 persons and put a approval mark on one which is called chagtag [Tib. ཕྱག་རྟགས] and this is the final decision and nobody could say anything.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama's incarnation is to be recognized, then the regent does it and at this times there would be the backdoor relations, right?   

**A:** . Yes. And they could give bribes.   

**Q:**  Is it the same for phodrang deba and chökhang deba where they can go through the back door?   

**A:**  These are appointed by the relevant tratsang and there was also back door relations. The phodrang deba is selected from Gomang in turns from among the 16 khamtsen and it's term is 3 or 5 years and there is no back door relations. For phodrang deba, they would give lots of gifts to the khamtsen itself because it has a big income. In the old society, for phodrang deba position, they gave 1,000 dotse as a bribe to the khamtsen. The term of phodrang deba is probably 6 years and then it becomes the turn for the other khamtsen. Each khamtsen can get the turn once every 16 years.   

**A:**  Was this done only by the böba or what?   

**A:**  No, it can be done by everybody like Khampa and Amdo.   

**Q:**  What about chökhang deba?   

**A:**  The chökhang deba is appointed by the tratsang. They don't have to give gifts to get the position. They might have a good income, but they have a heavy responsibility on fire and theft.   

**Q:**  What is the main responsibilty?   

**A:**  There were two chökhang deba; one from Gomang and one from Ngagpa who have to take care of Drepung tsogchen. The famous phodrang deba comes from Gomang but the chief caretaker of the Tsugklagang called Könyerpön [Tib. དཀོན་གཉེར་དཔོན] comes from Loseling.   

**Q:**  So this was like dividing the income between the two tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The phodrang deba has a high rank. He holds the golden seal of the dewashung which is called Phodrang Serdam [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསེར་དམ]. Sera is different, Sera had shesimnyi [Tib. ཞལ་གཟིམ་གཉིས]; two shengo and the simkhang debpa [Tib. གཟིམ་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] who makes the decision on jurisdiction [Tib. ཁྲིམས་གཅོད]. In Drepung, phodrang deba has no authority over the jurisdiction. All of the jurisdiction is done by the two shengo. In Drepung if a monks kills someone or commits a serious theft, the sealing of his apartment and confiscating his property can only be done by phodrang deba. He puts his seal on it and the shengo puts his seal on it. On this phodrang depa had more power on this.   

**Q:**  I heard that if there is no phodrang depa, the laji is not allowed to meet, is that right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Laji were allowed to meet for verbally discussing matters without phodrang deba. But the seal box of laji is kept by the Phodrang Deba and nobody is allowed to touch it. So if they have to seal the door, it could not be done without phodrang deba. Let's talk about the shengo candidates. The Dalai Lama would give the approval letter to the two abbots and the abbots are not allowed to open the letter. They have to bring it back to laji who had gathered there. Many monks would be waiting at the stone floor courtyard in front of the tshogchen to see who was selected when the 2 abbots come back with the letter from government. At this time, 2 Thamba [Tib. དན་འབག] thabyog wearing white chuba made from raw silk and a conical hat called Arsha [Tib. ཨར་ཞྭ] would also be waiting by the Laji office. When the shengo candicates return from Norbulinga dressed up, first they go to their shag and the approval letter [Tib. འོས་རྒྱ] is opened by the laji and they know who is the senior and the who is the junior shengo and they tell the 2 thabyog each to take one letter to the winner's shag. The shengo candidates have to have raw wheat on a tray in their shag. The thabyog would give the letter by placing it on top of the wheat and the shengo would give the thabyog a khata and some money. The shengo also would give thabyog a stack of 5 layers of fried cookies, khabse [Tib. ཁ་ཟས] and droma dresi. Then the thabyog leaves. When the thabyog are going to inform the shengo winners, the monks on the way would ask who won the shengo. The thabyog won't say the winners name, only says it is the first, second or the third candidates [Tib. འོས་དང་པོ་གཉིས་པ་གསུམ་པ].   

**Q:**  In what month and date would they do this?   

**A:**  This is done before 25th of the 6th month, because they have to get prepared. Then after it is known who won, streams of monks comes carrying khata to congratulate the winners. At this time, both the winners don't know who is the senior and who is the junior. Then the old shengo would come to give the khata by yelling Ojojo [Tib. ?]. The old senior shengo would give the khata to the new senior and old junior would give the khata to the new junior. That is how they were known. The new shengo receives the old shengo outside the door of the courtyard carrying his hat. Then both of them go together to his shag. Then the new shengo puts down a thick cushion for the old shengo and serve droma dresi. Then the old shengo ask for the permission to the new saying, "I would like to ask the permission for all the ex-shengo before me to not to have to come to the tsog and chöra " [Tib. nga yar gyab kyi shengo rnying pa mtha' dag thsogs chosra 'dro ma dgos pa dgongs pa gnang rogs gnang] The new would tell the old, "I ask for the permission to build a stove in the courtyard and make fire and light lamps for the preparation for the shengo's inauguration and draw the sand on the road" [Tib. ཞལ་ངོ་ཁྲི་འདོན་གྱི་གྲ་སྒྲིག་གི་བྱེད་དུ། སྒོ་རའི་ནང་ཐབ་རྒྱག་ཆོག་པ་དང་མེ་གཏོང་ཆོག་པ། ཞུན་མར་སྤོར་ཆོག་པ། ལམ་ཁ་ལ་བྱེ་ལམ་འཐེན་ཆོག་པ་གནང་རོགས་གནང] Then in the Laji, the khamtsen gegen of three khamtsen; Hamdong, Samlo and Tsa would throw dice [Tib. སྦར་ཤོ] to see to which khamtsen the 2 shengo would go to and go for the pilfrimage [Tib. མཆོད་མཇལ] on the same day. Then the shengo would dress up and go fo the pilgrimage. If Hamdong wins, then its said the shengo will be powerful, [Tib. དབང་ཐང་ཆེན་པོ] while in office. If Samlo wins, then shengo get good income. If Tsha khamten wins, then its said that the shenyo will be strict (fierce) [Tib. ཚ་པོ]. These three were done on the day of the inauguration day of the shengo. The shengo's main inauguration is done in front of the big satin thanka [Tib. གོས་སྐུ] show on the 30th of 6th lunar month. On that day, just after the day break they would bring the satin thanka. The new shengo does his internal kind of the inauguration in his shag and they would offer him the khata. The two old shengo, one in front and one in the back, accompanies the satin thanka carrying incense when the thanka was brought up there. When the thanka is brought back, the old shengo had already returned and the two new would bring it back. Then 5 umdze from 4 tratsang and tshochen sit with the new and old shengo on a mattress facing the satin thanka and they would do the cleansing and concecration, trüsö rabne [Tib. ཁྲུད་གསོལ་རབ་གནས]. It doesnt take long and once this is finished, there is the opera show and the shengo would watch the opera. Then the 4 shengo would rise from their thrones and the old senior shengo holds a small gong and the junior holds an iron stick, jagyug [Tib. ལྕགས་རྒྱུག]. And the senior shengo beats the gong by saying the auspicious verses and the junior would stand there holding the iron stick. Then the new ones get up and give the iron stick and the gong to the new ones and then the old ones leave. Then the new sit where the old ones were seated. Then the senior hands over the gong to the new senior shengo and the junior hands over the iron stick to the new junior and then the two old would leave. Then they take the thanka down and put it away. Then the new shengo sits on the throne and beat the gong and say the auspicious verses of the inauguration ceremony held in the tshogchen dukhang.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't they hold the inauguration ceremony in the Kelsang Lhakhang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ལྷ་ཁང]?   

**A:**  No, this is the place where they hand over the charter, jayig [Tib. བཅའ་ཡིག]. When the shengo arrive in the tsogchen they go for the pilgrimage and then do 3 prostrations and they hold some white aupicious flowers [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་མེ་ཏོག] and then they take 3 steps into the front row and bang the iron stick 3 times. They can tell from the sound of that banging roughly how powerful the shengo will be for the coming year. Then the two shengo would sit on the throne with their cloaks on. And their friends would come to give khata and the envelopes with money in it and they need three khata. If the shengo is from a simple monk there wouldn't be many people offering the khata, if the shengo is from the better off shagtsang or kudrak there would be many people coming to offer khata. The two shengo would sit side by side and the two chabril and nangma sit beside the each shengo and those firends would give 3 khata, one to each. There are two lines of khata givers, one for each. If one line has more people, then the geyog would send the line with less people slower so that both end at the same time. Then do a droma dresi and say a prayer while doing it, and its over.   

**Q:**  Would they give money along with the khata?   

**A:**  Yes, the money was put in envelopes and it is written "this is for buying clothes " namthö [Tib. ནམ་དོད]. As soon as the shengo sits on the throne, they would recite three prayers with four verses which said, "on the best day and best stars according to the lunar month, the Buddhas in ten directions have appeared in the sky. The gods rained the auspicious words and we enthrone you as the dharma king of three realms" [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཡར་བརྩེག་གཟའ་སྐར་འཕྲོད་སྦྱོར་ཉིན།ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་སངས་རྒྱས་མདུན་གྱི་ནམ་མཁར་བྱོན། ལྷ་རྣམས་ཆར་འབེབ་བྲང་སྲོང་ཤིས་པ་བརྗོད། སྟོང་གསུམ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོར་མངའ་གསོལ་ལོ]. This is the main enthronement ceremony. Then they also say the tea offering prayers with the wording to make the offering to Jayang Chöje the founder of the Drepung. They also serve a droma along with the offering prayers. Then they offer the khata and then it's finished.   

**Q:**  What is all about the great asking for permission, gongshu chenmo [Tib. དགོངས་ཞུ་ཆེན་མོ]?   

**A:**  About 5-6 days later, the gongshu chenmo starts. In the past, everyone has to pay trangga garbo. The shengo had a great income. It will reach tens of thousands of yuan if we count it as the present currencuy. E.g., if you have a big window, or outside curtain, or go curtain, and other different types of curtain types like upper curtain, namyöl [Tib. གནམ་ཡོལ], lower curtain, sayol [Tib. ས་ཡོལ], yak hair curtain, drayöl [Tib. སྦྲ་ཡོལ], you have to pay for the permission to have all of these. If you have an orchard with fruit trees, a stable, drainage [Tib. ཆུ་སྦུག] or even a large boulder which was prohibited to be split due to some reasons related with deities also has to be paid trangga garbo. Including lama, khembo have to ask for these ask permission. And there were some peddlers [Tib. ཁྲོམ་འདོན་མཁན] in the Drepung tsogchen stone floor like butchers, inn keepers [Tib. གནས་མོ], bread sellers. Among the three great monastic seats, Drepung has the most elaborated market. It was said that this was because of the blessing from the Drepung's three Tara Statues which said to have talked [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ་གསུང་བྱོན་མ]. One Tara blessed for the Drepung to become powerful and one blessed for Drepung to have a abundant of water and the last one blessed for Drepung to have an elaborated market. All the peddlers have to pay trangga garpo.   

**Q:**  Do the monks of Gomang pay the money to the Gomang shengo and the monks of the Loseling pay to the Loseling shengo or was it paid jointly?   

**A:**  All this money is split between the two shengo.   

**Q:**  I know a tsogchen trüku in America and he told me that he has to pay 70 trangga garpo per year for asking the permission for keeping horses and flowers.   

**A:**  Yes, there were lot of things to ask for the permission. In general, mules and donkeys were not allowed to keep over night and to keep horses and oxen overnight only needs to ask the verbal permission [Tib. ཁ་དགོངས]. When women come for the pilgrimage, they have to ask for the permission and they are not allowed to stay over night.   

**Q:**  Do the monks like you have to ask for permission?   

**A:**  No, because I was a simple monk and didn't have a right and big name and a big house. The higher lamas have to ask for permission. I heard that the shengo gets full leather pouches of trangga garpo. They get the trangga garpo twice; once in the gongshu chenmo and once when the Mönlam Festival is held in Lhasa. During the Mönlam Festival, they keep watchmen for the houses in the monastery. For this also they had to pay trangga garpo. I don't know the number of trangga garpo. There was a saying, "when the tsogchen shengo looks at the sky, he gets money and if he looks at the ground, he also gets money" [Tib. འབྲས་སྤུངས་ཚོགས་ཆེན་ཞལ་ངོ། གནམ་ལ་བལྟས་ན་དངུལ་རེད། ས་ལ་བལྟས་ན་དངུལ་རེད]. As for the reason for saying this is; when they white wash the housess in Drepung, the shengo would go around patrolling to check whether the white wash, the black painting around the windows [Tib. ནག་རྩི] and the banner on the roof, the curtains and the fringes on the window etc is done well or not and when he looks upwards and found something not well done, he would fine money. That's why they said looking at sky, they get money. [laughter] As for the money when he looks at the ground is that the shengo would check whether the grounds were sweeped clean or not and whether the white lines were drawm well or not. If he find something wrong he would fine money. Once when the shengo was going around, he saw a yak urinating and brought the monk out and beat him with switches and they could find small pieces of broken switches stuck into his flesh that they had to pull them out. This happened at our time   

**Q:**  Did he beat the owner of the yak or the owner of the place?   

**A:**  They beat the monk who was the owner of the place. He held grudge [Tib. དགའ་མིན་དགའ་དྭོགས] and beat him. The nangma was a very bad one. Usually, the nangma would say, "take him down and beat him 100 times with switches!" and they would beat him. This nangma said it in a sacastic way using honorific words and said, "please have him lay down and offer him 100 swithes pleasantly" [Tib. ཁོང་མར་སྐུ་གཟིམ་ཅིག་ཞུ་རོགས་གནང། སྤྲོ་པོ་ཅིག་བགྱ་ཐམས་པ་ཕུལ་རོགས་གནང]. [laughter] Actually, there couldn't be a place where yak is not allowed to urinate.   

**Q:**  Did you hear of throwing thukpa on shengo's nose when the dobdo were serving thukpa in the tsog and fighting?   

**A:**  No. There is no fighting over thukpa in tshogchen and Loseling. There is only fighting on the thukpa in Gomang. It almost resulted in taking of life. There is pushing and shoving in the tshogchen and that over causes thukpa to splash into the air up to the long pillars and that may have fallen on shengo's face. But I have never heard they threw thukpa on shengo's face.   

**Q:**  Do you know what started the big Gomang thukpa fight between Amdo and böba? Some say that an Amdo knifed a Tibetan. Some say a böba told lie and hid the thukpa to get the first place server. What was the cause of this big fight?   

**A:**  There wasn't any reason for that fight though they were beaten badly. They would beat gongs when they serve the rice gruel in the tsog. It was regarded as very famous if one gets first and seond place thukpa server and all the monks would watch who got the first and they would try to grab the pots and hit with ladles on the way. The rice gruel of Gomang is said to be great because it was blessed by Drugpa Künleg [Tib. འབྲུག་པ་ཀུན་ལེགས]. This seems to be really true.   

**Q:**  We heard there was a big fight between the Amdo and the böba and the böba side said that the Amdo knived the böba when grabbing the thukpa? And the Amdo side say that when the jayog served the thukpa, a monk called Thüsö [Tib. ཐུབ་བཟོད] hid the thukpa in his cloak and when Thüsö came out, the fight started with Amdo. What really happened?   

**A:**  Yes. They would stop each other, but they would not use knives. But they would hit with the ladles and it was said the heavy ladles will kill people if the back side of the ladle is used to hit people.   

**Q:**  When the big fight took place were you in the dukhang?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there. It could be true that Thüsü and the jayog colabborated [Tib. ཁ་སྒྲིལ]. The jayog would beat the gong to serve the thukpa for the monks to get up to get the thukpa.   

**Q:**  We heard that there was a jayog named Künga.   

**A:**  Yes you are right. There was a jayog called Wöser Künga [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཀུན་དགའ] an old monk like me and Thüsü's name is Wöser Thöndrub and I also know him. At that time, they went out in the place called Shachubug in the late evening and many people were almost killed. It was the first time where the shengo beat 22 monks on their rear end with switch called tsargyug [Tib. ཚར་རྒྱུག] in this fight.   

**Q:**  Later, did they fight in Parikhug [Tib. བྲག་རི་ཁུག] in Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, I don't know about this. They fought at the east side of Drepung. At that time, jayog Wöser Künga and Thüsö were also beaten with switches. I don't remember the number of Amdo and böba, but altogether there were 22 monks. The thabyog from Thambag beat them. The thabyog being böba, he held grudge and beat the Amdo severely with switches and the Amdo's leg nerves were damaged. This is what I saw.   

**Q:**  Trindo: What I heard was that jayog had kept the thukpa from the beginning and before the second tea was served, he gave the thukpa to Thüsü and he hid the thukpa in his cloak and then when he took this thukpa [to get the first], the Amdo noticed it and pulled the thukpa.   

**Q:**  This also seems to be possible, but it impossile for Chungdag [Tib. ཆུང་དག] knived people. If he had knived people then his name would be spread out. Geyog Chungdag was among the dobdo and he and Wöse Thusü were in the same tobtsang.   

**Q:**  Did they beat them on that day?   

**A:**  No, they fought in day time and they also fought at night. After the shengo knew about this, they called them to the shengo office and there were 22 people. At that time, I was the Hamdong jayog then.   

