# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College. In this interview he talks about the "young monk tax" (shöndre), and the salary paid to him, as well as discusses how he first became a monk and the work done in the monastery. There is also a detailed discussion of various incidents that occurred while he was a grain steward, and discussions of daily life, including diet, salary, and alms distributed. There is also a discussion of the structure of the Gomang College government.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_01/M_0003_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I'm 74. I'm not an expert on religion, politics and science, but I stayed in monastery for a long time so I know something.   

**Q:**  How old are you? How did you first get into the monastery? How old were you when you came to the monastery? Where were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in Phembo Lhündrup Dzong [Tib. འཕན་པོ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང]. I became a monk at age 7. My gegen was my relative as well as a dobdo, so we gidru couldn't learn any knowledge. His name was Chömphel Namgyal [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. My name is Wöser Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང].   

**Q:**  How did you first get in the monastery? Did your parents find your gegen?   

**A:**  My parents brought me to the apartment (shag) of my gegen who was my maternal uncle. And so my mother told him not to beat me and to be kind to me. So later, as my gegen was a dobdo, he didn't have the experience in religion. So he did not teach me and also did not find me a book-reading teacher (pechai gegan) on the pretext that this would anger my mother since if I studied, I would get beaten. Actually, eventhough he couldn't teach me, he should have sent me to one of those pechai gegan which he could have found as there were lot of them. Now when I look back, I draw two conclusions. On the one hand, the gegen was to blame for me not having good education in pecha. On the other hand, had the gegen not accepted me, I wouldn't have had the opportunity to live in one of the great monastic seats and get the alms. So I feel like he is the same as my root guru [Tib. རྩ་བའ་བླ་མ] and I feel gratitude towards him and I have faith in him.   

**Q:**  Where are you in Drepung? Which tratsang?   

**A:**  Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང] Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] Khamtsen, Tsokhag [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ་བ] Mitsen.   

**Q:**  Who was in your shagtsang? Did you have one or two gegen?   

**A:**  There was my gegen and he had three gidru; my two brothers and me who were from the same parents. I am the eldest. The two younger brothers both became dobdo. My gegen was in the dobdo's eating commune, toptsang [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང] and the two brothers were also in the toptsang.   

**Q:**  So you weren't pechawa and you and you were'nt in the tobtsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The two other dobdo were also in the tobtsang. I was just in between.   

**Q:**  You weren't pechawa and you were not in the tobtsang, so what were you doing then mainly in the monastery?   

**A:**  Usually, I didn't have much work to do and I always went to tsog chöra. My gegen had a friend who was jama of Gomang Tratsang. Jama was the care taker of the assembly hall, dukgang [Tib. འདུ་ལྷང]. So he needs a servant called, jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] and my gegen said I have to work as his jayog. If my gegen hadn't made me to become the jayog, I would have become very good. This was because I didn't have the merit [Tib. བསོད་བདེ]. In those days, when I was a child, the Gomang abbot told me to study tsenyi. And I told him I couldn't understand it and he told me never mind you are young and you can learn. You always come to tsog chöra, so you can learn. So according to his advice I got two gegen; one a Mongolian geshe and one a Tibetan geshe. I did the senriy in front of Gomang's deity, Maha Kala, Gombo [Tib. མགོན་པོ] and the Mongolian (outer Mongolian was chosen. He was a good scholar. So for 4 months I studied tsenyi. After 4 months, my gegen sent me to be jayog. So as my gegen told me to go, I also wanted to do that and I did jayog for 3 years.   

**Q:**  Is this a shöndre?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was about 19 years of age.   

**Q:**  Can you explain what you did from age 7-19?   

**A:**  I had no other work. I just went to tsog chöra.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go to do shöndre?   

**A:**  Just a little, not too much. When there is shöndre work, there are 9 mitsen in Hamdong who rotate to send shöndre to do this.   

**Q:**  What kind of work do you have to do for the shöndre? What do you have to work for the tsogchen, tratsang and the khamtsen?   

**A:**  Regularly, during the opera festival, shotön [Tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] in Drepung, one shöndre is to go carry the big satin thanka [Tib. གོས་སྐུ] to the side where it is displayed and bring it back. And if it gets wet, we have to put it into sun light to dry. This is the tsogchen shöndre. In tratsang, there are some big rugs (with long fringe), these are used during the winter and in summer we put them away in the storehouse. This is tratsang shöndre. Other khamtsen/mitsen involve their having something to bring from Lhasa or something to send to Lhasa, we go to do this.   

**Q:**  Do you have to do work when thukpa or tea served in khamtsen, tshomja [Tib. ཚོམས་ཇ]?   

**A:**  Yes, we clean the utensils and containers. The tratsang jayog is one name but two jobs: I go to the rungkhang as jayog to work and the other is to do sweeping and dusting in the dukhang and taking responsibility of the care taker of the dukhang which is the job of the jama. Also he has to look after all the things in the dukhang. And I had to offer the water offerings and light and put off butter lamps. The jama also have to stand near the cauldron and there were two person standing there. Jayog is done by young monks, but in the rungkhang, he has big responsibilities. There are 13 lines of monks in the dukhang and the jayog has to count and lead the tea servers, chade [Tib. ཕྱག་བདེ་བ]. He leads them into the dukhang where there is 13 lines. In each line 5 chade are sent to do this, the first tea container, chabtra [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ] has more grease on it since the tea is not churned. When they put the tea in the container, they put the tea enough for two senior monks. The jayog's work is when the monks come carrying the tea pots, first they serve the front row [Tib. གདོང་གྲལ] the jayog tells the monks carrying the tea in through the side door which row to go into. Thus generally send 5 chade so the senior ones in line who get the grease. The jayog is in charge of this.   

**Q:**  So Jayog's work is not in the khamtsen, but in the tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I did the jayog for three years.   

**Q:**  When you were the jayog, what salary did you get?   

**A:**  I had some extra alms shares which was given directly to my gegen by the sponsor because I was send there like a servant.   

**A:**  How much extra alms shares do you have?   

**A:**  Sometimes I get about 6-7-8 extra alms shares. It depends on how good the sponsor is. In Gomang, the hierarchy of monastic official are: the highest is the uchö; umdze and gegö, the next is called Jachabnangsum [Tib. ཇ་ཆབ་ནང་གསུམ]; jama, chabril and nangma. Then the chabril has his servant called chabyog [Tib. ཆབ་གཡོག] and the jama has his servant called jayog. These are the 7 lene of Gomang.   

**Q:**  Do you have to make the tea?   

**A:**  No. There are 9 thabyog; 1 metong [Tib. མེ་གཏོང] person who make the fire and 8 chulen [Tib. ཆུ་ལེན] monks who fetch water.   

**Q:**  What work does jayog do for the whole day?   

**A:**  After I get up, first I go to the rungkhang. Then after the morning chöra, shogchö [Tib. ཞོགས་ཆོས] there is the traja. After the shogchö, the umdze comes for traja. I go to the chöra to fetch his cloak and carry it to the dukhang for him. I usually leave it on his seat in a heap and the traja starts I put the cloak on his back and when the tsog is over, I go to take the cloak to his shag.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the traja or mangja?   

**A:**  This is traja. In our tratsang, the five monks of the Jachabnangsum have a leather strip [Tib. འབྲེང་པ]. We have to tell the tea servers to get up and go to get tea and then when they return, we tell them faster faster and we would hit them a little bit. Other tasks include the cleaning the dukhang and making water offering yönchab [Tib. ཡོན་ཆབ] etc.   

**Q:**  There were separate sweepers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were two lay sweepers, but we sweep all the chapels [Tib. ལྷ་ཁང].   

**Q:**  At that time, how many jayog were there?   

**A:**  There was 1 jama and 1 jayog; and 1 chabril and one chabyog. One nangma was appointed by the gegö. The chabril is appointed by the Gomang Nyertsang. The hierarchy is umdze, gegö, chabril, jama and nangma.   

**Q:**  What is the work of the chabril?   

**A:**  The chabril work is like a gembo. He has to inform all the news to the gegö and if there is information to send down to the monks, it is sent through him to the 16 khamtsen. If the chabril isn't around, then the chabyog does that. If the jama is busy, then the jayog does it.   

**Q:**  What is the term of the chabril?   

**A:**  The chabril's term is three years, but can be renewed up to about 9 years if he does well. The nangma's work is that if a sponsor donates tea, the nangma gets the tea from the sponsor and brings it to the rungkhang. Then he over sees when the tea is ground and put in the cauldron. Then after its poured in, the pot is covered and a earth seal is put on the cover so it can't be opened. And in the morning if the nangma isn't there, they can't open the cover of the cauldron. When the nangma comes they take off the cover, and put in the butter and they stir up with ladle [Tib. སྐྱོགས་འཕྱར]. He is like a dagnyer." The nangma is also essential for the butter in the tea. If the nangma isn't there then they are not allowed to open the cauldron and put in butter. Its roughly 4 khe of butter per cauldron of tea and they put a wooden seal on the butter. We put in more butter if we get extra sponsor for that day and when we put the butter in the cauldron, the nangma comes.   

**Q:**  How did you earn your livelihood at that time?   

**A:**  I lived with my gegen till I became the jayog and he provided for me because my gegen is my relative. Then I did jayog for 3 years and then I did Gomang tratsang's grain nyerpa, drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] and Hamdong Khamtsen's jama.   

**Q:**  When you ended the jayog work, were you with your gegen? Or you got separated from the shag?   

**A:**  I stayed in the original shag until age 25. And then, I got separated.   

**Q:**  Was there a contradiction? Or did you get separate because you could stand on your own feet?   

**A:**  No. My gegen is dobdo and I didn't like to be dobdo. So I left the shag.   

**Q:**  Did your parents have other children besides the 3 in the shag?   

**A:**  There were 3 daughters, 2 were made nuns and 1 was kept at home. They all died earlier.   

**Q:**  Were you a farmer?   

**A:**  Yes. We were Drepung jiso's miser.   

**Q:**  When you left the shag, what share did you get?   

**A:**  My shag was like a real monk's shag without much things because my gegen was a simple monk. When we divided the things I didn't get much. I got some tsamba, oil, butter, a cusion and and bedding.   

**Q:**  Was your shag poor or middle standard?   

**A:**  It was a poor shag of a simple monk. After this, I did the work of jama for Hamdong Khamtsen. This is Gomang's largest khamtsen among the 16 khamtsen and they have a jama and a jayog. Hamdong has lots of miser and had nomads also in the north. Hamdong Khamtsen's jayog does all the things and the jama orders him to do things in particular, taking and bringing messages. At first, I was Hamdong Khamtsen's jayog. Then I did the jama.   

**Q:**  Lets go back to tratsang jayog. What was your work when there is a thukpa in the tratsang?   

**A:**  In Gomang, if there is rice gruel, [Tib. བཞེས་ཐུག་དམ་བཅའ] the main in charge is the jama. The jama measures the dry rice in dre and get the things from the sponsor. On the next day, the jayog yells to the monks in the dukhang and tell the amount of khe of rice he got when they bring the thukpa into the dukhang. He says, "today I got this amount of rice from the sponsor" In the next morning I report to the umdze and gegö that I received such and such rice from the sponsor. When we make rice gruel generally in the rungkhang there is jama, nangma, jayog who do things and there are also 2 people called the general in charge of the thukpa called Thukpey Jigyab [Tib. ཐུག་པའ་སྤྱི་ཁབ] the sponsor appoints these two jigyab from among the monks. The job of the Jigyab is to examine the quality of the rice and determine how many monks are there in tsog these days, and then has to say how much water to put in the cauldron. And he would say water is enough. If they are not careful at this time, the jikyab has big responsibility. The monks say: "If there is extra, it is like having extra water; if it is too little, it is like having too little gold" [Tib. ལྷག་ན་ཆུ་ལྷག། ཆད་ན་གསེར་ཆད] In other words, its okay to have extra but very bad to have too little. The monks will insult the jigyab behind his back.   

**Q:**  How does the sponsor know who is good to be the jigyab?   

**A:**  They know because the jigyab was done permanently. The sponsor asks the monks who is good and expert at jikyab, and all the monks say that this person is good. In that way, they picks the 2 jikyab. The thukpa jigyab have a big responsibility because if the thukpa is short the monks would complain him.   

**Q:**  What is your work when they serve thukpa?   

**A:**  In other tratsang, they beat some kind of metal, [Tib. ཏིང་ཏིང] and some have bells, but in Gomang we beat a gong in the dukhang. The jayog has to beat the gong near the main door for tea or thukpa. Then my responsibility is over the serving. The chabril has main power and he has a iron stick called pen case, Nyugdrog, [Tib. སྨྱུག་སྒྲོག] which is filled with sand used for beating the monks.   

**Q:**  Then when you beat the gong, the dobdo come running to get the thukpa.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there people putting the thukpa into the container?   

**A:**  In general, there are 4 thabyog who put the thukpa in the container.   

**Q:**  Do the dobdo bring the containers?   

**A:**  Yes. There is very much pushing when they serve the first thukpa. In Gomang, when thukpa is served, the fighting is so bad they would kill each other. There is nothing to get at all in terms of profit from this. When they hear the gong beating, the monks behind then start saying who is first serving thukpa. If its a böpa, they say it is a böpa or Amdo. It just gives some fame for a short time and they would get beaten very severely. The first, the 2nd and 3rd get acclaimed. So to be first, the dobdo don't wait for the thabyog to put it in the pail, but they scoop it out by themselves.   

**Q:**  They were doing that to get the first in serving the front row, right?   

**A:**  Yes, just to get the name of the first and the second.   

**Q:**  Is there a lot of fighting?   

**A:**  Yes. They hit each other by being bias, [Tib. ཕྱོགས་ཞེན] standing on one's sides of böpa or Amdo, As they run into the dukhang, one tries to steal the ladle of the next, so he can't pour, and they often hit each other with the ladle. The lene beat them a lot at this time.   

**Q:**  Do they pay attention to the beatings?   

**A:**  Not at all. In one year, there was also killing each other because they were bias on being böpa or Amdo.   

**Q:**  Did they hit each other with the ladle?   

**A:**  Yes. When they had a severe grudge [Tib. ན་ཚ་ཆེན་པོ], they would call each other to fight outside after the tsog. When I was Hamdong jayog. The abbot and gegö sent messages via the Hamdong jama and the jama would then send me to deliver the messages. The jayog has no authority, he just goes with messages on foot. I did this 3 years.   

**Q:**  This was after you got separated from the shag and after that did you live alone?   

**A:**  In the beginning, I borrowed a shag and then I was living alone in my shag.   

**Q:**  How did you make your living?   

**A:**  My main income was from monastery alms and salary and my family and relatives would send some tsampa.   

**Q:**  How much grain salary did you get in Gomang?   

**A:**  When I was young, we got only 1 khe per year from the tratsang. Then there was a famous. Inner Mongolian abbot who had been the tsenshab, the tsenyi debater for the 9th Panchen Lama. After he was the abbot, some Gomang shiga were reorganized and we ended up with one more khe per monk per year. The Drepung grain salary is poor. The jiso only gives 2 khe per year per monk. And these two khe are mixed grain, bean, vicia faba, [Tib. རྒྱ་སྲན] and wheat. The Gomang tratsang pays real barley and real beans. And then just before the revolt there was more reorganizing the shiga and we ended up with 3 khe of grain per monk per year.   

**Q:**  Was this enough with the alms?   

**A:**  No it wasn't, we have to do other means to survive.   

**Q:**  Normally, what food do you eat?   

**A:**  We eat mainly pag. And sometimes we cooked meat with thukpa.   

**Q:**  You may not have vegetables?   

**A:**  Vegetables were very scarce in the past. Mostly we had potatoes, radish and cabbage and the vegetables like asparagus lettuce [Ch. wo sun] and celery [Ch. qin cai] were not available to us.   

**Q:**  How many times did you eat meat in a month?   

**A:**  Twice, three or four times in a month. And if a monk was okay in income he would eat bagtsa marku [Tib. བག་ཚ་མར་ཁུ], small pieces of dough mixed with melted butter, dry cheese and sugar. And at the work place, we eat some meal whatever was there. So as tratsang jayog and khamtsen jayog, we eat whatever meal was there. That was okay as food.   

**Q:**  When you get up in the morning, did you make a fire?   

**A:**  Yes, but I only boil black tea. Butter was scarce. The monks having butter tea were few. We had to make fire, since at that time there was no ready made tea to buy. The brick tea had to be boiled.   

**Q:**  What was the khamtsen jayog's work? Was it mainly delivering messages?   

**A:**  It was mostly delivering messages and notices.   

**Q:**  Did you do that just for the khamtsen?   

**A:**  The order was from the jama and he got this from those above him. In Hamdong tsondu there were about 40-50 members. If there is a tsondu meeting today, then I have to go and deliver the message to everyone. I also have to deliver the messages to the 29 jikhang [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁང] and 9 mitsen and if they have tsondu then I have to go and deliver this message also.   

**Q:**  Do you get any extra salary or food for the khamtsen jayog?   

**A:**  We get some food when they eat food. Between jama and jayog, the jama is more important and have a bigger name.   

**Q:**  Did you have salary when you were the jayog?   

**A:**  No salary.   

**Q:**  Did you get extra alms?   

**A:**  Yes we had little bit extra alms from khamtsen, generally speaking 1 extra share, but sometimes we get 12 shares called thogthabarsum [Tib. ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ] which litarally means, in the beginning, the middle and in the end. This is not just for jayog, there are about 11-12 persons in the khamtsen who get this thogthabarsum. [TN Note: Thogthabarsum is the extra alms share they get when all the monks were in line getting the alms and they can ask for it at the begging of the line, at the middle of the line and the end of the line]   

**Q:**  How did you first get this jayog work?   

**A:**  Since, the jayog is hard work with little income, the jama tries to persuade and insist someone he knows to do the job. People don't try to get it. But if a person isn't capable, he will have a hard time doing this job. I did the Hamdong jama for two years right after I did the jayog. I had to ask for the jama job at the Hamdong tsondu. I need to give 15 sang and a khata Ashe, [Tib. ཨ་ཤེ] as the gift to the tsondu. Hamdong's custom is that you can't exceed this amount or give less than it. If there is one candidate or many, the amount they have to give the same. If there are many askers, they appoint the most capable one. If there is only one, the one is chosen.   

**Q:**  When you were jama, were there many people trying?   

**A:**  No, there was only me and another one. When Hamdong Khamtsen's sponsor wants to give tonggo at tratsang, then the jama has to do all this to help him. If he wants to give tonggo at tsogchen, tratsang and khamtsen, then the jama has to ask the officials in charge on behalf of the Hamdong's sponsor and deliver the list for requesting the prayers, kyabtho [Tib. སྐྱབས་ཐོ] etc. If it is in the tsogchen, the jama has to deliver many messgaes and ask for pemissions. For example, if there is to be a alms tomorrow in tsogchen, today he have to go to the shengo and say, "Tomorrow, Hamdong Khamtsen's [sponsor] is going to give alms, so may he offer this alms. In case the money is not enough may he offer different kind of things, [Tib. དངོས་པོ]". In the early times, if the money is not enough they would offer things. After this, I should say, "May I control the doors on the ceiling, namgo" [Tib. གནམ་སྒོ]. When I was jama, I had to go to the shengo and asked for these permissions, The shengo was surprised when he heard what I said and replied, "Oh, this must be a old custom." I had to give 3 khata. The first was to be allowed to give alms, the second was for controlling, [Tib. དམ་དྲག] the door on the ceiling, [so the monks don't go round and get alms twice;] third was for if the money not enough ask the permission to give things. Then there are some young boys who yell the chuke, [Tib. ཆུ་སྐད] and when there is alms in the next morning, they have to yell the chuke twice. To them I don't have to give a khata or ask permission, if I inform them that there is alms tomorrow, that's enough. Then there is a lama migtsema [Tib. བླ་མ་དམིག་བརྩེ་མ] to whom we give the message that there is a alms tomorrow, so gives a notice for the alms [Tib. འགྱེད་བརྡ]. He does this from the roof by reciting a kind of prayer. In the rungkhang, there are 4 people; 2 jama, chatsü depa [Tib. བྱ་ཚུལ་སྡེ་པ], 1 Tashi Khangsar's [Tib. བྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་གསར] representative. I have to send a message to them informing them about the manja to be served on the next day and we have to weigh the butter and measure the salt in dre and give them to the tsogchen jama for making tea.   

**Q:**  What notice do the lama migtsema give?   

**A:**  The lama migtsema's prayer notice is recited from a corner of the tsogchen' roof. The prayer was like the Migtsema prayers, but the tune is longer which the people in the jikhang could hear. When there is alms, he will recite the alms tune [Tib. འགྱེད་རྟ] and all the monks can here it and it tells them there is alms tomorrow.   

**Q:**  Does the lama migtsema do it himself?   

**A:**  Yes, he himself recites the prayer migtsema the night before, the chuke was yelled in the morning when there were mangja with alms]. When there is alms in the tsogchen, I have to tell the following 7 people: in the rungkhang 4 people (jama 2 + 2 others [see above], then 2 monks yelling chuke, then Lama Miktsemba. Plus I have to ask the shengo. If there is a tratsang alms, it is done similar, but since there is no shengo, I have to ask the abbot. I would tell him, "Tomorrow, there is alms in Hamdong khantsen so may I offer the alms" and I would give him one chegye [Tib. ཕེད་བརྒྱད] [= 7 and half karma]. Then I go to gegö and say as same as I did to the abbot and give him 5 karma. I also have to inform the umdze the same, but there is no money to give him. Also tell tratsang jama that there is alms, so tomorrow please put the new rugs for the trüku, umdze, gegö and abbot. They change the rugs when there is alms, they have raised seats, so have their own rugs] that is the jama's work. Then I ask the jama to raise the amount of water in the cauldron since more monks will come for alms. I also ask jama to take out the vase like container called, chab gyendrugma [Tib. ཆབ་རྐྱན་གྲུ་མ] which usually is kept beside the pillar when there is alms. It is gilded copper. It is put out when there is alms to dress up the tsogkhang. I also tell tratsang chabril that there is alms tomorrow, so please beat the larger gong [the smaller one is used when there is no alms].   

**Q:**  Who actually gives out the alms?   

**A:**  The sponsor themselves gives the alms. The khamtsen jama isn't involved. The sponsor hires some monks who are experienced in giving out alms to do this for him. [This is same for tsogchen and tratsang].   

**Q:**  Please explain how they take the alms share, kelen [Tib. སྐལ་ལེན]. Some have to go get the alms in person and some don't.   

**A:**  The system of kelen is same for tsogchen and tratsang. Kelen refers to collecting one's alms outside of the dukhang. The higher lamas and the geshe would sit inside the dukhang. The monks who get the kelen sit on the stone floor.   

**Q:**  Is it up to one's own choice to get the kelen or do you have to ask for the permission?   

**A:**  It is up to one's own choice. All monks can do this without having to ask anyone's permission. Usually, there are more monks who collect alms at kelen than sitting in the dukhang for the prayers. At kelen, the monks get their alms and then leave. Its really colder in winter to sit outside than inside and there is no tea outside and in the dukhang you sit on a rug and also get tea, but most kelen takers are the ones who don't go to tsog chöra and they did that to get the alms faster. And the ones who go to the tsog and chöra would go inside the dukhang. In khamtsen and tratsang, the amount of alms adds up and is more than the number of monks due to the extra shares. In the alms were given at the tsogchen, if a regular monk gets one share, the shengo gets 50 -30 times of that. This is listed in the document called, Gyetong Tsatsig [Tib. འགྱེད་གཏོང་རྩ་ཚིག]. But I do know the tratsang system well. If a regular monk gets 1, then the office of the chabu together gets 40 shares which is called 40 bukel [Tib. སྦུག་སྐལ] then the throne of the Dalai lama, shugtri rinpoche [Tib. བཞུགས་ཁྲི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ ] gets 40 shares, but this actually goes to the 3 ngünyer of the tratsang as their income. The 3 ngünyer would spend this money when the Dalai Lama visits Drepung. The abbot gets 30 shares, umdze gets 9 shares. Gegö gets 10 shares. Jachab Nangsum get 2 shares each. Then the jayog and chabyog, they get one extra share each. Then the house manager, khangnyer [Tib. ཁང་གཉེར], the care taker of the chöra, chösung [Tib. ཆོས་སྲུང་བ], l care taker of the orchard, jangsung [Tib. ལྕང་སྲུང], 2 sweepers. these 5 they get 2 extra shares each. The 2 sweepers are laymen, the others are monks. The tratsang have 8 thabyog and 1 fire maker, metong [Tib. མེ་གཏོང] there is also one layman called Nyinrepa [Tib. ཉིན་རེ་བ] whose job is to serve tea for gegö and umdze. This makes 12 laymen working for Gomang, 2 sweepers, 9 thabyog and 1 nyerpa. These laymen were all the miser of Gomang.   

**Q:**  What kind of income [Tib. ཟ་སྒོ] do the jama get?   

**A:**  In Hamdong khamtsen's jama has good income. Normally he gets 2 shares, and sometimes they can get Thogthabarsum. There are 12 officials entitled to receive this. Hamdong's jama has good income. But if there is trouble, then there is a danger of getting beaten with switches and expelled from the monastery. Normally if there is a trouble made by monks, then the shengo summons the khamtsen gegen, but in Hamdong and Samlo khamtsen, the shengo is not allowed to summon these two khamtsen gegen, so he summons the Hamdong jama and Samlo Nyerpa. The Hamdong and Samlo khamtsen gegen and shengo have the same rank, so the latter can't summon the former. If a Hamdong monks has caused trouble, the shengo will send a message to the Hamdong jama saying bring him to my presence tomorrow. Then the jama goes to the relevent monk and says, "Tomorrow you must come to the shengo office, lhengye khang [Tib. ལྷན་རྒྱས་ཁང]." If the monks doesn't show up the next day, then the jama will be scolded by the shengo and even get beaten with switches. And they will tell the jama whatever they want because they had the power then.   

**Q:**  Did you have any personal experience of getting beaten?   

**A:**  Yes, I almost had one incident. I was Hamdong khamtsen's jama. Hamdong khamtsen has two chandzö. The khamtsen's common box, jigam [Tib. སྤྱི་སྒམ] is locked and 1 chandzö carries the key and the other places a seal on the box. When this is done, the jama must be present and the common box is not allowed to open without the presence of jama. There are 9 mitsen in Hamdong khamtsen. From these 9 mitsen come the 2 chandzö, 2 nyerpa, 2 khamtsen gegen. These are appointed from the 9 mitsen by turns. From these posts, the one that is the representative of the pure böpa is the Jama. The Hamdong Jama's work seems to be that of a servant, but in the Khamtsen, people refer honorifically to the jama as Jama-la, [Tib. ཇ་མ་ལགས] even after years. At this time, I was the grain steward in Phembo, so I had a horse. One of the main in charge chandzö who worked closely with me received a message through a monk to come the shengo's office. I wondered what it was about. Then the shengo called me and told me to bring him [chandzö] tomorrow. When I went there the shengo said, "Bring the chandzö to me tomorrow. The reason is that someone has accused the chandzö of theft. But the chandzö says I didn't do it, but the other monk says yes he did." So that night when I was there with the shengo, the shengo did not decide whether the chandzö was guilty or not. So the chandzö returned to the khamtsen. Normally, since we ate from the same table [close relations], so I asked him, "It is strange that some body accused you of being a thief. I can't say that you are the thief. I am just wondering whether you are a thief. If you have to meet the shengo about this, then you are in bad trouble. Can't you find a person for doing good office [Tib. འགོ་འདྲེན] for you in Lhasa." He said I do, so I lent him my horse to go that night to find a backer. If you can bring a person to back you that is good, or if not get a letter. You have to do something to avoid having to go to the shengo. So he went that night to Lhasa and that night he returned to Drepung. When I asked him if it was okay now," he said yes. So I said, good. I didn't know whether he was a thief or not, and if he didn't arrive, I would have gotten beaten. People would have said that I helped a thief escape and that I was probably involved with him. So the next day we two went to the shengo office. Then the shengo tied the chandzö's hands and immediately beat him with switches without asking him anything. As soon as the beating started, the chandzö admitted he stole. He was a real thief. He stole a big yellow robe called namjar [Tib. སྣམ་སྦྱར] from a lama. I had actually seen him one day taking apart something from the namjar, but who would have thought that it wasn't his property and that he was a thief. He wanted to fix this to wear this on his mongolian dress and show himself being imposing when he goes to the northern nomad area on business. I was very glad that he came back thinking the my protective deity Gyangkar Nangso [Tib. ?] helped me, otherwise, I would have been in real trouble. If he had fled, I would have been beaten not just once, but it would have gone on for many days since they would have thought I was in cahoots with him and would want me to say where he went. The thief himself was quite good that he returned, if he was a bad peson he would have ran away riding the horse. Another incident occurred just before I did the jama work. At the time of shotön, when they were performing Tibetan opera at Nechung. Before the opera was over, Two monks from the stage grabbed one actor boy who acted as female and took him away by force. [for homosexual acts]. That night the two monks were caught and turned over to the chabyog. And the shengo said bring them to me tomorrow. But the two monks fled. So the chabyog was in trouble and was almost expelled from the monastery. In the end they weren't though. He had to bribe the shengo with lot of things. So Hamdong jama is difficult job. The Hamdong jama also has important responsibilities at the Mönlam. For one tsog at Mönlam there may be 30 or 40 alms from the Hamdong khamtsen's sponsors. I have to set up rugs for the sponsor on the roof of the Khyamra, and invite the sponsor to come and sit on the rugs, then the jama has to go with the sponsor who carry incense in their hand and go around the monks in tsog. At that time, Gyanbumgang [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་གང] Jigyab khembo at Mönlam gave a mangja langdön [Tib. ལག་འདོན]] which means to provide the tea and butter etc in kind right away to the rungkhang. After the early miday tsog, gungtsig [Tib. དགུང་ཚིགས] was finished, the butter and tea have to be arranged ready. For tomorrows mangja, everything is supposed to be ready on the eve. He is a big family, so he should have known about this, but they didn't have enough butter on hand. When we ask where is the butter, he said, "I have lent the butter to the in charge [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ] of Tsomönling, [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང]. So we had no butter". If the person wasn't jigyab khembo, he would have been beaten with switches if he did this, but in this case he wasn't due to his position. So monks power at Mönlam is immense, we can just decide something and carry it out. In Kyomolung [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང] Hamdong has 3 shiga, Gyangdrong [Tib. གྱང་གྲོང] Shiga, Jarag [Tib. སྦྱར་རག] shiga, and Shangdrong Lhoma [Tib. ཞང་གྲོང་ལྷོ་མ] Shiga. These have been let out on lease by Hamdong. When the lease grain was delivered to Hamdong, only the Jama would measure the volume measure, bo, [Tib. འབོ]. Hamdong jama was known as the common representative [Tib. སྤྱི་འཐུས] of the 9 mitsen. I get a little bit bribes before the grain was measured since it makes difference how the grain was measured. So the people who are paying the grain will give a gift before the measurement saying "please measure the grain well" so that they have to give less grain. Though at that time, I didn't know much about the present life and the future life and karmic cause and effects [Tib. འདི་ཕྱི་རྒྱུ་འབྲས] but I didn't do many reckless things when I was jama. Usually, there were lot of ways of measuring the grain which makes a big difference. At that time, I have to give verbal orders to the miser.   

**Q:**  Did you have the authority to beat the miser?   

**A:**  The jama didn't have the authority to beat them with switches, but could scold and beat with hand. I did the Hamdong jama for one year, and then asked to resign. The khamtsen, however, didn't get another person who asked to be jama. The Hamdong jama has good income but is very difficult to do unless one is very capable. So the khamtsen took the names of three böpa from Hamdong before the Hamdong deity called Gyangkar Nangso for be chosen and approved [Tib. ཕྱག་རྟགས་ཕུལ]. The deity is one who goes into trance. Normally the deity choose and approve one from among the three, but this day the deity said, "Leave the old one as is" [Tib. རྙིང་པ་རང་འཇགས་བྱེད]. It was unprecedented to have the jama appointed by the deity. Usually, the tsondu would apppoint the jama. So I had to do it another year. In the second year, I had no difficulties and then I resigned.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know Tibetan writing well?   

**A:**  I could do hand writing, but it was inferior one. Hamdong Khamtsen's economic accounting is all done by the jama by using the diu.   

**Q:**  Hamdong jama was a like a nyerpa, right?   

**A:**  He is like a nyerpa. The jama has two nyerpa under him and their salary are as same as jama. When there is a meeting of chandzö and jama, the jama would sit next to the chandzö and the nyerpa is not allowed to sit in the tsondu and they sit in the rungkhang and do more manual work under the instructions of the jama.   

**Q:**  What do the nyerpa do?   

**A:**  They basically move things into and out of the storeroom and they can not order people around.   

**Q:**  Do you keep the records of the grain from the shiga?   

**A:**  The jama keeps the list of all the things the nyerba have brought in and taken out. When the work is finished, the list is put in the box and the chandzö lock it and seal it up.   

**Q:**  Are the chandzö and nyerpa same?   

**A:**  No. The chandzö are more powerful than the nyerpa for when the Hamdong Khamtsen tsondu meets, the people who want to make appeal, cannot just go to the tsondu, they first have to ask the chandzö. The 2 chandzö sit in the meeting, and if the tsondu wants to send a message to someone, the chandzö send it. The chandzö are in charge and supervise all the regular work of the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  What is the structure of Gomang Tratsang?   

**A:**  In Gomamg, there were 16 khamtsen and among these, Samlo, Hamdong, Gungru and Bati [Tib. པྲ་ཏི] were the standing committee [Tib. རྒྱུན་ལས]. In addition, there are 2 clerk and if there is the tsondu gyepa [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] then also the gegö and umdze come. Then there are also three khamtsen from among the 16 khamtsen who had to do the daily works by turn. They come to the tsondu to do the nyerpa's work, They don't have the authority to talk and hold the discussion.   

**Q:**  The four big khamtsen are called 4 Nachen, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There are actually only 2 of these who mainly come by turns which are the Badi and Gungru and there was one called nayog [Tib. སྣ་གཡོག྄] is rotated by the 12 khamtsen. Chabu have to attend the tsondu and they have the names and the power.   

**Q:**  What is the 4 seniors, dreba [Tib. བགྲེས་པ]?   

**A:**  It is the 4 chabu who comes from the 4 big khamtsen. They were called drepa in their own khamtsen.   

**Q:**  How are the clerk picked?   

**A:**  They were appointed by the six tsondu members from among the monks who are not chabu and their writing is good.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the tsondu?   

**A:**  In the tratsang's usual tsondu there are: 4 chabu , gegö, umdze, 2 clerk. There is also a tsondu with 14 memebers, it is called tsondu 14.   

**Q:**  Who were the additional ones?   

**A:**  In addition to the 8, there were 2 trasang nyertsang and Badi and Gungru khamtsen. The tsondu with 14 members only meet when there is feast or party and do not meet for deciding matters.   

**Q:**  So the tsondu with 14 members is the middle tsondu, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When the standing committee couldn't decide the matters, Then the tsondu of 16 khamtsen which is held only once a year. This is like a tsondu gyendzom.   

**Q:**  Do you have a name for the tsondu gyendzom?   

**A:**  They called it the tsondu of 16 khamtsen [Tib. ཁང་ཚན་བཅུ་དྲུག] .   

**Q:**  What do you call for the middle one?   

**A:**  It is called the tsondu with the 14 members [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་བཅུ་བཞི].   

**Q:**  What do you call the small tsondu?   

**A:**  They call it chabu which are the 4 nachen. The khamtsen who are not nachen are not allowed to become chabu.   

**Q:**  Were the chabu böpa or like Mongolians? Was there any rule for that?   

**A:**  In Gomang, among the 4 chabu there was no böpa. These are the four best and senior people from 4 nachen khamtsen. In the tratsang they are called chabu and in the khamtsen they are called dreba. They were all from the long distances and no böpa. Gegö and umdze can be böpa or monks from the long distances.   

**Q:**  How about gegö and umdze?   

**A:**  They can be different people like Amdo, Hor or böpa.   

**Q:**  How about the chabril and jama?   

**A:**  The chabril didn't have the right to talk in the tsondu, they can only eat there. Tratsang's chabril and jama are completely böpa. The reason is that they are the ones who are on the path to the position of shengo, so they must be böpa. These two have very similar jobs regarding discipline. Before one can become shengo, one must be chabri, then gegö and then shengo.   

**Q:**  This is similar to the nyertsang in Loseling, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In general, the shengo also goes by turn from the khamtsen. In Gomang, the shengo can come from only 2 mitsen and they go in turn. These two are böpashung and Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] Mitsen. These two mitsen send up the candidates. If you want to be shengo, then in advance you have to join these mitsen.   

**Q:**  Is the tratsang nyerpa böpa?   

**A:**  Nyerpa is appointed internally. But the Hamdong nyerpa rotates among the 9 mitsen in Hamdong. After the nyerba, one does khamtsen gegen. Then becomes khamtsen chandzö. Then you have arrived in the tsondu and böpa cannot get in there. Samlo Khamstsen might also be the same.   

**Q:**  When you did the Jama did you have the hope of shengo?   

**A:**  No, my physical appearance [Tib. མི་བབ] is not good and I was a simple monk. According to my working capability, I can do the shengo because I lived in the monastery from childhood and I have some experience. I also did the grain nyerpa.   

