# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College, and Hamdong Khamtsen. In this brief interview, he discusses the grain steward's influence on whether loans are provided to individuals, and the grain steward's role in collecting debts, including the power to enforce collection.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_06/M_0003_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  When someone asks for delay and adds the remaining loan on the old loan, domthag chö [Tib. བསྡོམ་ཐག་ཆོད], we three grain nyerpa, drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] have to discuss and the miser gives something when they ask for this. We decide it on the spot. Another way to get something is when people ask for loans. When they give loans, the chabu sits on the cushion and the clerk is also there, but some bigger households also give something to the drunyer for asking more loans, but as much as they give when asking for domthag chö. This is because we can influence how much of a loan should be given, so we get something then. Though chabu has a higher position and power, but really they don't stay there all the time and they don't know much and they depend on the strategy [Tib. ཇུས] and introducing people by the drunyer and chabu would have to depend on what the drunyer said because the drunyer is familiar with those debtors.   

**Q:**  How was it decided what amount goes for the salary to the monastery?   

**A:**  The drunyer had his grain storage and the chabu had many grain storage called ganjug [Tib. dkar bjug]. After the drunyer gave the loans, we store the remaining grain to the ganjug where they had the list on the pillar in which it was written the in put list [Tib. བཅུག་ཁྲ] and the out put list of the grain [Tib. བཏོན་ཁྲ]. When they send grain from the ganjug to the monastery, they make a out put list.   

**Q:**  What happedned if they give out all the grain for the loans? Would the chabu say that it is not okay?   

**A:**  If there is no remaining which is caused by the bad crop or something, then there is nothing to do with it and the chabu wouldn't say anything.   

**Q:**  Did this happen when you were the drunyer?   

**A:**  Only in one year, it happened when we gave loans of beans. If we still had remaining after lending out in spring and stored in the ganjug, sometimes we lend out tsamba in summer, yartsam [Tib. དབྱར་རྩམ]. We grind the grain into tsamba and lend it out in summer. Only the bigger granary have that.   

**Q:**  Does the amount of grain increase yearly because you get the yearly interest?   

**A:**  Yes, the principal increase on paper, but not on the grain in hand. Most is old loans getting bigger, but not in the actual collection or grain in hand. The Khashag's new edict was issued in the Water Horse Year [Tib. ཆུ་རྟ་ལོ] and they made the loan payment arrangement, gyeje [Tib. རྒྱས་དཔྱད].   

**Q:**  Wasn't this after the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  Yes. At this time, it was said that Gomang's total amount of grain loan written on the paper reached about 93,000 khe including the amount they did the gyeje and the amount yet to be done the gyeje. Had the edict not issued for one year, it would have reach upto, 100,000 khe.   

**Q:**  How much principal and interest do you collect in a year from the places including Phenpo etc?   

**A:**  This I can't calculate. We don't really calculate. The drunyer counts only the amount of grain in hand and the documents were kept by the tratsang. And the remaining grain in the granary was stored in the ganjug and they also give loans outside and use the remaining for the summer tsampa.   

**Q:**  The grain in the ganjug is mainly used for the monastery need, right?   

**A:**  The drunyer stores them in the ganjug and from the ganjug they bring it to the monastery.   

**Q:**  The grain from the shiga was also stored in the ganjug, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was stored in the same house, but the account is separate. I did the drunyer for the longest period among about 20 drunyer of the Gomang Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Do yo have any law cases caused by not paying the loans while you were drunyer?   

**A:**  There might have been a little bit law cases.   

**Q:**  Was there any serious ones like the trouble in Phündrub [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ] Dzong?   

**A:**  No. Nothing serious.   

**Q:**  Were you the drunyer while you were jama?   

**A:**  Yes for one year it overlapped and I did the both; drunyer and the khamtsen jama. I did the drunyer for many years. I started drunyer after I finished tratsang chayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག].   

**Q:**  What happens if a miser doesn't pay the loan? Do you have the power to beat them up or shut them in?   

**A:**  We had a little bit power to enforce because we were the drunyer of a big tratsang. We were doing this to support the monks like the saying, "use the root as the capital and use the leaves for the offering" [Tib. རྩ་བས་རྩ་བྱས། ལོ་མས་མཆོད་པ་འབུལ]. So if someone isn't paying the loans, we have the power to beat them. We can't beat for small loans. If we beat them, then that is considered punishment and they don't have to pay the loan [Tib. ཉེས་དག].   

**Q:**  Do you whip them or beat them with hand or stick without bleeding, kamdung [Tib. སྐམ་རྡུང]?   

**A:**  We were allowed to whip them or just beat them with hand or stick.   

**Q:**  Were you allowed to beat them even it is a miser of someone else?   

**A:**  Even it it is a miser of someone else we can beat them probably without having to ask the dzong first.   

**Q:**  Have you beat people?   

**A:**  A little beating with hand and stick, but not much since I was the senior drunyer.   

**Q:**  Can you confiscate goods from the debtors?   

**A:**  They were allowed to bring their things to the chabu for repaying the loan and the chabu will accept it.   

**Q:**  The drunyer is not allowed to rob things for the loans, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But once, I took a coral head ornament, patrug [Tib. སྤ་ཕྲུག] from a woman by saying it will be kept as a pawn [Tib. གཏའ་མ] until you pay the gyeje debt. If you the repay the loan in certain time , you can take back the patrug. If you don't pay it we will give it to the tratsang. This family ultimately paid the debt and we returned the patrug.   

**Q:**  Who transports the grain from the storehouse to the monastery? Did they have to impose tax on the miser?   

**A:**  The miser transports it as a tax or the tratsang would hire animals for that and pay the fees. This is not our concern. The chabu does this by taking out the grain from the storage.   

