# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0003.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Wöse Chökyong [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wöse Chökyong was a dobdo monk in Gomang College and Hamdong Khamtsen who talks about many different aspects of life in Gomang College, and Hamdong Khamtsen. In this interview he explains about the dispute between the common monks (lagyüba) and the scholar monks (pechawa) and discusssx the differences between alms and salary and how these were distributed in the monastery. There is also an explanation of what enchöndze is and a description of the several kinds of Gomang Assembky (Gomang tsondu). Finally, there is a description of the roles, responsibilities, and details of the work of the grain steward.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0003_04/M_0003_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  We have heard from some people that the reason for the dispute between lagyüba and pechawa was that they were saying that the pechawa who go to Jang günchö had a very hard condition, so they need to have a special right [Tib. དམིགས་བསལ་ཐོབ་ཐང] Is this true? if not, there might be other affairs [Tib. གནས་ཚུལ]. Please explain how did it happen.   

**A:**  This was their internal affair. There was nothing to do with the reason for the cause of the Gomang Tratsang's case. The cause of it as I said earlier was the attempt to change the location of where salary was paid and it was with regards to the discipline and not to have the good old system get declined [Tib. སྔ་སྲོལ་བཟང་པོ་ཉམས་པ]. At that time, the case was not between the two parties; pechawa and the lagyüba. It was a general case regarding the two places; gomchor [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར] and the chöra where the salary should be paid. The reason for paying the salary in the gomchor was because there were many monks with special privileges. These with special privileges could ask for a permission from the new abbot during his 6 years term (they have to only ask once) and from each gegö during his 6 months term.   

**Q:**  Please explain clearly how they ask for the permission from the abbot. Could they ask for the permission during 6 years abbot or what?   

**A:**  There were many different types of monks who could ask this permission. One of these were dewashung kudrak and those who have the special privilage who would ask the permission to not have to come to the regular tsog or chöra except the special tsog. I will tell you who were the people having special privilage; first is all the enchöndze and the second is the geshe who have passed their exams [Tib. དགེ་བཤེས་མཚན་རྟགས་ཐོན་ཟིན]. From the lagyüba who don't know tsenyi, there are the trebön treyog [Tib. གྲལ་དཔོན་གྲལ་གཡོག], these are the 2 senior lagyüba who sit at the head of two rows. Then all the main people who are working in the 16 khamtsen. In the biggest khamtsen such as Samlo they might have about 20 people and in Hamdong it might involve 25 monks. And in some smaller khamtsen, there might be only 4-5 monks. Khamtsen gegen and mitsen nyerba have special privileges. Then there are the monks who were called Rakhor Genpa [Tib. ར་འཁོར་རྒན་པ] who look after and do the cleaning in the jikhang of the khamtsen. These above mentioned monks were the ones who ask for the permission.   

**Q:**  To whom did they have to ask for the permission?   

**A:**  They could ask the new abbot only once during his 6 years terms by giving 2 sho of money to the abbot and the one karma to the tratsang gegö to ask the permission only during his 6 months term. This was the main old custom which also happened just we became the monk and they paid the salary under the gomchor. In the very early times, they might not have that. When there is alms in the tsog, they have to give alot of alms shares and they also serve the mangja. When the salary is going to paid on the next, the monks who have the special privilage would ask for the permission and which would be grantd and then they go to get the salary. If the salary is not paid in the gomchor, the above mentioned monks who have the special privilage to ask the permission will get harmed [Tib. སྐྱོན]. As for how they get harmed, if I tell you in detail, when the salary is given in the gomchor, the names are read out of each monks according to the seniority. So the monks working in the khamtsen etc would not need to lock the door and go to get the salary at once, but they could go according to the senioriry. If the salary is given in the chöra, nobody would have the privilage and asking the abbot for permission also becomes useless. That's why, they were it is not okay. The gegö and umdze sit there maybe with another and they read the all the names of the monks one after another.   

**Q:**  The monks who have the special privilage would not need to wait for the salary, right?   

**A:**  The privileged ones don't have to come in person and when they read the names, they would read their names and say that they have the extra shares and they can send someone to collect it on behalf of them. otherwise they too will lose that day's salary. And the monks with less high privileges such as the geshe and other khamtsen workers will be given their salary when they come and they can go back as soon as get the salary. They don't have to wait there for a long time. They get it at once. But when the salary is given in the chöra. They have to wait until the chöra is finished to then get the salary, and in the process must set aside whatever work they were engaged in such as performing rituals, watchmen of jikhang etc. That's how the case started because the old custom was declined.   

**Q:**  How would they give the alms?   

**A:**  The alms is different. It is given in the Dukhang together with tea and they beat gong from the roof. There are all sorts of extra shares in alms and the amount needed to do alms is much more for the same number of monks even it is one tranka. With salary, you only get your share, no extras. In the salary, first the senior monks and the ones with privilege get their salary as their names are read off.   

**Q:**  There was no name list for the common monks, right? Do they have to go in line?   

**A:**  The names of the common monks are also on a list but they would not read it every time and they can get the salary right away by going in line according to the seniority whether the name is read one by one or not. But if they go to the chöra, it takes a very long time. In Gomang Tratsang, when they would give the grain salary, names of the all the monks regardless of senior and junior are read off one by one and then they have to go one by one and get their share. They were thinking that some one would take double shares. At first, the names of the privileged ones are read off and their replacement [Tib. ཚབ] would take it. After the names of the privileged ones are read off, then the common monks come.   

**Q:**  If the privileged ones didn't send their replacements, what would happened?   

**A:**  They would suffer the loss and wouldn't get the salary.   

**Q:**  Would they read the names when they give the alms?   

**A:**  For alms, there is no reading of name list. Alms are given while the monks are seated in the dukhang.   

**Q:**  Then what about ones who come to get the shares, kelen [Tib. སྐལ་ལེན]?   

**A:**  These people don't go into the tsog, The kelen just come to get alms at the courtyard of the dukhang and then leave.   

**Q:**  Wouldn't they try to get double shares?   

**A:**  There is no way to sneak around for a second alms since they would exit by the east or the west door from where the alms in given. There is no sneaking around since they start only when all the monks are there and then no more can enter the courtyard. Kelen is the same in tsogchen and in tratsang. When the monks stand on line to get the alms, sharkag [Tib. བཤར་བཀག], if a monk is too late to stand on the line, he is not allowed to stretch his hand to get the alms because he is too late.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between alms and salary? When they give the salary there is no mangja, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Mostly, the salary is money, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between alms and salary?   

**A:**  There is a great difference between alms and salary. When they give alms, the monks would assemble and they serve tea, they offer butter lamps and khata, [Tib. སྙན་ཤལ] to the deities and they also submit the request for the reciting prayers, kyabtho [Tib. སྐྱབས་ཐོ] but also there were many extra shares for the monks. In salary, there are no extra shares. Between the salary and the alms, the monks get the same amount, but there is a big difference for the sponsors in spending their money. For the alms, they spend alot of money because there were many extra shares for the privilaged ones. Salary is simple, one just sits under the gomchor and hands it out, doesn't have to worry about tea and offerings etc.   

**Q:**  In salary are there few people with special privileges?   

**A:**  Yes. In Gomang, these would be the abbot, 4 tratsang chabu, 1 labrang chandzö, 1 clerk, gegö, umdze and there were many working in the tratsang. These people get extra shares in the alms like some get 2 shares and some even get 6-7- or 10 some.   

**Q:**  Who decides whether the money goes as alms or salary?   

**A:**  When a sponsor gives money, it is up to him whether to give it as alms or as salary. When they say they are going to give alms, they would have to serve tea etc on the tsog as I mentioned above. And the sponsor would go around the tsog carrying incense. But they don't need to do that for the salary and they just sit on a stone step and when they read the names, they give the money and that's it.   

**Q:**  Do you have to leave the endowments [Tib. མ་རྩ] for both the salary and the alms?   

**A:**  You leave the endowments for the salary, for alms you don't give endowments. They leave many endowments for the salary to the tratsang chabu, the 2 joint cashiers and the 4 joint cashiers. This is like the proverb, "using the root as the capital and using the leaves for making offerings [Tib. རྩ་བས་རྩ་བྱས། ལོ་མས་མཆོད་པ་འབུལ] they use the interest grain and money loans for salary. If somebody leave an endowment for alms, they would not give it in the tsog but they would give it outside and there was also endowments for the rice gruel [Tib. ཐུག་པ་དམ་བཅའ]. During the times I remembered, there weren't many of these. There was just 1-2 persons who left this kind of endowment.   

**Q:**  Who is he?   

**A:**  He was Jiso Tagkharel [Tib. སྟག་ཁ་རལ].   

**Q:**  Mostly, do the sponsors give alms by themselves or they do it through the laji etc ?   

**A:**  The sponsors give alms by themselves. But some of the endowments left for giving the salary on holy days was given on the tsog also, but they would not give extra shares.   

**Q:**  The jiso had many shiga and they give mangja and those things, but would they give alms?   

**A:**  Yes. They had to give money many times to the monks and they also give grain and butter to the monks. In Drepung, there was no one who had to give more tonggo than the jiso. Jiso collects grain from many miser and they leave the endowments to the miser and use them for the monks.   

**Q:**  Is the jiso's money called alms or salary.   

**A:**  It's all called salary.   

**Q:**  It is hard to know about the customs that we haven't seen it. Was there a trouble regarding Jang günchö?   

**Q:**  Regarding our law case and when we talk internally, there was no trouble about that. But, I don't know whether they had talkled about this when they reported to the higher ups [Tib. གོང་རིམ]. They have enough endowments for the alms and the mangja in the Jang günchö and they have purposely built a house there. After awhile, if they had said that they want something, this we, commom monks wouldn't know. Even they want endowment, the commoon monks didn't have endowments to give them. Maybe the tratsang chabu might have something to give them, but we don't know.   

**Q:**  Do you remember that they had that kind of comment [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] at that time?   

**A:**  In our law case, there was no talk about Jang günchö. Among the three great monastic seats, probably Gomang was especially good to the pechawa because they have a library where 3-4 people were working that lends out whatever pecha a monks wants free of charge for his entire life. The student and his gegen (acting as guarantor) signs out a kind if pledge for the pecha and it is returned to the library when he dies or leaves the monastery. No one in Gomang has to pay a cent for a pecha. And the monks keep about ten some or even 20-30 pecha in the shag. The librarian gets salary and alms to support this. The library gets 20 shares of alms which is for the office. Nowadays, the monks didn't have salary and the alms and buying pecha is very hard for young monks since a single volume [Tib. པུ་ཏི] may cost 50 or 60 yuan.   

**Q:**  Did the Loseling also have the same library?   

**A:**  I don't know. Probably only Gomang had the library. All the three great monastcic seats had the Jang gunchö, but I wouldn't know about their endowments.   

**Q:**  Was there any talk about the Jang gunchö before the law case?   

**A:**  Maybe this occurred internally.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that the other tratsang had left 1-2 chöshi to be used for the tonggo for Jang gunchö, but Gomang didn't have that. So at one time there was an incident [Tib. གནས་ཚུལ] where the pechawa said that they want that and the Yigtsang settled the matter and left 1-2 chöshi for Jang gunchö. I don't know when this happened.   

**Q:**  In the early times, they might have reported the tratsang, but I don't know that there were separate chöshi for that. During Reting Regency, he gave an additional chöshi to Gomang Tratsang. I don't know whether this was for the library.   

**Q:**  Who exactly were enchöndze? All the monastic officials, lene [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] were called enchöndze, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You were the khamtsen jama, right? Was this called enchöndze?   

**A:**  No. I was just a worker. There were many levels of enchöndze, 1. dewashung kudrak who had become monks in the three great monastic seats. 2. the incumbant and ex-jiso. 3. ex-shengo of Drepung. 4. the Gomang Nyertsang. 5. the chöndze of all the 4 tratsang. 6 ex-gegö of the tratsang. 7. The ex-khamtsen gegen of Hamdong and Samlo. Among the 16 khamtsen only these two were in the enchöndze. There are many enchöndze.   

**Q:**  Was the khamtsen chöndze included in the enchöndze?   

**A:**  No. Only the tratsang chöndze is included. The incumbant lene were not in the enchöndze, but when they finish their work, some were included in the enchöndze ans some were not.   

**Q:**  There are several kinds of Gomang tsondu, please explain this. The regular tsondu members were the 4 seniors, drepa [Tib. བགྲེས་པ],right?   

**A:**  There were regular tsondu members consists of the 4 chabu.   

**Q:**  In Gomang, was the 4 drepa and the khamtsen gegen of the 4 big khamtsen same ?   

**A:**  No. Hamdong, Samlo, Badi, Gungru were called the 4 nachen, [Tib. sna chen ?] and they would send 4 chabu or bugpa [Tib. སྦུག་པ] to the tsondu. Along with these 4 chabu, there was the the abbot's chandzö and these 5 persons were called the 5 bugpa laja [Tib. སྦུག་པ་བླ་ཕྱག]. And there were two clerks. These 7 were the ones who sit on the cushion and put their bowls on the table and discuss the matters. Then in addition to this there are 3 people from khamtsen who are basically servants who comes by turn. 2 of these come from Badi and Gungru and 1 comes from the other 16 khamtsen in rotation (by turns). These don't sit on rugs and thay put their bowls in the lower place and go back and forth and do the works and they can't talk about the policy.   

**Q:**  When the 4 chabu stay in their own khamtsen were they called dreba or were they called khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  After becoming the khamtsen gegen, they come to the tsondu. And they were the ones who were called drepa in their khamtsen and have the biggest internal [Tib. ནང་དོན] power.   

**Q:**  When the tsogchen is making rice gruel 4 people had to stay in the rungkhang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when we give alms to the tsogchen, we have to ask for the permission and there were 2 jama, Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་གསར] Deyang's chatsül depa [Tib. བྱ་ཚུལ་སྡེ་པ].   

**Q:**  There were three different jama; khamtsen jama, tsogchen jama and mitsen jama, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What is the job of Tashi Khangsar and chatsül depa?   

**A:**  On that, the highest were the 2 representative of abbot which fall on the different abbots by turns. The jama has much hard work, like making fire and putting in the amount of water and jama would always stand near the cauldron when they were putting in butter and crushing tea (overseeing) talking to people, the others just stand there by the cauldrons.   

**Q:**  How do the Tashi Khangsar and chatsül depa come?   

**A:**  Tashi Khangsar comes from the Namgyal [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] Tratsang. He is the representative of Namgyal Tratsang. Tashi Khangsar holds the key of the storehouse in Drepung and he give the tonggo for all the mangja.   

**Q:**  Was Tashi Khangsar the name of the title?   

**Q:**  Tashi Khangsar was the name of the position of the main in charge who was called representative [Tib. སྐུ་ཚབ] of the office. It was a like a office of Namgyal Tratsang who gives the tonggo. There is a house called Tashi Khangsar in the west of Drepung. He was appointed by Namgyal Tratsang. They would just send a person and it is not needed to be a better one. In rungkhang at mangja or the rice gruel: 2 jama, Tashi Khangsar, Deyang's chatsül depa, 2 representatives of the abbot. These 6 have to be in the rungkhang and they check on the materials used in the mangja. They don't need to be there everyday, but they have to come the night before manja to oversee the tea crushed and put in the cauldron and measuring of butter. They do all this together. They actually do all this together. The jama, however, is particularly responsible for the fire making.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by thogthabarsum [Tib. ཐོག་མཐའ་བར་གསུམ]? Please explain.   

**A:**  In Drepung tsogchen, some monks with special privileges go to receive extra alms share by stretching their hands. In two basic lines of monks standing to get the alms, the ones with special privileges can go to each line and collect 3 times two shares; at the beggining of the line, the middle of the line and at the end of the line, so they end up with 12 shares. This is not written in the alms book (its custom).   

**Q:**  Who were the people who get the thogthabarsum?   

**A:**  Many people have the right to do this like; 2 tsogchen shengo, 2 nangma, 2 chabril, probably the jama though they are not among the kelen. I am not sure. And then Lama Migtsema [Tib. བླ་མ་དམིགས་བརྩེ་མ]. These are the ones I know.   

**Q:**  These were all the incumbant ones and what about the ex-officials?   

**A:**  No they do not have this right.   

**Q:**  Was this thogthabarsum only for the tsogchen or was there thogthabarsum in the tratsang also?   

**A:**  When there is alms in the tratsang, the tratsang officials; gegö, umdze, chabril, nangma, jama, jayog would get it. For the khamtsen, it is only Hamdong that has this.   

**Q:**  Who were the ones in the Hamdong khamtsen who have the special privilages?   

**A:**  In Hamdong Khamtsen, those with special privilages are: 2 khamtsen gegen, jama, 2 nyerpa, nyungjai jama [Tib. ཉུང་ཇའི་ཇ་མ] and nangsen.   

**Q:**  What is nyungjai jama?   

**A:**  Those were the poor monks who were the regular jama in the rungkgang. Hamdong jama which I did was the jama when they held the tsog. In tsogchen, when there is alms line in the dukhang, the umdze stands by the door. If there is kelen, then the umdze doesn't go. In the tratsang, the monastic officials are; gegö, umdze, chabri chabyog, jama, jayog, [left out chabu].   

**Q:**  Does the lama shunglenpa, [Tib. བླ་མ་གཞུང་ལེན་པ] have the special privilage?   

**A:**  Lama shunglenba is appointed from Loseling, I don't know about that and lama migtsema is appointed by Gomang though his work was in the tsogchen. It is said that the lama migtsema can collect alms shares from all 4 tratsang (Loseling, Deyang, Ngagba and Gomang). If the lama migtsma has this, lama shunglempa also must have it. They have different names but are the same job. They are in charge of the gelong's confessional assembly [Tib. གསོ་སྦྱོང]. If there is a alms tomorrow, before they yell the chuke [Tib. ཆུ་སྐད] for giving the notice to say that there is alms on the next day and lama migtsema would say a special prayer with tones on the roof of the dukhang. Migtsema is the name of a prayer. They say this short prayer while they are standing there. For this he would not get extra money. He probably gets some extra shares, but I am not sure and he gets the thogthabarsum.   

**Q:**  Does khamtsen have its own umdze?   

**A:**  Yes, the tratsang, khamtsen and mitsen all have their umdze.   

**Q:**  Who were the ones in the tratsang who get the thogthabarsum? Was it the gegö and the abbot?   

**A:**  The abbot don't get it. In the tratsang; the gegö, umdze, jama, chabril, nangma, jayog [Tib. ཇ་གཡོག] and the chabyog [Tib. ཆབ་གཡོག]. These 7 get the thogthabarsum   

**Q:**  When you were the jama of Hamdong Khanmtsen, if there is alms on the tsogchen, you had to lead the sponsor in a circle around the dukhang with incense in hand. What do you call it?   

**A:**  There is no name for that. The khamtsen gegen leads him in a circle around the dukhang with incense in hand. The jama have to invite the sponsor and deliver the kyabtho.   

**Q:**  When there is alms in the tsogchen, the lama migtsema recites the prayers and do they yell the chuke in the morning?   

**A:**  The chuke is yelled by a young boy. The night before the lama migtsema does a prayer on the roof top and in the morning, he does another prayer which is followed by a young boy yelled the chuke. I heard in Sera its an older monk. The lama migtsema has a lot of work. When the tea is being made, the lama migtsema is in charge of starting the tea. We Drepung monks have a saying that the young boy yelling the chuke would not live long. The reason is that it is said there is snow lion milk in the 4th tea in mangja and we should drink it even it is a small amount. It is said that the diety Tenma Traktsenma [Tib. བསྟན་མ་དྲག་བསྟན་མ] goes to get the snow lion milk for the 4th tea when the young boy yells the chuke, Tenma Tratenma would feel annowed thinking she have to go again to get the snow lion milk. That is why it is said the young boy would not live long. In front of the door of Drepung rungkhang there is a dry birch tree [Tib. སྒྲོ་སྡོང]. It is said that the deity Tenma Traktenma would tie her deer to this birch tree.   

**Q:**  Now tell us about your work as the grain nyerpa, drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] and how did you get the job?   

**A:**  Gomang Tratsang had 23 drunyer. These are appointed by the 5 chabu and they would go to the countryside. As the salary for 1 year, we each get 12 bo [Tib. འབོ] of barley and 5 sang.   

**Q:**  What is your work?   

**A:**  Lending grain to people. When we lend out grain, two chabu come to take the pledge from the debtor in which it was written about lending the grain before planting and should be repaid in autumn. At this time, since the drunyer is the person in between, we would introduce the chabu regarding who is good to give loans to. Although we didn't have the power, we do that because we have to collect the loans. The lending of grain is to get some income for monks like the proverb, "use the root as the capital and use the leaves for making offerings". We go in fall to collect the loans sometimes far away and sometimes we have to go 5 or 6 times to get the loan back.   

**Q:**  For how many years did you do that?   

**Q:**  I did this for 15 years.   

**Q:**  What was the interest rate?   

**A:**  We Gomang had two kinds of yearly interest; one was 25%, shingandro [Tib. བཞི་ལྔ་འགྲོ] and the other was 20%, ngadrugdro [Tib. ལྔ་དྲུག་འགྲོ]. Usually the lower rate was for our own miser and the higher rate was for outsiders.   

**Q:**  Do the drunyer live mostly in the villages?   

**A:**  When we give loans we go with the chabu and return after the loans were given.   

**Q:**  In what season do you go to give loans?   

**A:**  Usually, I go after the tsongjö. I have to be there for about 20 days before planting in the 2nd Tibetan month. In fall, I should be there for 2-3 months in 9-10 lunar month and stay till the threshing work is done.   

**Q:**  Do they divide the places for each drunyer?   

**A:**  No we don't. When we go, we go together and stay in one house and there were 3 drunyer in Phembo. The three drunyer eat and work together. When we go to collect the loans, we make copies of the tratsang's loan agreements which is called, detra [Tib.འདེད་ཁྲ] and we take these with us when we collect. The main agreement is left in the monastery. When we give loans the chabu is with us, but when we go to collect them we are alone.   

**Q:**  Would the 23 drunyer stay together?   

**A:**  No. They are divided in many places as follows: 5 in Phembo, 2 in Chölung [Tib. ཆོས་ལུང], 1 in Kyarpo [Tib. སྐྱར་པོ] 2 in Tölung Dzem [Tib. stod lung ?] and 2 in Tölung Nyen [Tib. གཉན] etc. My job was in Phembo. There were three of us in Phembo, in Phembo, we had two granary and we were in the largest of the two granary.   

**Q:**  Does the chabu really have to come in spring?   

**A:**  Yes, he does when the loan is given and make the agreement. The drunyer keep the keys of the granary. The agreements are with the chabu. At the time of lending out, when the miser hear that Gomang Tratsang has arrives, the miser come forcing us to give loans. We don't have to go to them. But when we have to collect the loans, we have to go to them, since they won't come to us.   

