# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0007.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Gendun Tenzin [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བསྟན་འཛིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** with Gendun Tenzin [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བསྟན་འཛིན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 71  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gendün Tenzin [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བསྟན་འཛིན] was a monk in the Hor mitsen in Gomang College's Hamdong Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery. He was from a better-off shungyupa natal family who became part of a better-off monk shagtsang (household) that included his teacher and older brother. He was an unusual monk in being a dobdo and achieving the geshe degree. In this interview, he talks about his studies and the life of a pechawa. He also discusses how he worked for his mitsen as its ngünyer and then as the nyerpa. He talks about how he was unusual since he was both a dobdo and a pechawa who received the geshe degree, and how he participated in the dobdo jumping competitions. He also talks about what happened in Drepung after 1959 and how he returned to the monastery in 1985. Finally, he talks a little bit about life in Drepung Monastery at the time of the interview.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0007_01/M_0007_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Where were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in Shograng [Tib. ཞོག་རང྄], in Dechen [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན] Chü located on this side of the river where the motor road to Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན] is.   

**Q:**  How many years have passed since you became a monk?   

**Q:**  It has been about 61-62 years.   

**Q:**  At what age did you become a monk?   

**A:**  I became a monk at age 9.   

**Q:**  Did you stay in the monastery until now?   

**A:**  I was in the monastery until the revolt. After that, I lived there until 1967. Then I returned home.   

**Q:**  When did you come back here [to Drepung]?   

**A:**  I returned back here in 1985.   

**Q:**  How did you come to become a monk the first time? Did you stay with your relatives [in the monastery]? Was your gegen related to you?   

**A:**  My gegen was my relative.   

**Q:**  Were you in Gomang?   

**A:**  Yes. I was in the Hor mitsen in Gomang's Hamdong Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Who was in your shag when you first became a monk?   

**A:**  My gegen, my elder brother and I.   

**Q:**  Were you and your brother from the same parents?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The gegen was also related to you, right?   

**Q:**  The main gegen was not related to me. My older brother became a monk first and he found his gegen, and then he introduced me to him when I became a monk and I joined their shag.   

**Q:**  Was it a common custom to have two sons become monks?   

**A:**  Yes, it was common.   

**Q:**  Do you have other brothers?   

**A:**  In my family there were 11 children.   

**Q:**  So two of you became monks and 9 children remained home, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was your family nomad or farmer?   

**A:**  At first during our parents time, we were kind of like nomads. Later, after we grew up, we became agro-pastoralists.   

**Q:**  To which lord did you belong [to] [Tib. དཔོན་ཁུངས]?   

**A:**  We were shungyuba.   

**Q:**  Was your gegen a lagyüba or pechawa?   

**A:**  He was a pechawa.   

**Q:**  When you became a monk did you study pecha?   

**A:**  I studied pecha and passed the geshe exam.   

**Q:**  Tell me about your studies?   

**Q:**  First I studied reciting prayers [Tib. ཁ་འདོན] and then I studied pecha. My late brother was also a pechawa. If he was alive, he might be in his 80s.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am 71.   

**Q:**  How many years did you study reciting prayers?   

**A:**  I studied until I was about 20 years old, although there is no limit to pass these prayers. We only memorized the popular parts. Likewise the tsenyi pecha would not be finished even if you studied for 1,000 years.   

**Q:**  From what age did you study tsenyi?   

**Q:**  I studied tsenyi since age 17.   

**Q:**  Was your gegen also the pecha gegen?   

**A:**  No. I had a separate pecha gegen who also died.   

**Q:**  What did you do as a youth?   

**A:**  I just studied pecha. I didn't do trading or go to other villages. I stayed studying.   

**Q:**  How did you earn your living?   

**A:**  The tsamba was sent by my home in the village for us as well as a little bit of cow dung, and I would also buy some. That was okay [because he received gye and phog from the monastery].   

**Q:**  How did your gegen teach you tsenyi and the prayers to recite? Did you have to memorize them?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to memorize them. At first my gegen taught me some prayers by me listening to how the gegen read and then I repeated it [Tib. ཁ་སློབ]. The gegen who to taught me tsenyi was also a different one. But quickly the gegen sent me to another pecha gegen in the monastery where they had organized to teach us.   

**Q:**  How many geshe are there now in Drepung?   

**A:**  Maybe 3-4-5. Only the ones who have passed the geshe exam. In the old society, there would have been more than 100 geshe in Gomang who had passed the exam [Tib. མིང་བཏགས་ཐོན་ཟིན].   

**Q:**  Did you do any work for the khamtsen and mitsen?   

**A:**  Yes, I did a little bit. For example, I did the job of ngünyer of Hor mitsen. I lent out money at interest and used it for giving the tonggo ritual. We got no profit from this. Often it was a loss for us. For example thebtsa, was started in the early times when things were cheap. But due to inflation, [in my time] it was not enough to give the tonggo, so the ngünyer had to make it up from our own money.   

**Q:**  How many years did you do the ngünyer?   

**Q:**  It was a 3 year term.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you did this?   

**A:**  About 18 years old. I also did [the] job of the mitsen's nyerpa.   

**Q:**  After you finished the nyerpa work, were you in the tsondu?   

**A:**  Yes. First you do ngünyer, then you are in the tsondu.   

**Q:**  What work did the nyerpa do?   

**A:**  The main work was to give the tonggo to the monks and there wasn't much work to do. The main work was supposed to be to oversee the discipline, but actually we didn't need to do that. Hor mitsen had a large group of monks, but we didn't have many tsog to hold. There were about 26-27 all day tsogs in a year. The nyerpa job in general was hard because the nyerpa had to give the monks the all day tonggo for 4 days every month. So only the monks from the big shagtsang and well-off families could have their monks do the nyerpa job because it cost a lot and the household had to help them. It was difficult even though there were 2 nyerpa at a time. Actually, it seemed that we couldn't do it, but by the grace of the protector deities [Tib. ཆོས་སྐྱོང་སྲུང་མ] we managed it. The main thing was that my elder brother was very capable and he helped me   

**Q:**  Other than giving the tonggo, what else did the nyerpa have to do?   

**A:**  The nyerpa were supposed to oversee the discipline, but they actually didn't need to do that because there was a chandzö who oversaw the discipline and there was also the mitsen tsondu. The nyerpa had to read the mitsen's charter (Tib. ཇཡིག [བཅའ་ཡིག]) when he took over the position. In Hor mitsen we had some tragyün from Hor who came from the branch monastery that belonged to the tratsang and the khamtsen. When they came, they were ready to be monks, and got their clothes and gegen.   

**Q:**  When the tragyün first came, did they give them food?   

**A:**  The gegen would give them the food for 2-3 days or 1 month. Then they had to find food on their own, but they would get the gye and phog.   

**Q:**  Was there any income for these tonggo?   

**A:**  No. There were some endowments which were not even enough to handle the fuel.   

**Q:**  So how did you manage it, did you take loans?   

**A:**  We took a little bit of loans, but one's friends and relatives would give donations for the nyerpa tonggo, which had become like a custom.   

**Q:**  Was your shag rich?   

**A:**  It was like middle standard. We were not so poor that we didn't have tsampa to eat. We had an abundant amount of tsampa.   

**Q:**  What is the term of the nyerpa?   

**A:**  The nyerpa's term was for one year.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you did the nyerpa?   

**A:**  About 24 years old.   

**Q:**  Did you do work for Hamdong Khamtsen?   

**A:**  No. The pechawa didn't have to do anything at all in the khamtsen. It was a big khamtsen with a large number of monks. But when the pechawa passed the geshe exam, they had to give the tratsang tonggo. But they don't need to give it to the tsogchen [the whole monastery].   

**Q:**  This was when you served the rice gruel thukpa [Tib. མིང་བཏགས], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did people talk about in the Hor mitsen's tsondu? How many times did they meet in a year?   

**A:**  It met a lot of times. It discussed the discipline breaches of monks and other work.   

**Q:**  For example, what kind of work?   

**A:**  Like appointing the nyerpa and ngünyer.   

**Q:**  Did the nyerpa job go by turns or appointment?   

**A:**  By turn.   

**Q:**  How was the ngünyer selected?   

**A:**  The ngünyer went by turn from among the well-off shagtsang or those who had taken the thon, like the gegö and the chöndze. This ngünyer would then select a partner on his own from among the monks who were friendly with him and who had some skill.   

**Q:**  Did you live separately from the shag?   

**A:**  I stayed together with the shag and didn't get separated.   

**Q:**  In Gomang, do you have a kind of rule when you can have your own gidru?   

**A:**  There was a rule. You could keep a gidru when you became a little older. In the monastery, we had different grades. For memorizing the pecha, one could pass the test after taking the test for 6 years, and in each year they had to take 8 tests. Then one could choose whether one wanted to study tsenyi or whatever.   

**Q:**  Did you have to take the test in each of the 8 chöthog [monastic terms)? There were actually 12 chöthog, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were 4 monthly chöthog: the spring jichö chemmo, the summer yarchö chemmo, the autumn tönchö chemmo and the winter günchö chemmo. And there were also two 20 day chöthog and two 15 day chöthog. In general there were 12 chöthog if we include the Mönlam and Tsongjö, the Jang günchö in 11-12th month and the Sangpu Yarchö in the 4th month.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the Jang günchö?   

**A:**  Yes and I also went to Sangpu Yarchö. And to Mönlam and Tsongjö because it was held near by.   

**Q:**  Were the Jang günchö and günchö chemmo held at the same time?   

**A:**  Yes. Most of the pechawa went to the Jang günchö. The günchö chemmo was held in the monastery for the monks staying in the monastery. In the Jang günchö, there was the pechawa from the three great monastic seats, and in addition to that, the monks from Radö [Tib. ར་སྟོད] monastery would also come, and some came from some monasteries in Lhoka. There pecha was studied very hard.   

**Q:**  Was there any special salary for when monks were at the Jang günchö?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Your name is M.0007, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you were young, did you have to go to the tsog and the chöra?   

**A:**  We were supposed to go if we could, but there were so many monks. So it was up to each monk and they didn't have to go. For the ones who went there, they had very strict discipline. The ones who were active had to go to the mangja every morning where there were 4 teas which were supplied by the Dewashung. Then the chöra would be held and we would have to go to the chöra. After that, we would go to the traja and the mid-day session called nyinchö, and then there was a break for about 2-3 hours. Then in the evening the kurim was held. It would be about midnight or 1-2 a.m. when the kurim was finished.   

**Q:**  How many gidru do you have [now]?   

**A:**  I have three.   

**Q:**  Are they related to you?   

**A:**  Two are relatives and one is not.   

**Q:**  Have they been admitted into the monastic community [Tib. སྒྲིག]?   

**A:**  Only the older one was admitted in the monastic community. Nowadays, it's hard to get admitted. It used to be easy in the past.   

**Q:**  How do they get admitted? Do they give tests?   

**A:**  They give tests, but this isn't very hard and most can do this. For example, from a long pecha with many pages, there might be about 70 pages to memorize.   

**Q:**  Do they have to go through back door relations [Tib. ལྟག་སྒོ]?   

**A:**  It probably is via back door relations. It is said that the higher ups do not permit more monks to be admitted in the monastic community, but I don't think so because I heard that Labrang Tashikhyil [Tib. བླ་བྲང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ] has about 1,000 monks now.   

**Q:**  If you are admitted in the monastic community, what do you get? Do you get a salary [now]?   

**A:**  You get the alms, but they don't transfer your the resident card [Tib. ཐེམ་ཐོ] [to the monastery]. If you get your resident card transferred, then you get the phog [grain rations].   

**Q:**  If you get admitted but you don't have the residence permit, you get the gye and phog, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If you work, you get the grain and if not, you don't get the grain, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do your gidru work?   

**A:**  The oldest one is admitted in the monastic community. He works in the apple orchard. He has no residence permit and gets no ration grain [Tib. ཟ་འབྲུ་ཐེམ་ཐོ].   

**Q:**  Does he have time to study pecha if he works in the apple orchard?   

**A:** . From after the 10th lunar month to the 2-3rd lunar month, there is no work, so he can study pecha. They also can study in the morning and evening and on Sundays.   

**Q:**  If you say you want to study pecha and don't want to work, can you do that?   

**A:**  In the past, you could have studied tsenyi whenever you wanted, but now you have to work for a few years and pass the tests well, and then they will allow you to study tsenyi.   

**Q:**  How many tsenyi pechawa are there?   

**A:**  Probably, there are about 100 of them.   

**Q:**  What would they do [to subsist] because they are not admitted in the monastic community?   

**A:**  Their tsampa was brought from their homes. I and one gidru would get the alms and salary. So we buy tea and butter from that.   

**Q:**  Are the alms okay these days?   

**A:**  They are not bad.   

**Q:**  In general how much do you get per month?   

**A:**  When there are more visitors, the gye becomes more. In winter it is more and we get 30-40-50 yuan in a month. Summer is worse and in some months, there is no gye at all because there are no visitors. It depends on how many visitors come.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you passed the geshe?   

**A:**  I was 34.   

**Q:**  It was in 1951-52 after the Chinese arrival, right?   

**Q:**  How did you pass the geshe? Would they give you an exam for the geshe?   

**A:**  When you studied pecha for some time, your seniority turn [Tib. མིང་ཚམས] to be a geshe would come. The best geshe go to Norbulinga for the exam where the Dalai Lama, his tutors and his tsenshab would give the exam. There were about 4 kinds of geshe: lharamba, tsoramba, kabjupa, doramba and lingse. These were the best, highest type of geshe. In general, you ask the abbot to give you the title of geshe [Tib. མིང་བཏགས་གནང]. When he thought you were ready, in the chöra, the abbot would give you a khata and say "From now on, you are a geshe and I give you the geshe name." Then if you can give a tonggo, you give that. If not, you can pay some money as the replacement of giving a tonggo. Then you have to sit for the debate which is called thamja shag [Tib. བཞག]. If you are lharamba you do the thamja in the Mönlam where all the monks from the three great monastic seats have gathered. If you are kabjupa and lingse, you sit for the debate in the chöra.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by thamja shag?   

**A:**  This means you sit for the debate and many monks would debate with you. After being given the geshe name, your turn would not come for 2-3 years.   

**Q:**  When do you give the tonggo?   

**A:**  After the name is given, you can give the tonggo whenever you want. The lharampa and tsoramba would give their tonggo in the 12th lunar month at the time of günchö chemmo.   

**Q:**  What geshe did you pass?   

**A:**  I was the gabju geshe and sat for the debate in the monastery. I heard that lharampa and tsoramba were made by the 13th Dalai Lama. Tsoramba was the one who sat for the debate during the Tsongjö. In the past, there were only kabjupa and lingse, but then the 13th Dalai Lama made the lharamba and tsoramba.   

**Q:**  Are the tsoramba and doramba the same?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After you passed the geshe exam, did you stay in the monastery?   

**A:**  I was only in the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did you go [outside] to perform rituals?   

**A:**  I didn't go [outside] much to perform rituals.   

**Q:**  What about the dobdos' chogyag? Did they make a new rule in the 1950s that the chogyag could not be performed?   

**A:**  Yes. The dewashung made a new rule forbidding it.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  I think it was after my geshe exam was finished. Usually, Loseling would compete with Sera Jey and Gomang would compete with Sera Mey.   

**Q:**  And Deyang and Ngagpa would compete, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In our time, I heard that they did the chogyag as mentioned above.   

**Q:**  Yes. Gomang won and after that they stopped it. I heard that you were there when they stopped the chogyag. They called you people. Who called you there?   

**A:**  The laji told the tratsang and the tratsang called us.   

**Q:**  Who came to call you?   

**A:**  I was not there. I was not allowed to do that in front of my gegen because the chogyag was not a good thing, and it was just to fool around [Tib. འཁྲབ་ཡག] and hop around [Tib. འཕག་ཚག་རྒྱག] when you are young. Anyway, I was planning to go there inconspicuously but then I heard that the tratsang had told them to stop the chogyag, so I didn't go.   

**Q:**  Basically, you were in the tobtsang, but you didn't go there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Actually, if I went for the chogyag, I should have gone there 4-5 days earlier to rest my body because I had to jump. But if I went earlier, my gegen wouldn't let me go. so I was waiting until the very end and I was going to go there on the eve of the chogyag.   

**Q:**  At that time, they beat the monks with switches and made them prostrate 50 times, right?   

**A:**  There was no beatings, but they had to do prostrations in the chöra.   

**Q:**  When was this? How many years before you passed the geshe exam?   

**A:**  I'm not sure. I was about 35-36 years old.   

**Q:**  Was this in the 1950s after the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  After the Chinese arrived, the chogyag was not allowed, although there were still dobdo.   

**Q:**  When they stopped you from doing the chogyag, how old were you?   

**A:**  I must have been 23 years old.   

**Q:**  Was this before or after the Deyang chogyag which was done in 1945?   

**A:**  It was before that. No. I think they were before us. I am talking about the lunar calendar. After we did the chogyag, there was no more chogyag, and they didn't even prepare for that.   

**Q:**  I heard that Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག] set up a new tobtsang after that where he was the senior head [Tib. གེངོ]. They planned to do the chogyag with Ngagpa College. Then Ngagpa College told them to postpone it for a few years and they did the Lhagyel [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱལ] Chogyag and yelled "May the god be victorious" [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱལ་འཐེན].   

**A:**  I didn't know about that. But yes, in the beginning, Rinchen Könchog did the chogyag with Ngagpa College.   

**Q:**  Was that after the Sera War?   

**A:**  Yes. I am not sure it was true or not, but it was said that the Sera War was caused [Tib. བསླངས] by the dobdo tobtsang massing together.   

**Q:**  Who do you think originated this prohibition? Was it the laji or the Yigtsang?   

**A:**  Probably the Yigtsang told the laji and they called the tratsang.   

**Q:**  You couldn't do the chogyag, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Even though we had already made the site for the jumping competition.   

**Q:**  Were you in the monastery in 1959?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you were at the Mönlam in 1959, did you think the revolt would take place?   

**A:**  Yes, we were saying that the revolt might take place since it was said that there was the organization called Chushigandru, though I wasn't involved.   

**Q:**  You went to the Mönlam and then returned, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I returned to Drepung. Usually on the 17th-18th of the 2nd lunar month, the Tsongjö would start. And the revolt took place on the 10th of the 2nd lunar month. At that time, I was in the monastery.   

**Q:**  How did you first come to know the cannons started firing?   

**A:**  People said it would be bad and they [Chinese] would kill us and make us suffer, so I went over to the upper part of the valley, and crossed the mountain pass behind Drepung and fled to my home in Tölung. I returned in the 5th lunar month. My older brother and 3 other gidru also fled together. We were 9-10 monks.   

**Q:**  You crossed the mountain pass after the revolt took place, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the 5th lunar month I returned and they all stayed there. There was my brother and 4-5 gidru. Then I stayed in the monastery until 1967.   

**Q:**  When you returned, was the Democratic Management Committee [Tib. དམངས་གཙོ་བདག་གཉེར་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] set up?   

**A:**  Yes. I asked them for the permission to return to my shag and they said okay.   

**Q:**  Did you wear monks' robes then?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you do then? Did you stay in the shag?   

**A:**  I went for the study session [Tib. སློན་སྦྱོང] until the 9th month. Then after this I went to Ngachen Phang [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན་འཕྲང] to work on the Power Station. They sent about 400 Drepung monks there.   

**Q:**  At this time, how many monks were there in Drepung?   

**A:**  About 4-5000. Before that, there were about 10,000 I think. Later many monks were jailed and only the common monks [Tib. གྲྭ་རྐྱང] [non monastic officials] were left.   

**Q:**  Weren't you classified as trerim?   

**A:**  No. In the old society, the geshe were regarded as common monks and weren't regarded as trerim. But in the revolution era, they regarded the geshe as trerim a little bit and they were called chötsab, which meant that we served the ngadag who practiced religion. For example, in the past when they did the cleaning of the courtyard, the geshe didn't have any exemptions from this like the chöndze and the tratsang chandzö did. We had to go do the cleaning like a common monk. And we also had to go to get the gye and phog in person, but the ex-officials could send their gidru to get the gye and phog for them.   

**Q:**  After you came back to the monastery in the 5th lunar month, what did they teach you in the study session? Do they hold the study session from morning until evening? Did they hold the tsog then?   

**A:**  There was no tsog then. The study session was held all day. We were taught all the things that we hadn't heard.   

**Q:**  Did they hold the study session in the chöra or in the assembly hall?   

**A:**  They held it in the chöra and also in Hamdong's dukhang.   

**Q:**  What did you do when there were no study sessions?   

**A:**  There was no time when there was no study session.   

**Q:**  Did they tell you that capitalism is not good, etc.?   

**A:**  Yes, they taught us about the "three big mountains" [Tib. རི་བོ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ] and "oppose three and exempt two" [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ་གསུམ་དང་ཆག་ཡང་གཉིས], and "three cleanings" [Tib. གཙང་མ་གསུམ], etc. There were a lot.   

**Q:**  What did you have to say? Did you say, "Yes, yes".   

**A:**  We had to go through the motions of saying yes.   

**Q:**  How did you get your food? There was no gye and phog, right?   

**A:**  Yes. How could there be gye and phog? We didn't get even a single fen.   

**Q:**  How did you get your food?   

**A:**  I ate from the little bit that was left in my shag. Then after awhile, it became loosened up a little bit and my family was able to send me a little bit of food.   

**Q:**  Were some monks eating in the joint eating commune at this time, or were the monks eating individually?   

**A:**  There were different financial conditions among the monks. So for the poor monks who didn't have food to eat, their food was supplied from the common tea and butter in the khamtsen and the mitsen in the monastery, and they ate together in a eating commune. The monks who had things to eat, ate their own food in their shag.   

**Q:**  Did they ask for volunteer workers for the Power Station construction?   

**A:**  Externally, they said it was for volunteers, but in reality no one came forward to be volunteers, so they nominated the monks to go.   

**Q:**  What did you do after that?   

**A:**  After this work was done, I returned to the monastery and I planted trees in the monastery. They had drawn the lines and one person carried a hoe and the other carried a shovel, and we dug the holes for the trees.   

**Q:**  Were these apple trees?   

**A:**  No, these were the simple trees. At that time the apple trees were yet to be planted. After some time passed, we planted the apple trees. Then it was time for the Tibetan New Year. So they told us, "If you are going to Mönlam you can go. If not, you can stay in the monastery."   

**Q:**  Did they hold the Mönlam in 1960?   

**A:**  They held the Mönlam in 1960 and 1961, and then there was no Mönlam.   

**Q:**  What was the Mönlam like? There were less monks, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was only a small number of monks in the courtyard of the Jokhang.   

**Q:**  Did they hold the Mönlam in the same way?   

**A:**  Basically, it was same.   

**Q:**  Did the monks sit for the tsenyi debate [Tib. དམ་བཅའ་བཞག]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there also tsenyi debating in the monastery at this time?   

**A:**  No. It was only at the Mönlam. There was no chöra after the revolt. The monks were all send to work. I worked at the Ngachen Phang on 4 different occasions. Then I also worked on a motor road construction project, and then I dug ditches for the thick electric wire that was put underground.   

**Q:**  Was there any tsongjö held?   

**A:**  Not at all since 1959.   

**Q:**  Was there tsog sometimes in 1960-61?   

**A:**  No tsog like we had in the early times. At meal time, all the monks would gather there and they would serve 2 teas, and they would tell us about the study and the work to be done.   

**Q:**  Were you allowed to go to perform rituals [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན]?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  So you could practice religion in [your] shag, but not outside, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Trindor: [not on the tape] In 1963 a person hired our horse cart to go to Ganden to give gye at the tsog.   

**Q:**  When the monastery's food ran out, what did you do?   

**A:**  After some time, we bought grain from the government with the wages we got from the work and the monks were given monthly tsampa.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the leaders of the monastery monks or laymen?   

**A:**  In the beginning, they were all monks and there were also 40-50 laymen cadres who mainly did the work. And all the former lords [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] were shut up in prison.   

**Q:**  How did they start the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  When the Cultural Revolution started they said we were not allowed to keep any statues.   

**Q:**  At first, they held a meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you allowed to wear monks' robes?   

**A:**  In the beginning, it was okay, but then they said that we were not allowed to wear the monks' robes. So they set up an organization where the monks' robes were dyed black. Some of the monks who were more tough or brave [Tib. ཞེད་པ] saved their monks robes. But the weaker ones dyed the monks robes black and made pants and garments from these. And then I returned home.   

**Q:**  Did they ask if you want to go home or stay in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. They said "If you want to go to the countryside, you are free to go." So I said I'd go and they said all right.   

**Q:**  Were there many struggle sessions?   

**A:**  Yes. There were a lot of struggle sessions.   

**Q:**  Were most of them lene?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In 1985 you returned. How did you do this? Did you submit a report?   

**A:**  They appointed some leaders and I knew some of the leaders. I asked them for permission to return and he said, "It is okay. Come to the study session for tomorrow."   

**Q:**  From 1985 until now, was the discipline in the monastery kind of the same?   

**A:**  Yes, about the same.   

**Q:**  Could you keep gidru in 1985?   

**A:**  I stayed in the monastery awhile going for circumambulations without being admitted into the monastic community. Then I asked to be admitted and I was admitted in 1987.   

**Q:**  Who has the power to admit the monks?   

**A:**  The committee [Tib. ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] had the power.   

**Q:**  Did they have to report this [to] their superiors? Or did they make the decision?   

**A:**  In the beginning, they probably made the decision. But now they have to ask the higher ups for permission and they give permission for say, 20-30-40 monks to get admitted into the monastic community.   

**Q:**  How is your livelihood now? Do you get a salary from the Old People's Home [Tib. རྒས་གསོ་ཁང]?   

**A:**  I'm not in the Old People's Home since they didn't transfer my residence permit, and they didn't send me there.   

**Q:**  Does your family help you?   

**A:**  Yes. My family helps me.   

**Q:**  In the old society, what would happen if a monk has no gidru, and if he is sick and can't work?   

**A:**  The mitsen would help and they would send a servant to nurse him, and they would also give tsampa and those things. This is written in the mitsen's document. Patients were treated very specially and it was written that they should send a person to nurse him and give him food. The document was kept with the seal from the dewashung which they had asked for. Similarly, the monks had their own khamtsen where they belonged to.   

**Q:**  If a person was sick for a long time would they still help him?   

**A:**  Yes. And the patient also got his share of gye and phog.   

**Q:**  Was there ever a case when a monks family sent one of their layman children to look after the sick monk?   

**A:**  No. I never saw this happen, though it may have occasionally been done like this.   

**Q:**  Were there cases when the monks help their parents who need help or money in their old age?   

**A:**  Yes. This was done.   

**Q:**  Do most of the monks keep close contact with their family or don't they?   

**A:**  If their household lives nearby, there is close contact. In my case, I didn't return home very much. Most of the monks go home after Mönlam and work and stay until the 10th month. And then they bring tsampa and cow dung and come to the monastery in 9th-10th month, and stay for the winter. But there are many good and righteous lamas and monks [Tib. སྐྱེ་བུ་དམ་པ] who stay in the monastery and study pecha even if they don't have enough food to eat. But some monks go home after the Mönlam and some drink chang, etc. After Mönlam, there is not much gye and phog in summer so they stay at home and help out there. In the winter, there are more visitors, so there are more tsog and more income, so they return and live in monastery.   

**Q:**  If you want to keep a new gidru, do you have to ask the committee for permission?   

**A:**  Yes you do. This year there is a new rule and they made it very strict saying we are not allowed to keep new gidru. This was made in this year.   

**Q:**  How many monks are there now?   

**A:**  Some ran away, some were expelled. So there are a little over 300 in the monastery.   

**Q:**  These were the ones who were admitted into the monastic community, right? How many are there who are not admitted in the monastic community?   

**A:**  There are about 400 who aren't admitted and who are studying by asking for lodging. This year they have started a new school for the new gidru. It has 152 monks. In the past, the gidru who had some sources of income didn't have to work and they could study. But this year there is another new rule which said that the monks are not allowed to stay without working and all those who are 17-18-19 and in their 20s and the 30s have to work. There are about 90 such monks. They also made a list of those who are asking for lodging and studying.   

**Q:**  So you monks got angry with this, right?   

**A:**  The monks aren't angry I think, but the ones who rent the houses might be angry because they raised the rents. There are also many retired monks who in the past have been monks and have returned to the monastery. In the past, the monastery had sent about 400-500 monks to Kongpo to build roads and to learn to drive vehicles, and some were also sent to schools. A number of these have now retired. Some were still monks and some were not monks, but they stayed single and returned to the monastery. So they are angry about the raising of the rent up to 20-30 yuan for a room with one pillar in a month. So they were saying that this was not good at all.   

**Q:**  Do these retired monks wear monks' robes?   

**A:**  Some wear monks' robes and some don't. They get retirement from their offices so they are not allowed to join the monastery. They do some free work, like fixing the road for circumambulation and the road to monastery, and they even donated about 500-1,000 yuan for the monastery and also told the monastery to keep their belongings after they die. So many of us are thinking that it's better to have these retired people because if there is no one living in a house, the house will get dilapidated. So there is a lot of criticism about charging high rent. In the past, there was no one taking care of the houses and the houses got dilapidated. Then when these people stayed in the house, they would renovate the houses. When I stayed in this house, the rafters had departed from the beams because some Chinese had stayed and made the house dilapidated by pouring water when using cement, but I plastered the walls again.   

**Q:**  What did you think when they stopped the chogyag? Were you angry?   

**A:**  I didn't have much idea about that and I was not very angry.   

**Q:**  But you were planning to go there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I was planning to go. I was good at the games so the tobtsang regarded me very highly.   

**Q:**  Were you the chief or margenpa [Tib. མ་རྒན་པ]?   

**A:**  I was the ngöngyupa [Tib. སྔོན་རྒྱུགས་པ], the one who jumped first. The margenpa was the late Dorje Chödar [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆོས་དར]. Gendün Phüntso [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཕུན་ཚོགས] was also very good at the games and we two were in the same tobtsang. There was one called Gendün Tsering [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཚེ་རིང] who stayed in Deyang College. We two were the same monks under one abbot.   

**Q:**  Were there many like you who did both the tsenyi and the games?   

**A:**  There were not many among the dobdo who studied pecha. But by the grace of my gegen, I studied pecha.   

**Q:**  You were both a dobdo and also a pechawa, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. My relative told me not to be a dobdo and that I should study pecha, but I didn't listen to him. When I was young, I liked the dobdos and the games, and I was a dobdo and played in the games. But my gegen was older and strict and he insisted that I should study tsenyi. At first I studied the pecha as a secondary activity [Tib. ཞོར], but after the tobtsang ended, I studied very hard and passed the geshe exam. I passed the geshe exam 5 years before the revolt.   

**Q:**  Did your tobtsang do the Lhagyel Chogyag?   

**A:**  Yes we did.   

**Q:**  This was after that, right?   

**A:**  We invited our sponsors and made preparations to give the tratsang our things. I could only sneak away the morning of the day before the chogyag because my gegen was there.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between the Lhagyel Chogyag and the Tashi Chogyag?   

**A:**  In the Tashi Chogyag there was an opponent and in the Lhagyel Chogyag there wasn't.   

