# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0007.02 : Tape 2  
##  : Gendün Tenzin [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བསྟན་འཛིན]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Gendün Tenzin [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བསྟན་འཛིན]   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1918  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gendün Tenzin [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བསྟན་འཛིན] was a monk in the Hor mitsen in Gomang College's Hamdong Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery. He was from a better-off shungyupa natal family who became part of a better-off monk shagtsang (household) that included his teacher and older brother. He was an unusual monk in being a dobdo and achieving the geshe degree. In this interview, he talks about the dobdo's chogyag, and the jumping and throwing events that it consisted of.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0007_02/M_0007_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  In the Tashi Chogyag we didn't draw marks where the jumpers' feet land, but when competing to win or lose, the Thobshor Chogyag, then we drew the marks where people landed.   

**Q:**  So in the Tashi Chogyag, you didn't draw the marks, right ?   

**A:**  Yes. Although they were opponents, we didn't draw the marks where they landed and they did not draw the marks where they threw the stones. So there was no winner or loser, although people could basically see who was better. In the Tashi Chogyag, there was no wagering [Tib. རྒྱན]. But in the Thobshor Chogyag there were bets on every event and the loser would pay the bet, though it was not a big amount.   

**Q:**  Did you mostly bet money or thukpa?   

**A:**  It was money, but it was just a token bet.   

**Q:**  Have you ever bet money?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  There were no bets in the Lhagyel Chogyag, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Lhagyel Chogyag was done internally where we divided the tobtsang members into two groups and played the games. We also invited guests as usual. We didn't measure distances with the rope called lingthag [Tib. གླིང་ཐག].   

**Q:**  How did you throw the gyabdo?   

**A:**  We threw the stone backwards over our heads.   

**Q:**  How did you practice it?   

**A:**  We practiced first in the water which has no pebbles, only mud. There used to be good water in front of Damba (village). First we banged on our back [Tib. སྒལ་པ་བརྡབས] and then we touched our head down [Tib. མགོ་བཙུགས] and laid face down [Tib. ཁ་སྦུབ་སློག], and then we threw the stone by turning it around.   

**Q:**  How high was the jumping platform above the water surface?   

**A:**  The water was quite deep when we practiced in the water. But when we jumped from the platform, it was very high and the earth was made soft on the landing spot, so it was not too dangerous. Then we threw the stone while we did a full somersault and landed on our feet facing the opposite side. The weaker ones would land face down. This way of throwing the stone by turning around was called changel [Tib. ?]. On the side we made the place where the guests sat.   

**Q:**  On the day when they stopped the chogyag, did Sera Mey show up?   

**A:**  Yes. They came. We crossed the Ramagang ferry site and went and stayed in Tsangthog [Tib. གཙང་ཐོག] for a few days, and came in a coracle to the jumping place.   

**Q:**  Before that, had the abbot told you that you were not allowed to do the chogyag?   

**A:**  No. Usually we did that inconspicuously.   

**Q:**  Did you think that they would come to stop you?   

**A:**  They would hear about that and then they'd stop it. I heard that the reason for stopping the chogyag was because in the past there had been a disturbance [Tib. འཁྲུག་རྐྱེན] with Sera which was caused by the dobdo, since the dobdo generally have solidarity [Tib. ཁ་སྒྲིལ་པོ]. I am not sure if this is true or not.   

**Q:**  You mean the Sera War?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Anyway, you went up there through Ramagang because you had to do it inconspicuously. Although it is nearer if you go there directly, you never thought that the tratsang would stop you, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you pick the team?   

**A:**  The best 15-20 competitors were picked in advance from among members of the tobtsang. If there were 50 or so in the tobtsang, then after Tsongjö, we would go to Barshi to do the selection by making them play the games. This was called tebopi [Tib. གཏེ་པོ་ཕུད]. I am not boasting, but I was very good at the games, so I didn't need to get selected because I was selected for sure.   

**Q:**  Did you ask the deity to approve the second chief, mawog [Tib. མ་འོག], and the ngöngyugpa?   

**A:**  We would submit the names of 5-6 better competitors to the deity for approval and the deity would go through the motions of putting his seal on the names of who was approved.   

**Q:**  Who was the ngöngyugpa then?   

**A:**  I was the ngöngyugpa.   

**Q:**  It was because you are tall, right?   

**A:**  No. Because I could jump very well. [laughter.]   

**Q:**  Who was the margenpa?   

**A:**  It was the late Dorje Chödar [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཆོས་དར].   

**Q:**  And the mawog?   

**A:**  Mawog must have been Gendün Phüntso [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཕུན་ཚོགས]. I don't recall well.   

**Q:**  How many competitors were [there]?   

**A:**  Seventeen competitors on each side.   

**Q:**  Did you challenge them or did they challenge you?   

**A:**  We were good at the games, so we might have challenged them.   

**Q:**  Who was your gengo then?   

**A:**  The late Ngawang Pelsang [Tib. ངག་དབང་དཔལ་བཟང] was the gengo.   

**Q:**  Do you remember if the chogyag was done one year or two years after the Sera War?   

**A:**  Probably, it was after that for 5-6 years.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you did the chogyag?   

**A:**  I jumped when I was 23 and when the Sera War took place, I must have been 19-20 years old. I don't recall well.   

**Q:**  Trindor: You did the chogyag before the Sera War and after that, Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག] did the chogyag.   

**A:**  I don't think so. It is strange because since then they have prohibited the chogyag, so probably I don't recall the years well.   

**Q:**  How much did the stone used for the gyabdo weigh?   

**A:**  It weighed about 3 gyama [3.6 lbs.].   

**Q:**  You held this with two hands and threw it, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was thrown with both hands, and two stones were thrown like this and two were thrown like this. And the kyangdo was also thrown like this and it was not allowed to be thrown like this. And the mendo was thrown upwards like this [he demonstrated these motions].   

**Q:**  How much does the kyangdo weigh?   

**A:**  It might be like 8 sang, which is a little less than 1 gyama. If it was too heavy, it would hurt your arms because we used much strength when throwing it.   

**Q:**  Did you each bring your own stone?   

**A:**  No, everyone used the same stone.   

**Q:**  Before starting the chogyag, did you first walk around wearing monks' robes hanging your underpants [Tib. ཆུ་རས] on your pinky?   

**A:**  We held it in our hands while we sat in a line, and did the prayers for propitiating the protective deities [Tib. འཕྲིན་བཅོལ] and burned the incense. Then the two parties stood on two sides of the runway.   

**Q:**  The underpants were made by you, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The tobtsang didn't make them for us.   

**Q:**  At the time of [the] running, we wore the underpants and came to the runway where they had spread a five colored khata on the runway, which was for wiping the platform. For example, as soon as the Sera jumpers jumped, our person would wipe the platform and then our person would jump.   

**Q:**  Where would the people stand who wiped the platform?   

**A:**  They stood on two sides of the platform, which was high and reached up to their chests. The jumping pit was dug deep down and the audience would sit on the two sides of the pit. After you jumped, you walked up along the steps to get out of the jumping pit. In order to make the runway higher, they would pile up sod, and the platform stone from where we jumped (took off) was placed there.   

**Q:**  Trindor: I heard that the best ones would jump from the edge of the pit. And when you threw the kyangdo, did you throw it while running?   

**A:**  We ran a little bit on the incline runway starting about half way up. But when we jumped, we started running from the end of the runway. When you threw the mendo you kept your hands in front of you and held the stone by 2 fingers and your thumb. When you did the kyangdo you kept your hand behind them, like in a hammerlock.   

**Q:**  When you reached the platform, did you throw the stone right away or stop for a while and then throw it?   

**A:**  You threw it without stopping and then jumped down at the same time.   

**Q:**  Was it [the] same when you threw the mendo?   

**A:**  It was same when throwing the mendo. You held the stone with the same fingers but threw it behind your back as if your hand was in a hammerlock, and then you jumped. You may jump or may not jump, because they would not draw the marks down there. Most would jump because they had been running strongly on the runway. Before you were experienced, you would have trouble running fast on this narrow runway, which was less than half a meter wide. Like the length from the elbow to the finger tip [Tib. ཕྲུ་གང].   

**Q:**  The runway was built with sod, right?   

**A:**  The jumping place in Barshi was a pasture and the runway was build with sod, but there was another jumping place near Drepung where the runway was built with stones.   

**Q:**  Were there any tobtsang after you [after your tobtsang was stopped]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They didn't have a wining-losing competition (Thobshor Chogyag), but did they do the internal competition (Lhagyel Chogyag)?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. There was a tobtsang, but no chogyag.   

**Q:**  You just played the games and learned from each other, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Thank you.   

