# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0050.01  
##  : with Dobdo Targye [Tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ་དར་རྒྱས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** July 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Dobdo Targye [Tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ་དར་རྒྱས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dobdo Targye was a Drepung monk who was a member of the Mimang Tshogpa (People's Association). In this interview, he discusses the start of the Association, its leaders and the meetings they held.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0050_01/H_0050_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell us in detail about the People's Association, what you heard, and how they made connections.   

**A:**  I think the People's Association first started in 1952, but I'm not sure about the year. The first meeting of the leaders was held in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> Nyungne Lhakang [Tib. བཞི་སྡེ་སྙུང་གནས་ལྷ་ཁང] [Reting Rimpoche's monastery in Lhasa]. They settled on holding a meeting of the People's Association, and held it in Jaralinga [Tib. སྦྱར་རག་གླིང་ག]. Around Jaralinga there were some households, not many. They put up a tent and around the tent they erected a cloth wall. On one side, outside of the curtain, there was a kitchen. They served tea and droma dresi. This was said to be like a celebration [Tib. རྟེན་འབྲེལ] for the opening of the People's Association. The leaders had prepared a document of the organization's goals and they read it to the group. The meaning of the document was: "The coming of many Chinese to Tibet is not acceptable. The Kudrak are instigating between the higher ups and those below, so we cannot have trust in the Kudrak. So because of this we have decided to start a people's meeting."   

**Q:**  Who were the main leaders who said that?   

**A:**  The main leaders were the representatives of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> [Tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ]. The main one who spoke was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>'s Chandzö Thamjö [Tib. སེ་ར་སྨད་དམ་ཆོས]. The other main leaders were Drepung's Tsangja Jayang Dawa [Tib. གཙང་ཕྱག་འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ]. I don't recall the name of the Ganden representative. Another leader was Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>'s Drubto Tenzin Nyima [Tib. གྲུབ་ཐོབ་བསྟན་འཛིན་ཉི་མ]. The last one was the most capable at the meeting, giving orders, etc. I was there as part of the common people [Tib. གཤམ་གྱི་མི]. After this meeting was finished, after about 4-5 days, they called a meeting in Nyungne Lhakang and I went there. On that day, all of the members didn't come, and I was not in the internal meeting [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་སྦུག].   

**Q:**  How many people attended the Jara meeting?   

**A:**  About over 200 altogether.   

**Q:**  Did they keep the secret very strict?   

**A:**  The internal meetings of the leaders were secret, but I wasn't part of the internal meetings. They told the mentioned above to the people below. We returned after the [large] meeting was over and they stayed behind. At this meeting, I only knew 2 people, Dobdo Wangdü [Tib. དབང་འདུས] and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> monk nicknamed "blue lower mink's skirt," Shamthab Ngombo [Tib. ཤམ་ཐབ་སྔོན་པོ]. That meeting had about 27 people and among them there were some who were said to be from Ganden. They counted the number of people many times and said, "We have sent notices to 27 people and all have come." This was said by Chöndze Ripin. He was very good at writing. He appears to have been a clerk somewhere. Then the leaders met separately and they told us to be on alert. "In case many people come, please guard the door and do not let them in." We were distributed outside, but no one came.   

**Q:**  What did they say at the meeting?   

**A:**  I don't know because, I was outside guarding the door. Then after some time, someone came outside from the inner meeting. He said, "Now, you can return home." So we left. In today's language we were guards. Then after a few days, they said that we were going to give the Kashag a petition. On that day, the leaders sent a message to some members saying that some people have to stay outside of Surkhang's house. "Do not stay right in front of the main door, sit scattered a little ways to the side at Dongtsesur [Tib. གདོང་རྩེ་ཟུར] [where the long prayer pole is]." So one group stayed on the side in front of Sungjöra and other group stayed spread out a little ways away from the south gate of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>. The Kashag was meeting upstairs in the Tsuglagang. We didn't know what the Kashag would do when the leaders gave them the petition. We were told that if any people, like people from Ba, which they meant people who belonged to the Chinese, would come along the street, please be on alert and be cautious. And if we had weapons, carry them with us. Near the Tsuglagang's south gate, there were 5 members. One was Dobdo Wangdü and one was me. I didn't know the other 3. Then there were people left every little ways in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> in the front and the side of the Tsuglagang, like at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a>, but there wasn't any trouble on that day. Then finally someone came to us and asked us, "Are you the people staying here?" We said "Yes," and he said, "They have left, so you can go home now." There was a restaurant beneath Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ] [a building near the Barkor] where there was a red chapel of the protector deities [Tib. བཙན་ཁང་དམར་པོ] at the front of the house called Palrab Khangsar [Tib. དཔལ་རབ་ཁང་གསར]. The woman who ran the restaurant was Singa Lhamo, the wife of the Denma Abse [Tib. ལྡན་མ་ཨབ་སེ]. Upstairs was a place for playing mahjong and under that was a restaurant. The owner of this restaurant was Tsingdor [Tib. ཚིང་རྡོར] who was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>. His servant was a Sera Mey Chöndze who was nicknamed "monkey" [Tib. སྤེའུ]. He was there. Tsingdor was among the leaders of the People's Association. One day I went to that restaurant to drink sweet tea. Tsingdor was sitting not far from me. Then 2 Baba arrived and gave him three wrapped packets each with 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>. They asked Tsingdor to give them a receipt for the money. Tsingdor asked me if I had a pen. I said no. Then the Babas and Tsingdor went upstairs. When they went upstairs, Tsingdor told me to stay awhile. I noticed when they went upstairs that the Baba both had guns under their dresses. I got very suspicious and thought that Tsingdor was working with the Chinese and the dayan might be his salary. Consequently, I immediately went to see Jayang Dawa. He was staying in Nyungne Lhakang. He wasn't there. Then I left and I met a friend of mine who was the clerk of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung called Shema Phüntso [Tib. ཤེ་མ་ཕུན་ཚོགས], the lame father of Dawa in the Municipal Dance Group [Tib. གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཟློས་གར]. He knew me and asked where I had been and I told him I had gone to meet someone up there. He lived near by and he said to come home and have some tea. I went and stayed awhile, and then I went again to see Jayang Dawa. He still wasn't there. Then I went to the Barkor. At the prayer pole called Ganden Thangnyol [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཐང་སྙོལ] (east side) I met Drubto Tenzin Nyima. He was buying a kind of prayer flag and he said that he needed prayer flags with the prayer Gyentsen Tsemo [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་རྩེ་མོ] printed on it. I said that it would be good to hoist the prayer flag. But he didn't buy them because the print was not clear. Then I asked him how important a leader in the group was Tsingdor. He said, "He is okay." I said, "Oh, you have to be careful. Probably, he might not be trust worthy." He said, "What happened?" I said, "I saw something this morning. Be careful. Otherwise, it is not good." But since we were outside we didn't talk in detail and I said "I'll tell you in detail tomorrow or the next day." Then I again looked for Jayang Dawa and I told him what had happened in detail. At this time, he was in Samding Khangjung [Tib. བསམ་ལྡིང་ཁང་ཆུང] where there is a Nepalese bicycle repairer at the front of the door. He was with Chandzö Thamjö. I had brought along Drubdo Tendzin Nyima. I told them what I had witnessed. I said, "Tsingdor is not at all good. They [the Babas] gave him 300 dayan and he gave them a receipt and if it was just trading business they might have told him the money was the right number. But they didn't say that. So I ended saying "You have to be careful about Tsingdor. Then they went upstairs and I was told to stay there. They didn't come down so I went out." Chandzö Thamjö said, "Oh, I see. The previous information and this fits perfectly." Then one day I met Tsingdor by the Jayang Nub [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ནུབ]. I noticed that he was carrying a pistol so I took his arm and said, "Oh, today you have got a gun. I swear by the three jewels, do you think you are great?" I swear by the three jewels that he got a bit afraid. Tsingdor said, "What are you doing? You know me and are showing a black face." I said, "I am just kidding and just said that. Why are you getting angry at kidding?" Then he said, "Let's go have some tea." I said, no. So from then on I didn't go to the restaurant to have tea. From then on I didn't have anything to do with the association. I went to Tö [Tib. སྟོད] and that's it. When I returned, Alo Chöndze had started a new group, and Drubdo Tenzin Nyima was in it. Just before the revolt, they arrested Alo Chöndze, Tenzin Nyima, etc., 3-4 people. I went to see Tenzin Nyima, but he was not among those at the Police Station. When I asked them if Tenzin Nyima was there? They said yes, but they didn't let me talk to him. I saw he was sitting on the top floor. Tenzin Nyima said to me, "Are you Targye la?" I said, "Yes, are you staying here?" He said yes. I said, "The guards wouldn't let me go up. So goodbye." At that time, Alo Chöndze and the others were kind of detained there.   

**Q:**  How old was Jayang Dawa at the time?   

**A:**  In his 50s.   

**Q:**  How about Chöndze Thamjö?   

**A:**  He was older. He had white hair.   

**Q:**  The representatives were mostly from Sera and Drepung?   

**A:**  Yes, from Sendre. Jayang Dawa was from Drepung and Chandzö Thamjö was from Sera Mey. I don't know the name of the Ganden representative.   

**Q:**  What was in the petition they gave to the Kashag?   

**A:**  They didn't tell me.   

**Q:**  Who were the top leaders?   

**A:**  Jayang Dawa and Chöndze Thamjö.   

**Q:**  Was Lhabtsün Labrang [Tib. ལྷ་བསྟུན་བླ་བྲང] Chandzö there as a leader?   

**A:**  When I was active, he wasn't there. Later I do not know. Shamdab Ngonbo is in Nepal. He came to Lhasa twice. Drubdo Tenzin Nyima is in India. Last year he was alive. He left before the revolt.   

**Q:**  Is anyone from the association left in Lhasa?   

**A:**  None at all.   

**Q:**  Did you have hope that this association which opposed the Chinese would be successful?   

**A:**  Yes, I had great hope. But I wasn't a leader, I was an ordinary member. But I thought it would be successful. Later the association had all kinds of members and Chinese spies, so I didn't want to continue in it. I thought what was the use for going in that.   

**Q:**  Who first asked you to join?   

**A:**  Jayang Dawa. He is a Drepung monk and I am also one. I asked him what the association was about. He replied, "If the Chinese stay in Tibet, it is no good. And the Kudrak aren't doing their work well, so we have a plan to start a large People's Association." I said "If you do that it will be great. I'll join." But to tell you the truth, I didn't have much to think about or was able to make plans. I just had the enthusiasm.   

**Q:**  When you put the seal [on the document], how many people were in the group?   

**A:**  I don't know. There were some. I was the 3rd seal [affixed].   

**Q:**  Was there an explanation on top of the paper of what this was?   

**A:**  There was, but it was folded under, so you couldn't see it and we had to place our seal at the bottom under the names. At that time, I said, "There will not be a problem because we put the seal by handing over the seal to every one [Tib. ཐེལ་རྩེ་ལག་སྐོར]." Placing the seal like this was regarded as very precious at this time.   

