# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0209.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kalimpong, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང] was a well-known Geshe from Sera Jey College. In this interview, he continues talking about Reting Rimpoche and his entourage and how they set in motion plans to depose the Regent Taktra. He also discussed the fighting at Reting and tells in detail how his brother and several associates murdered 16 Tibetan soldiers there and then fled to Kham.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0209_02/H_0209_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  So all the servants were scared and refused to hold up the egg. My younger brother, however, was not afraid and held the egg. When Reting shot, the egg broke but nothing happened to him. I asked him why he volunteered to do such a stupid thing and he told me that he thought that he couldn't get any achievement in religion, so it was better to be shot and die at the hand of such a great person as Reting. If he was killed, he would not go to hell and he would be saved by Reting so he did not fear death at all. So that's why he did it. Therefore Reting liked and trusted him 100%. This is the reason why I know about these things. My brother would tell them to me. However, I didn't know Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ] and Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས་བླ་མ] very well.   

**Q:**  Do you know who had more influence with Reting - Nyungne Lama or Khardo?   

**A:**  Khardo had more influence. Even these new plans, etc, were presented to Reting by Khardo.   

**Q:**  How did Khardo get this idea about introducing democracy and so on? Had he traveled to foreign countries?   

**A:**  No. This idea was originated by Reting himself, not them. However, they did plan out the details as to how it should be carried out.   

**Q:**  [COMMENT BY GELEK RIMPOCHE: This is my personal view: Nyungne Lama had ideas of introducing reforms and changes such as this. I believe he went to China and Mongolia and he had such ideas. That's what I have heard from my father. My father and Nyungne Lama we very close friends.] When was this? What time, which period?   

**A:**  [Gelek Rimpoche] A long, long time back. Before all these things started. It was during my childhood. My father used to joke with him.   

**Q:**  Was it during Reting's regency?   

**A:**  [Gelek Rimpoche] Yes. My father used to tease him by saying that he (Nyungne Lama) was the substitute for Geshe Sherab [Tib. དགེ་བཤེས་ཤེས་རབ] and all those sorts of people.   

**A:**  At that time, he (Nyungne Lama) was very old. He was in his late fifties. So when these people suggested to Reting that they should introduce democracy in order to regain their lost power, Reting sent a special messenger through the person called Chöpönla [Tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་ལགས], the son of Dönyön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. འདོད་ཡོན་ཚང], to Khardo with the verbal message not to start any such movements since it wouldn't serve any purpose. Reting had further written that as far as he was concerned, he was satisfied and happy. He had carried out his mission - the search for the new reincarnation of the Dalai Lama - successfully, like a taking a precious jewel out of the ocean and the enthronement ceremony was also held. "And now, even though we have left the regency, still I am happy and content so let it be." When Khardo received the letter [message] in Lhasa through the messenger, he was greatly upset and said, "What nonsense. We have done so much for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, but see how he has repaid us. He has not only mistreated and persecuted the people of Reting Labrang, but he is mistreating anyone who has some connection or contact with us. If Reting Rimpoche does not care and refuses to do something about it, then I am going to retire and go to Mt. Kailash and sit in a cave." I heard that Reting was laughing and he said, "Well, if you don't want to listen to me, then you can do whatever you wish, set up the plan or do anything, but you don't have to go for the pilgrimage and run away to the mountains and build a small house for meditation because you will get a small house automatically." He said this like a prediction.   

**Q:**  Meaning?   

**A:**  Indicating that he would end up in a cell in jail. Khardo and Reting were classmates in Sera.   

**Q:**  When was this exchange of letters, etc.?   

**A:**  It was during and after the Lhündrup Dzong incident. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was also involved in this. He had attended these meetings, hence he knew what was going on.   

**Q:**  How did he get involved in this?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> joined in the Reting group and took part in the discussions. Therefore, later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> came to know about these plots through Kapshöba.   

**Q:**  What were their plans? What did they do?   

**A:**  One of the decisions they made was to eliminate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> on the night of the Butter Sculpture Festival (Tib. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ] The festival on the 15th of the first Tibetan month when butter sculptures were exhibited.">Jönga Chöpa</a> [བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ]) on 15th of 1st Tibetan month. They were planning to throw a bomb at him. While they were discussing this, my younger brother, who was in Reting, overheard it and was greatly upset. He thought that if he didn't say something about this to my father then he would be killed along with many others when they threw the bomb. On the other hand, if he wrote to our father about it, then the plan would leak out. He didn't know what to do, so he started crying. The plan was that 2 volunteers would throw the bombs; one was from Drepung, the monk known as Gendün Chöndze [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་མཛད] and the other one was a Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་ཁམས་པ]. These two were ready at their position, but at the last minute they had to cancel it because the other party also knew exactly what they were up to. It had to be <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> who betrayed them.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was involved in all the planning?   

**A:**  Yes, he was.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  Then the government came on the scene and they started the investigation   

**Q:**  What were they going to do? Say if they threw the bomb and killed Taktra. How was that going to help them?   

**A:**  They thought that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was the biggest obstacle in their path. If they removed him they were confident that Reting would get the power.   

**Q:**  You mean that whatever was going to happen, it was going to be better?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Even if someone else came [to power], Reting Labrang would be better off?   

**A:**  They thought that Reting would automatically come back into power.   

**Q:**  But didn't they have any plans to raise an army of monks and make war?   

**A:**  At that time they had made big plans, but no practical lay-out, as it never worked out. Actually, they had planned to eliminate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, but it didn't work. Only Reting had plans to escape, because things had become very serious.   

**Q:**  And after that?   

**A:**  Their plan was to attack on the evening of the 15th, that's all. They had no other plans. So on the 23rd of the 11th Tibetan month, one of the protector deities [Tib. སྲུང་མ] named Tsöru Jen [Tib. གཙོད་རུ་ཅན] from Phenpo, prophesied to Reting that unless he left immediately, he would be taken to the Lord of Death's Court of Law [Tib. གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཁྲིམས་ར] and would be killed. This particular protector deity had prophesied to his people that this message should be given to Reting no later than the 27th. So they went and delivered the letter to him. Reting just laughed and said, "This fellow is always telling me to go. He has done it again." He just laughed and did not take heed. This was the same protector deity who had guided him into finding the right reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. He was the same protective deity who told the meaning of the letters of the vision seen in the lake. I forgot to tell you about this. When Reting was in Lhasa - it was the 27th of the 11th Tibetan month - Reting called me and told me, "On the 24th of the same month, I went to the Potala to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, but he refused to talk to me and didn't even say any greetings [Tib. འཚམས་འདྲི] although we did meet. I was not to going to tell him about handing over the regency, but he might have thought I came for that." Reting was very upset about this. He said, "Now I am not going to stay long and all my plans have to be changed. Now there will be no invitation of the Dalai Lama for Mönlam and so on. I won't stay here for long because it's very uncomfortable and it's like a prison here. When I reach Reting then whatever I do it's my wish, so I am going to go back soon." That's what Reting Rimpoche told me personally on the 27th evening of the 11th Tibetan month. By that time I had already finished my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> degree and joined the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] The Lower Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüme</a> tratsang. At that time, everyone was saying that something would happen to Reting. So one day at a prayer assembly offered by Taktra in Gyüme in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> at which I was attending, Gen Ngawang [Tib. ངག་དབང]-- the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> who later became the ex-abbot and later died in the U.S.A.-- he had a very good voice and read Taktra's prayer request [Tib. སྐྱབས་ཐོ] very loudly and clearly. I was listening to this request very attentively along with Rongda [Tib. རོང་མད྄] Rimpoche, who was there. In it, Taktra mentioned that there was a big obstacle coming to him from the north-east side, so he requested everybody to pray that this obstacle or disturbance from the north-east may disappear. This was in the 2nd Tibetan month, a few days before the Reting trouble. Reting Labrang was sealed on the day of the religious procession ceremony (Tib. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> Sebang [ཚོགས་མཆོད་སེར་སྦྲེང]). Around that time Taktra made the Gyüme College perform an exorcism called Trojü Torgya [Tib. ཁྲོ་བཅུའི་གཏོར་རྒྱག] facing the north-east direction. Normally when they performed such exorcisms, they faced west and threw the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> [Tib. གཏོར་མ] but this time they were instructed to face the north-east towards Reting and Sera. Internally, it was meant to face <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>. I also went to attend the exorcisms. Then there were 13 torma to be thrown, but one of these torma was broken, so those people were happy because they were saying now that they would not be successful. This torma had fallen off before it could be thrown, so people took it as an omen that they would not be successful and were very happy about it. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> Ragra Rimpoche [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང་རག་ར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] was there and came near me and told me the joke, "Now this torma is going to be thrown into our own cup, so you should visualize that the torma dissolved in our own cup." This meant Sera Jey is their cup and throwing torma meant to destroy the target. Then another geshe got very angry and said, "Even if I will be thrown out from Gyüme, I am going to fight with this person." After that, on the 30th of the 2nd month of the Tibetan calender when they finished the Tsongjö Sebang and the afternoon prayer assembly at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> was over, when I was coming out I saw all the shengo, the assistant gegö of Drepung, the soldiers and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> going towards Reting Labrang to seal the labrang. I also saw my younger brother going through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> without his hat. I went back to my room and lay down for a while and I was very worried. After some time I heard that the shengo were returning. Then I went to Reting Labrang to see what had happened. I saw that everything was sealed up. There were a few servants standing outside and when I asked what had happened, they told me that my brother had managed to run away, but the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> had been arrested. After that I quickly left the place because there were people watching, but I went away in a relaxed mood - my brother had managed to run away. Later I met him and he told me that he had two loaded automatic Mauser pistols [Tib. སྦག་སྦག་ལན་ཁྲུ] ready and when he saw the shengo and those people coming to seal up the place, he had asked the dzasa, "Should I finish them off?" The dzasa was very angry and told my brother, "Behave yourself and don't do any funny things. I don't want to make the Reting Labrang a pauper!" He scolded my brother so my brother couldn't do anything.   

**Q:**  They were going to shoot?   

**A:**  They were going to shoot outside the house at the people coming to seal their Labrang. My brother couldn't do anything so he packed up his gun and ammunition and, carrying a saddle, made up his mind that if they tried to stop him he would shoot his way through. But those people were too busy sealing up the houses and did not pay him any attention so he got through. He saddled a horse and left. When he reached Wogyalthang [Tib. འོ་བརྒྱལ་ཐང], which is beyond Sera, he saw another horseman coming in great haste. It turned out to be Chöndze Gendün, so they ran away together. They went up via Phembo Gungtang [Tib. འཕེན་པོ་གུང་ཐང] where the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> had an estate called Dzingame [Tib. རྫིང་ཁ་སྨད]. They reached there around midnight and knocked at the door. They opened it and gave them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and tea and looked after them very well. Then at dawn they left Dzingame and just before sunrise they reached our home which was on the way. So my brother was in a dilemma. Should he visit his family members or not? He decided not to visit them for if the government later came to know about it, they would seal our house and give us a lot of problems. But when he saw his family's sheep and goats being driven out to graze on the pasture, he felt very sad and wept. Then he asked every neighbor he met on the way to tell our family that he was on his way to Reting. If people said that he was killed and they were bringing his head, they should not worry. On the other hand, if they heard that he was captured alive, then they should not believe it at all! So he sent such verbal messages to his family. Then they continued on their way and reached Phembo Chagla [Tib.?]. There, Surkhang and the soldiers who had arrested Reting Rimpoche, had already left, but some of the soldiers who had come after them were going at a slow pace carrying their guns on their shoulders. Since we knew the area well, we took a short cut and went ahead of these soldiers and reached Phöndo [Tib. ཕོས་མདོ] Dzong. There they heard that they were bringing Reting Rimpoche. They kept our horses in a hut and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> told him that if today they can fight successfully and rescue Reting Rimpoche it will be good. If they couldn't rescue him here, then there will not be any opportunity later. So he said that it is better that they fight and win him now. There is no other option. So they checked their guns and came outside. Then they saw the procession bringing Reting Rimpoche. They saw that Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] was right behind Reting, covering him with a gun. Reting's dress and mount was the same as he normally worn and rode. His countenance did not show any anxiety or worry. He at once noticed chöndze - he just gave a smile of acknowledgement and continued on his way in style. Then they had second thoughts. They knew that they did not stand a chance, but on the other hand, looking at Reting's behavior [his calmness] it was possible that there just might be some hope. If the later was the case, then their desperate act might upset this slim chance. While pondering over these possibilities, the procession passed them by and that was the end. They couldn't fight.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> say that there was someone covering Reting with a gun?   

**A:**  Yes. He told me that, but I doubt it.   

**Q:**  How long did it take to go from Lhasa to Phembo?   

**A:**  It took two days. Since Reting went on and they couldn't do anything, they wept in frustration. Then they slowly went towards Reting. When they reached Reting, it had already been sealed and they could not find any place to eat. Actually, Reting had a lot of guns. The guns and their bolts were kept in separate rooms. They had posted 16 [soldiers as] guards to look after it. Now they decided to run away for good, but then they heard that Sera was making war.   

**A:**  They met Kushog Udukpa [Tib. སྐུ་གཞོགས་དབུ་གདུགས་པ] - a tall <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> who was Reting Rimpoche's umbrella bearer. He was known as Gomo Udukpa from Sera. Reting told me to find a tall man and I had gotten him. So my brother and Udukpa had a pow-wow and they decided to run away. By that time they heard the news that Sera was fighting against the government. But the Sera monks did not have any weapons since their guns had been surrendered to the government by their abbot [after the Lhundrup dzong incident], so they decided to deliver the guns and arms locked up in Reting Labrang. In order to capture the arms, they would have to kill the guards, so they decided to kill these 16 soldiers. So while these soldiers were sleeping, they surrounded them and asked them to come out. As they came out they shot and killed them. Finally, when they thought they had killed all the soldiers, they saw one soldier cooly walking away. My brother called to him and said, "Unless you stop, I will kill you." The soldier stopped and turned around and said, "You are Chöndze Tendzinla, right?" (this guy was from the same estate as my brother). My brother said, "Hand over your gun." He said, "Here is my gun" and opened fire. The bullet somehow hit one of the bullets on my brother's bullet belt and all the bullets started exploding. My brother fell down and passed-out. After some time he got up and checked his own body and found out that he was not wounded at all. His gun was lying some distance away. He crawled, grabbed his gun and clutching a juniper, he managed to get up. He looked around and couldn't see the soldier. Then he looked down and saw the soldier about to cross the river. He took aim and fired and the soldier fell down. On that day <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> had not worn any amulets [Tib. གའུ] to protect him, but the strange thing is that there were no wounds at all, but his body was full of strange blackish color [Tib. ནག་ཁྲ] marks (bruises?). After all this was over, they broke the seals and locks of the doors, went to the storeroom and made some tea and ate food and relaxed. Then again they found another soldier who was still alive. They tried to take him, but he refused, so they fired and tried to kill him. The battle or exchange of shots went on for the whole morning, but they could not kill him. This guy was really brave and fought well. Then Udukpa - the tall Khamba - said, "Stop firing! We are just wasting ammunition. I will go and try to capture him." After some time Udukpa was able to overpower and catch him. When this guy was caught and brought to us, we realized that he was a Gusung battalion shengo and a relative of chöndze. They stripped him of his clothes and drew a bull's eye on his chest and tied him up to a tree some distance away like a target. Then they told my brother to take aim and shoot. My brother could not shoot. Then shengo also started saying, "Chöndze, how can you shoot me. I am related to you!" So chöndze couldn't shoot. Then Udukpa got angry and started scolding him. He said, "Relation or no relation, this is a war and not a joke, so you must shoot him." So chöndze closed his eyes and pulled the trigger. The soldier fell down - dead. Then they started relaxing again and cooked food. Then they saw some smoke coming from the Reting Rimpoche's summer cottage [Tib. སྤྲོ་ཁང] on the river bank and found that [soldiers] had set the firewood pile on fire and someone was shooting at them from there. There was an old nomad [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་ཧོར] with them and he said,"Probably one of the government's sheep is still left there." Then when they asked him what are you going to do, he said, "I am old and my hair has became white, but I haven't taken the life of even a lamb by suffocating it. But today, for the sake of my lama, I volunteer to kill that sheep of the government." They told him that he could not manage it, but he was adamant. He said, "I must do this for my lama." So he went.   

**Q:**  Who was he going to kill?   

**A:**  The soldier who had set Reting's summer cottage on fire was inside the house and had put the gun on the doorstep. This soldier might or might not have been wounded. The nomad went down, just in front of the soldier. The soldier went for his gun, but the old nomad was faster - he shot and killed the soldier. That was the last of the soldiers.   

**Q:**  How many were in their group?   

**A:**  There were about four or five main people.   

**Q:**  Then, after that?   

**A:**  After that, they packed the guns and got ready to take them away to Sera thinking that they could only do something effective from Sera. When they were ready to go, one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> managers, (<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡེ་འཆང] A title some Labrang used for their managers/stewards.">dechang</a>) called Jungnela [Tib. འབྱུང་གནས་ལགས] hugged my brother and pleaded with him saying, "All you better people are leaving. What will happen to us? Please don't go!" He started weeping and created such a scene that they couldn't leave. The dechang was a manager of the labrang.   

**Q:**  Did they send the guns?   

**A:**  No. I think they postponed it for one day because this guy started crying and wouldn't let them go. Then they decided not to go to Sera. Maybe it was too late. Instead, they decided to make preparations just in case the monks of Sera will come running to Reting Labrang. In such a case, they would have the guns ready for them and they could make a stand and fight the government troops.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  At Reting. So they decided that the government would attack most probably from two sides. One from the normal direction, so they put more people on that side. From the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> [Tib. འབྲི་གུང] side, the road was very narrow, so they decided to put five people there. So the five strongest fighters were posted on this side because the route was very narrow and easiest to defend. From the main road, a lot of soldiers would come, so they would put more people there. Then they asked, "Who will lead?" Then the famous singer, Champa Sangdak [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གསང་བདག], volunteered. He was equally famous for his cowardice. When he volunteered, my brother expressed his doubts about his ability, but then Champa assured him by saying, "Today I shall fight and give up my life. You can depend upon me." Then they collected about 500 fighters - Reting monks and nomads and they left led by Champa Sangdak.   

**Q:**  All with guns?   

**A:**  Yes, all with guns. Reting Labrang had lots of guns. They even had Russian-made Colt 45 ivory-handled revolvers. There were about 2,000 such revolvers. So coming back to the main point, Champa Sangdak was lying. He had other ideas. Rather than fighting, he was planning to run away. He said, "Today we are going to war and I must really dress up smartly for good luck." He got hold of the best horse in Reting Labrang, chose a very expensive gold-inlaid saddle and the brocade covers for the mane and hips of the horse [Tib. ཟེ་ཁེབས་ལོང་ཁེབས] and put it on the horse. He selected three golden amulet boxes [Tib. གཽ] and one sword decorated with pure gold. These he put on his neck. Then he took a precious dagger [Tib. ཕུར་པ]. There was one very famous and precious sword known as "Gesar's life sword." This he put on his back. Then they all lined up and burned incense and propitiated the deities [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ]. He also took two automatic Mauser pistols and wrapped a long <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མཛོད] A special high quality Khata scarf">nangdzö</a> on his head. He was looking very imposing like Gesar. [laughter] They all lined up and propitiated the deities. They also offered khata scarves to him, and he was acting very confident. He touched his forehead to them and said, "Don't worry, don't worry. You can relax and depend upon me." Then he went down and made his escape. Crazy! Since there was no leader, the rest of the soldiers went to their own places with the guns. Champa Sangdak went over the mountain, but before he reached Tölung, he encountered a robber who took everything away from him. Then he continued on his way and met a trader and became his servant. That's how he came to India. However, Champa Sangdak himself tells a different version. He told me that there was a bridge on the border with a soldier on guard. So he said that he cooly took a hundred <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> note and waved it at the soldier, saying, "Any use?" In other words, he gave the soldier a chance - either accept the hundred note and let him pass, or fight it out. Of course this is just a lie. He did not have courage enough to challenge a soldier.   

**Q:**  Where did he reach?   

**A:**  He reached Kalimpong through the Nataöla Pass [Tib. རྣ་ཐོས་ལ]   

**Q:**  Now can you tell us about the other group who went to guard the route from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a>?   

**A:**  The people guarding the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> route did not know that their other commander had run away. On the other hand, the government troops came only from the Drigung route. They had not sent any soldiers from the main route, but were coming entirely from the Drigung side - in coracles on the river. As soon as they saw the coracles, my brother and his friends started shooting at them. At the same time, the soldiers wanted to blow their bugle. However, this was not possible because when the bugler got up to blow his instrument, they would shoot very heavily at him and he had to duck down. In this way, they were able to sink two or three coracles. The coracles were made out of rawhide. However, after some time, it was not possible to fight them because they were too numerous and the soldiers were shooting Bren-guns. Bullets were hitting the rocks and fragmenting small pieces of rocks that hit them and made the protective talisman loose it's effect. After some time my brother and Udukpa got separated because the soldiers were coming closer. My brother saw that Udukpa was wounded and surrounded by the soldiers. However, Udukpa got up and sprayed his Bren-gun around him and then made his escape while the soldiers were ducking for cover. In the meanwhile, my brother made his way into the forest which he knew well. The government soldiers were unfamiliar with the forest, so my brother was able to make a good fight. From the forest, my brother fought until he spent three rounds of Bren-gun magazines - each magazine contained 40 shots. In the third round, the soldiers had come forward quite close - he could make out the faces of the soldiers. Then my brother shouted out, "If you don't know who I am, I am the son of Jangra Sharpa and my name is Chöndze Tenzin Gyatso." After that my brother quickly melted away into the familiar forest. Before that, Udukpa and my brother were the leaders. They had about 1,000 bullets and had taken an oath in front of the statue of the Buddha that they will fight to the end until the 1,000 bullets ran out. Then if they were surrounded, they will shoot each other. The soldiers who were not familiar with the forest were not able to catch my brother. My brother hid in a cave for quite some time. The soldiers were searching for them and sometimes a few soldiers would come right in front of the cave and sit there having a smoke. He could hear their conversations. One soldier would tell his friend, "Where the hell could this Chöndze Tenzin Gyatso have vanished to? If we catch this fellow, we will really make him pay dearly for the trouble he is giving us!" My brother sat quietly and the soldiers never discovered the cave's entrance since it was hidden nicely. After some time my brother met Udukpa, and they lived together in the forest for a month or so. They lived in the forest hunting wild animals and eating raw meat. After some time, the soldiers gave up their search and left the forest. When they would shoot an animal, they would collect the carcass and quickly go over to the other side of the mountain just in case the soldiers heard their shot and came to search for them. Just to make sure, you know. When they were absolutely certain that all the soldiers had left, after some time, they went down to the village to beg for food. However in one hand they would have the begging bowl and in the other they would hold their gun and tell the villagers, "Look, you have to give us some food. Now that you know we are here, you must not inform the government. In case you inform them, we will not only kill you, but all your family members." The villagers told them, "Reting Rimpoche is our spiritual leader. Even though we are facing a difficult period, we will never inform them about you." The local people helped them and gave them food. So they stayed in the forest until the 11th month of the Tibetan calendar. That means that they stayed in the forest for almost 10 months. Then they sent messages through some nomads to our home asking for provisions and telling them where they were hiding. Our family sent people disguised as beggars to give them provisions. Then, in the 11th month, I went to Ganden and then I went home once. In front of our home there were a lot of nomad horses. There were 10 to 15 extra horses and I could see a lot of activity going on. As soon as I reached home, I went straight to my room on the third floor. Soon my father came up and told me that on the next day one of our trusted servants was going to Reting to make a big religious offering. That was just a pretense. Actually, my father told me, "Your brother is hiding in the mountains in Reting. Soon he is going from there to Ba [Tib. འབའ] in Kham so he needs horses and provisions. So we are sending our trusted servant on this secret mission." Just opposite to our house, not far away, there was an estate of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> and the Taktra people had been keeping an eye on our house. So there was a need for this disguise and pretense of going to Reting to make a religious offering. On the 13th, our servant reached there and on the 14th my brother and Udukpa left the mountain at dawn. Udukpa was dressed up as a trader while my brother and the servant were dressed as junior partners. They left with their guns and horses through Drigung. They did a little business on the way and no one suspected them, even though they were going openly on the main road. The government didn't suspect them at all. Then the main servant who had gone to give them horses and provisions came back. Since he had given everything to my brother, he was coming empty handed. When he reached the pass known as Kyimola [Tib. skyid mp la] he started crying and threw away his shoes and went to a big family living on the pass. When they recognized him they asked him what had happened, he told them between sobs that he had been sent by his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> to give offerings to Reting monastery, but on his way he had met robbers who took away everything. Still sobbing, he begged them to give him a few things and confided that he was going to run away because after this unfortunate encounter, he did not dare to face his lord as it was such a disgrace. This family knew our family very well so they couldn't help him and let him run away so they persuaded our servant not to run away and promised him that they would return him to our father and on his behalf ask him to forgive the servant. On the other hand, my father was also very worried, because if the government came to know about it, they would surely have confiscated our house and estate and seal everything up. When he saw these people coming with our servant, he was very alarmed but he controlled himself and invited them in and asked them why they had come. When they explained everything, my father was greatly relieved but he didn't show it. Instead he berated our servant by saying that, "This guy can never get anything done correctly. Wherever he goes, he comes back losing everything. Anyway, I am sorry that he caused so much problems for you all. Please send him down." On the next day my father called him in again. As soon as he entered, the servant started crying and pulling his hair. Sort of a late reaction - letting out his pent-up tension. However, the other servants didn't know the true reason. They thought that he was genuinely scared of my father. So the other servants also started crying. In the meantime, my brother and Udukpa were nearing the Yangtze River. There they met Ludrub [Tib. ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>'s <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> who was coming up. Udukpa knew this guy and Ludrup told him to be careful because on the Yangtze River bridge there were government soldiers. At this my brother started laughing and said, jesting, "Don't worry, we have overcome thousands of government soldiers. What's 20 to 25 soldiers? They are there to die at our hands. So don't worry, but please tell my brother who is in Sera that we have reached here safely. Next year, when you people come down, tell him to send some woolen materials with you so that we can sell it and use it for our expenses." I received this message. Then they crossed the Yangtze River bridge and the government soldiers did not suspect them at all. They took them to be real traders. After they crossed the border and were in Ba no one knew my brother, but Udukpa had his house there and his family was well to do.   

