# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.209.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང] was a well-known Geshe from Sera Jey College. In this interview, he tells the details of how the Sera monks were trying to help Reting when he was brought down to Lhasa, and about Tsenya Lama running away and then coming back to Drubkhang Labrang and how he was handed over to the government. He also discusses how a government official asked the Sera Jey abbot to stop the English school in Lhasa.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0209_04/H_0209_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  When they saw that they were bringing Reting Rimpoche down [to Lhasa], they were supposed to inform the monks and the monks would run down and block this route. But the monks were not aware of what the government had planned for this. They [the government] had made fox holes below Sera and all the soldiers were waiting there. The monks were not aware of that. So from among those, one young soldier got up and started shooting towards the monks. The monk Gerge immediately fired once and the soldier died and Gerge's left hand was wounded. So the monks couldn't go down at all. The soldiers were there and they were firing volleys. Drungtö was the only monk who got through.   

**Q:**  At that time, had you heard that Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས] had shot himself?   

**A:**  I don't know whether the Sera monks had heard that or not. They should have heard that the Nyungne Lama shot himself when they came to arrest him, because it was at the beginning and at that time, the Sera incident had not yet taken place.   

**Q:**  At that time, what kind of plan did the monks have? Did they think that if they hold on a for a long time they could do something? I mean after the abbot was killed.   

**A:**  The monks had no thoughts except that they can fight and take over the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment's headquarters.   

**Q:**  But they never got a chance to go down to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, right?   

**A:**  A large number of monks couldn't go there [enmasse] so 4-5 of them went there, but they were not successful. The monks tried to go to the Potala, but it was very difficult to get through because the gates were very safe and there were many soldiers stationed there. So they couldn't get through and they came back. Then Tsenya and Drungtö ran away from Sera. They reached up to the Shugola [Tib. ཤོག་བུ་ལ] mountain pass in Tölung, but they didn't like to go and leave [Sera] so they came back to Drubkhang Labrang [Tib. སྒྲུབ་ཁང་བླ་བྲང] in Sera. When they reached there, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> looked after them very nicely, but at midnight they handed them over to the government because a few months ago they had a fight with one of the servants of Drubkhang Labrang and at that time, Tsenya and his servant forgot about that incident. At that time, Drungtö was killed there. They made Tsenya carry the head and hands of Drungtö on his back. During the [Sera] war, I was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] The Lower Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüme</a> Tantric College and at Gyambumgang. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> wanted to arrest me because they said, "They said there are two incarnate lamas who are leading the war [Tib. དམག་དཔོན] and probably one of them is Jangrashar Trülku. We didn't blame him because two of his brothers were Reting Labrang's servants. Then somebody said, "he may not be there. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> cook will know." So the drunyichemmo called the cook and asked him, "Did you know that one of the Jangrashar Trülku's brothers was one of the higher leaders of Sera. Did you know that?" The cook said, "No, he is in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> going to the Gyüme Tantric College every day." Then he said, "Oh! I see. That's how I could escape. Otherwise, I was also going to get arrested. [this section is unclear]  

**Q:**  At the time of the Lhundrup Dzong incident, when there was the talk about the setting up an English School and then it closed, were you in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did they say about that?   

**A:**  This is a very complicated matter and at that time, it was said that the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>, Ngawang Gyatso, was possessed by the Communists, and they were making a lot of publicity about this. Actually, it was not like that. Some of the government's important officials who didn't like democracy, asked the abbot of Sera Jey to speak up strongly [against the school]. [He said] If they set up the English School, many foreigners would enter Tibet and gradually we have to do democracy and religion would decline.   

**Q:**  Who were those officials?   

**A:**  I am not going to tell you the names. They also talked about how, gradually, even the monks would have to go to school. Therefore, you people should speak. They made the abbots speak out [in the Assembly].   

