# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0209.06   
##  : with Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང] was a well-known Geshe from Sera Jey College. In this interview, he discusses the decision to close the English school and how it was influenced by government officials. Also included is information on how Kapshöba was in the inner circle of Reting. Included here is his talk with Thubden Sangpo about Reting leasing his regency and promising to give territory to the Chinese.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0209_06/H_0209_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Normally, all the people in Tibet - even those people whose hairs have gone white - are saying that everything is made by the abbots of three great monasteries, but, they are just passing off their responsibility onto them. Actually, the abbots couldn't make any final decisions. There were some little events, like when the Chinese influenced the abbots of Loseling, Sera Jey, Mey, and Ngagpa. At that time, the Chinese Sheng went in the great monastic seats (Tib. དེནས [Tib. གདན་ས]), but he wouldn't go to the abbot personally and he might have sent the abbot of Gyerong. Actually, if the government officials hadn't influenced them [the abbots], the abbots won't even dare to move like this, right?   

**A:**  You are right. Usually, the abbots were very insistent and regarding that definitely the kudrak were behind them.   

**Q:**  Maybe people like the Chinese chöndze have influenced them [abbots], right?   

**A:**  There were several cases where the Chinese thought that they would not be able to enter the monastery if they didn't become monks. This also one of the causes of losing Tibet.   

**Q:**  It is certain a Chinese went to the Loseling abbot and gave him a monk's töngag [Tib. སྟོད་འགག] made from the brocade called Marser Gyendrug [Tib. དམར་སེར་རྒྱན་དྲུག྄]. This was written in Shakabpa's book. It was said widely that the abbot was influenced by the Chinese. I heard it was written in documents of the Guomindang that they gave the töngag and such things to the abbot.   

**A:**  Regarding the setting up of schools, it was the Sera Jey abbot who spoke.   

**Q:**  Kapshöba was saying that Drepung Ngagpa Khembo was the person who was pushing hard for this [Tib. ཤུགས་རྒྱག].   

**A:**  I don't know the internal things, but I heard that the Jey Khembo was the person who first talked at the meeting.   

**Q:**  You don't need to mention the names of the people, you can just tell me what the people from the two groups said during the meeting. Among the two groups, Kungö Ta Lama [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་ཏ་བླ་མ] Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང]] was one of the people saying that we shouldn't set up the school, right?   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**Q:**  Probably he was, because there is much information from everywhere showing that [Tib. བཟོ་ཏ་ཆེན་པོ་འདུག].   

**A:**  What we were talking about in the monastery was that it was made by the kudrak and not the abbots. It was Rebe Gyawu of the Sera Jey who talked to him. The Sera Jey abbott spoke at the Abbreviated Assembly saying that he objects to having the school opened. However it was not the Sera Jey abbot who moved the decision of the government because a large number of government officials did not want the school to open. They made strong objections and the decision was swung. Otherwise, if all the government officials were in favor of the English School, then even if there was the Sera abbot's objection, even if he screamed and shouted, nobody is going to yell for that.   

**Q:**  Do you have anything more to elaborate about this?   

**A:**  I don't have much to elaborate on.   

**Q:**  They didn't let them set up the school, right?   

**A:**  The school was set and then it was made to close. After that, the abbots came.   

**Q:**  Was Kapshöba among Reting's inner circle like Khardo and Nyungne?   

**A:**  At that time, I heard that there was a group that had an internal talk that it would be good if we could set up a democracy.   

**Q:**  Was Kapshöba in that group?   

**A:**  Later, Kapshöba was in that.   

**Q:**  How was he there?   

**A:**  Kapshöba was among one kudrak group and he was also passing information to the other group saying that they are doing this and that.   

**Q:**  What about the incident at the Jönga Chöpa [Tib. བཅོ་ང་མཆོད་པ]?   

**A:**  Kapshöba was in that.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for him to be in that?   

**A:**  Reting had an internal letter exchange with Kapshöba.   

**Q:**  Later, all the letters were searched, right?   

**A:**  At that time, Kapshöba didn't come out openly, but he was communicating through letters with Reting. People didn’t know whether he had burnt the letters.   

**Q:**  Probably, they didn't search for the letters from Reting Labrang though they searched them from Khardo and Nyungne, right?   

**A:**  I don't know clearly about the letters in the Labrang. But Kapshöba knew all about the inner matters.   

**Q:**  Did you have any talk with the late Thubden Sangpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བཟང་པོ] regarding Reting and China?   

**A:**  Thubden Sangpo said that Reting requested Chiang Kaishek to give him support and he (Thubden Sangpo) sent a telegram [to Lhasa] saying that Reting is doing that with Chiang Kaishek, so you should be careful and do whatever you can do. It was said that he knew about that from Kujar Kumbela [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར་ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས]. I doubt that Kujar would have lied.   

**Q:**  So did you talk with Thubden Sangpo regarding whether he had investigated that matter?   

**A:**  What I heard from him was that it was not the Guomindang; it was the communists. If the communists helped and made war, Reting probably promised to give him quite a large area of the territory to the communists. He said that he knew clearly about that.   

**Q:**  How did he know about that?   

**A:**  Regarding this matter, I had a little talk with him about Reting . He didn't like Reting at all and said, "How could he lease the regency? That's ridiculous. Because he leased the regency [Tib. རྒྱལ་པོ་བོགས་མ་བཏང] it had this consequence. Thubden Sangpo said that he was the representative [of the Tibetan government] in China. He [Reting] communicated with China and the representative didn't know that.   

**Q:**  How could that be?   

**A:**  He didn't know whether the letter was sent to the Chinese officers or not. He said, "I knew that Reting promised to give some territory to the Chinese. So I submitted a report to the government."   

**Q:**  Didn't he tell you from where he heard about this?   

**A:**  At that time, there were all kinds of rumors in China.   

**Q:**  Who took the measures in China to get their support?   

**A:**  Probably, there must have been some pro-Reting people there.   

**Q:**  Didn't Thubden Sangpo tell you about this?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  This morning I told you about Gyapönbu. He was the one who went to China.   

**A:**  There was a person called Gyabing Chöndze.   

**Q:**  Did you see him later on?   

**A:**  How could he be here? They held struggle session against him and he died under severe suffering.   

**Q:**  Didn't he go to China?   

**A:**  No, he didn't.   

**Q:**  Probably, they were relatives?   

**A:**  Probably, his relative went.   

