# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0209.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང] was a well-known Geshe from Sera Jey College. In this interview, he talks in detail about the aftermath of the Lhundrup Dzong incident and the ensuing confrontation between the government and the Sera Jey College. He also explained how the boycott of the Mönlam Prayer Festival for five days by the Sera Jey monks came about. He also talks about Reting Rimpoche.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0209_01/H_0209_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Regarding the Lhundrup Dzong [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང] trouble, I don't have a very clear idea about the time when the monks refused to attend the Mönlam Festival or the talks that took place between the government and the monks of the three great monastic seats. Can you tell me something about this?   

**A:**  The Lhundrup Dzong trouble occurred in the 9th Tibetan Month. The government said that we [in the Sera Jey College] should hand over the ringleaders.   

**Q:**  Did they send an order?   

**A:**  Probably they sent a sent a notice (Tib. ཡིགཆུང [ཡིག་ཆུང]).   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> send the notice or did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>?   

**A:**  The government sent it. They said that we should hand over the ringleaders.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they hold a sort of meeting or what?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> held the meeting. In the monasteries they had meetings of the different <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> of the different tratsang - the eight big ones, the three medium ones and the six mitsen. Each one had two representatives known as nachen. They had a meeting on the top floor of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> College with all the officials, including the abbot of Jey.   

**Q:**  When you say that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> held meetings, was there one representative from each khamtsen?   

**A:**  There were two representatives called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣ་ཆེན] The name used for the largest Khamtsen in Drepung (or Sera, or Ganden).">nachen</a> from all the khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> attend the meeting?   

**A:**  All the monastic officials (Tib. ལེནེ [ལས་སྣེ]) came. On top of that, they also had a representative of the Ngagpa Tratsang called Namdak Sherab [Tib. རྣམ་དག་ཤེས་རབ] who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> of Ngagpa Tratsang. He was very efficient and one of the key figures in Ngagpa Tratsang. So they met and decided not to hand over the monks involved in the Lhundrup Dzong incident because they felt that whatever these monks had done, they had done it for their monastery.   

**Q:**  In these meetings, were there any representatives from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> College?   

**A:**  No. Probably there was no one from Me. There were only two monks from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་པོ་རག] A medium size khamtsen in Loseling College in Drepung Monastery.">Bombora</a> which was part of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>, but they attended the meetings not as representatives of Sera Mey, but in their own individual capacity because they were involved in the Lhundrup Dzong incident. So after much discussion, they decided not to hand over the concerned monks to the government for interrogation. That was the reason there was so much delay. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> did not send a representative. They sent a letter seeking the government's pardon, but did not hand over the concerned monks for interrogation.   

**Q:**  Did the monastery say that they would themselves look into the matter and punish the guilty monks, or did they just say that they would not like to hand over the monks?   

**A:**  I really don't know about this. I think there were some problems in collecting the loans given to the people. Maybe the loans were given a long time back and the people didn't want to repay the loans, or they were unable to repay them. So on that account, the three big monastic seats had a meeting and they decided to act united with a common decision and they sent around the seal to each person to put on the document [Tib. ཐེལ་རྩེ་ལག་སྐོར]. Most probably the other monasteries did not carry out their decision as vigorously as was done by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> in Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ]. There they carried out the process of collecting the loans very vigorously. It was not the ordinary poor people who were involved in this, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a>, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>'s <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> were mostly involved. When the monks tried to collect the loans vigorously, the villagers refused to pay them. The monks went back and reported the matter to their abbot. The abbot told them, "It is good if you can collect the loans but if you can't, then kill them." So this is how it happened.   

**Q:**  Did they kill them?   

**A:**  They couldn't kill them. So the monastery refused to hand over the concerned monks to the government authorities because it would bring a bad name to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> (college). They would lose face since the monks were doing their duty - looking after the interests of the tratsang - so if the tratsang could not save them, they would lose face. So this is why the matter dragged on for some time.   

**Q:**  Were there a lot of arguments and discussions among the monks as to whether to hand them over to the government?   

**A:**  No. At that time the monks unanimously agreed that they should not be handed over to the government. First, they contended that if the monks were handed over, the government would punish them very severely and second, this would disgrace the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>'s name forever - for failing to protect their monks.   

**Q:**  At this time they still did not talk about boycotting the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] Prayer Festival, right?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there was no talk about boycotting the Mönlam. They were sending a few representatives like the one nicknamed, "bearded goat" (Tib. རེབེ་གྱཝུ [Tib. དབྲེ་བེ་རྒྱའུ]) who was also called Bötsang Gegö [Tib. བོད་ཚང་དགེ་བསྐོས] because his household name was Bötsang. There was also the one nicknamed, "Famine Fat" (Tib. ཇིམིཤར་མུགེ་གྱགཔ [སྤྱི་མི་ཤར་མུ་གེ་རྒྱགས་པ]). This person used to sell butter and tea and made great profit from the monks. It was like he was causing them famine while he became rich. That's why he was nicknamed "Famine Fat". Those two were talking to the government in Lhasa. They would not openly say that the monastery was not going to hand over the monks. Instead, they would plead on their behalf, making excuses and so on. Then they would come back to the monastery and report the government's stand and then again go back to Lhasa to make some more excuses. So these representatives kept on going back and forth between Lhasa and Sera. It was somewhere in between the 10th and the 12th Tibetan month -- around the middle of the 12th month the monks hit upon an idea. In order to have the government settle the matter soon, they decided to put a little pressure on the government by threatening to boycott the Mönlam Festival. Since Sera had the largest number of monks, the government would have to give in to their demands. They told the government if they didn't decide now, they would not come to the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  They told this to the government?   

**A:**  Yes, they informed the government.   

**Q:**  I heard that Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] had invited the Dalai Lama that year to the Mönlam, so it was important that there should not be anything untoward with the Mönlam Festival and that it should be well attended, right?   

**A:**  I don't remember if Tsomönling had invited the Dalai Lama or not, but the monks felt that if they boycotted the Mönlam, it would exert great pressure on the government which would not know how to hold the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  I heard that the monks didn't like to be interrogated by the investigation committee [Tib. བཀའ་ཞིབ] which consisted of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེ་ཇི] A third rank position in the Tibetan government.">theiji</a>, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> and was called the nine: Thaikhen Drungtsi Gudrel [Tib. ཐཻ་མཁན་དྲུང་རྩིས་དགུ་སྦྲེལ]. They wanted to be investigated directly either by the Kashag or the Regent. Is this right?   

**A:**  At that time there was no investigation committee. I don't know with which office they were dealing - the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> or the Kashag - but there was no investigation committee. It was formed later.   

**Q:**  So after telling the government that they would not be coming, what happened?   

**A:**  Then the traders/business men came into the picture. They appealed to the government to grant a decision in favor of the monks. And to the monks, they pleaded not to boycott the Mönlam Festival. They were acting as intermediaries. So the government told the monks through the intermediaries that if they attended the Mönlam festival, after the festival they would decide favorably towards the monks. The government urged them to attend the Mönlam festival.   

**Q:**  Who were these business men, were they Triu Khambas [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་ཁམ་པ]?   

**A:**  Yes. Almost all the business men were involved in this.   

**Q:**  So then they heard from the government and conveyed the message to the monks. They were acting as intermediaries so did the monks' representatives stop going back and forth between Sera and Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, that's correct.   

**Q:**  Was it only the Mönlam, or was it the Mönlam and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a>?   

**A:**  Both the Mönlam and the Tsongjö.   

**Q:**  Then what did the monks say?   

**A:**  Until the 8th [of the 1st month], the [Sera Jey] monks did not come.   

**Q:**  What were they doing until the 8th?   

**A:**  The reason why we did not go to the Mönlam was that we had said, "Until the government yields to our demands, we are not coming." So until the 8th we did not go. We sat on the rooftops idling away the time. We could see the smoke rising from the kitchen where they were brewing tea for us [the Mönlam]. So we would tell each other that now they must be brewing the morning tea or the evening tea and so on.   

**Q:**  Until the 8th day of the Mönlam?   

**A:**  No, no. The 8th day of the first month. That would be the 5th day of the Mönlam. The Mönlam would start normally on the 2nd, 3rd, or 4th day of the first month. In this instance, it started on the 3rd day. So on the morning of the 8th, we went to the Mönlam Festival.   

**Q:**  How did you go? Was there a message or a meeting?   

**A:**  There was a message from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> saying that now we would attend the Mönlam Festival.   

**Q:**  That's all?   

**A:**  Yes, that's all.   

**Q:**  But you heard later about these traders acting as intermediaries?   

**A:**  We knew about it at that time because these trader intermediaries would come and go, back and forth, so everyone knew what they were doing.   

**Q:**  At this time, did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> people ever think of consulting the other monasteries and trying to enlist their support, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>, Drepung and Ganden?   

**A:**  No. We were very confident. We had a large number of monks and likewise we had plenty of arms and ammunition. On top of that we took it as a personal issue. So we never thought of discussing or getting support from outside.   

**Q:**  So then what happened?   

**A:**  Nothing. Everything went on as usual until the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> was over.   

**Q:**  So until the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> was over there was no problem. In the meantime, had the monks made any plans or preparations for action after this?   

**A:**  No. There were no preparations at all. However, we had made plans to resist and fight in case the government soldiers came to arrest us forcibly.   

**Q:**  How was it planned? In case the troops came, had you posted lookouts and guards?   

**A:**  No. That was not necessary. All the monks were raring to fight. All we had to do was give a shout, "shog!" (Come!), and the monks would rally without hesitation.   

**Q:**  You didn't distribute weapons, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [We didn't]   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  So after that they set up the investigation committee and then they called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> people to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Nekhang Thoga [Tib. ཞོལ་ནས་ཁང་ཐོག་ཁ]. Probably, Silön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and those people were also there. It was very uncertain, I mean, the reason for calling them down. They did not mention whether the monks had to come down for interrogation, discussions or for advice.   

**Q:**  Did they call down the abbots or the representatives of the monks who were involved in the incident?   

**A:**  No. They did not specify. They just mentioned that the concerned people should come down. So we had representatives appointed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣ་ཆེན] The name used for the largest Khamtsen in Drepung (or Sera, or Ganden).">nachen</a> meeting. Lots of people went down. For a few days they went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> where the investigation committee was set up. All of them said that at first it seemed to be a discussion, then it seemed to be an advice session, but finally it dawned upon them that it was going to be an interrogation. They went there for a few days.   

**Q:**  Didn't they demand that the abbot should come down or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> should come down and so on?   

**A:**  Then the investigation committee said that they wanted him [abbot] to hand over his yellow robe [of office] (Tib. chögö [ཆོས་གོས]).   

**Q:**  Was it after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> that the representatives were summoned to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> for a few days? Was it after that or before that?   

**A:**  This was the first thing they demanded after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> ended. It was before they [those concerned] came to Shöl. They wanted to strip the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> abbot's rank by taking away his chögö. That was the first thing. Then the monks had a meeting. At that meeting Rebe Gyawu stood up and while banging on the table gave a fiery speech saying that, "Under no circumstances - come what may - are we going to let the abbot surrender his rank." The abbot also agreed with him. All the monks agreed with him.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  Among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, my khamtsen, Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང], was the biggest one. Our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣ་ཆེན] The name used for the largest Khamtsen in Drepung (or Sera, or Ganden).">nachen</a> (representative) was Muge Gyagpa. He said that it would be better if we handed over the abbot's chögö. It would save a lot of trouble. On the one hand, there was the abbot - only one person. On the other hand, there was the government who could give us a lot of trouble. If they stripped our abbot's rank, they would have to appoint another one, so it did not make so much difference. On hearing this the abbot was very unhappy and angry. He stood up, folded his chögö, put it in front of Muge Gyagpa and said, "I was fighting for the name and prestige of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> tratsang and not for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [himself] as an individual. So if you want to hand it over, here it is, take it. If it would not harm the name of the Sera Jey, it doesn't make any difference for me." After saying that he walked off. He didn't stay in the monastery but went straight to Lhasa and went to the Kedung [Tib. སྐས་གདུང] house that belonged to a rich Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> family known as Budruk <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. བུ་ཕྲུག་ཚང] that had six sons. So the next morning at sunrise the abbot with his two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and some other Triu Khambas mounted their horses and left boldly carrying guns. The abbot himself was wearing a Mongolian dress with a yellow satin dress which was like the travelling dress of the government officials. They left boldly and openly by the main road. Every one of them was well armed. To his friends he had said, "We may get through or we may not get through. If we don't get through, we will fight until every one of us is dead. No one will be taken alive."   

**Q:**  Did all this happened at the same meeting -- Rebe Gyawu saying that you should fight rather than surrender your abbot and Muge Gyagpa counseling to hand-over the abbot to the government, and then the abbot walking out of the meeting in disgust? Did all this happen at one meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. It was one and the same meeting.   

**Q:**  Why did they leave Lhasa boldly and with such style? Why didn't they leave at night in stealth? Normally, given the situation, wouldn't it have been more logical to choose the latter option?   

**A:**  He was thinking about the name of the abbot, and had decided that he would not get through this alive, so he decided to die fighting in a style befitting his rank and name.   

**Q:**  Then what happened in the meeting after the abbot left?   

**A:**  All the members present in the meeting opposed Muge Gyagpa for denouncing their abbot and saying the abbot should hand over his chögö. They said that such a thing had never happened before. "Anything that happens under <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>'s jurisdiction has always been decided by Sera Jey itself and never decided by the government. There is no such system, so why do you say such a thing?" They scolded Muge Gyagpa a little bit and then the meeting was dissolved.   

**Q:**  Then what happened to the abbot's chögö?   

**A:**  It was handed over to the government.   

**Q:**  Who handed it over, Muge Gyagpa?   

**A:**  No, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> handed it over to the government. Although the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣ་ཆེན] The name used for the largest Khamtsen in Drepung (or Sera, or Ganden).">nachen</a> meeting broke up, they had another meeting of the tratsang called the tratsang meeting, and something like a working committee was still functioning. There were 21 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> in it. So that very day the tratsang meeting decided and handed over the chögö to the government.   

**Q:**  The government didn't exactly know that the abbot had left, right?   

**A:**  No, they didn't know. After they handed over the robe to the government, the government asked the previous representatives - the ones who had met the government before the Mönlam festival - to come down. Then they set up the investigation committee.   

**Q:**  When the government asked them to hand over the abbot's chögö, did they give any reasons?   

**A:**  If they handed over the abbot's chögö, then it would signify that they had submitted to the government's judgement. It would also signify that the abbot had been stripped of his rank and punished because the government held him responsible for all these troubles, even though they did not mention it.   

**Q:**  It looks like the government was more angry with him because the monks refused to attend the Mönlam Festival?   

**A:**  No, that was not the only reason. There were many other factors involved. The abbot had been taking many cases like ones concerning leases of land [Tib. བོགས་མར་ལེན] and fighting many cases with the government regarding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>. So the Kashag and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> did not like him. Another very important point was that Sera Jey was Reting's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and they considered him as Reting's man. The abbot also did not care much for the government and was always acting against it. So the government wanted to get rid of him.   

**Q:**  I heard also that earlier, when Reting Rimpoche came to Lhasa, he had asked many government officials not to punish the monks. Is that true? Have you heard anything like that?   

**A:**  I haven't heard about that, but I doubt it. Reting was very concerned about the decision. If the decision was [not] favorable, then Reting Rimpoche was prepared to join hands with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> and support them.   

**Q:**  Reting Rimpoche came to Lhasa once. Is it true that on this occasion he had been specially invited by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> to consecrate some place?   

**A:**  No. He was not specially invited by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> on this occasion. That was earlier when Sera Jey invited him to consecrate a site. On this second visit, Reting came to Lhasa to invite the Dalai Lama to the Mönlam. But since he was in Lhasa then, Sera Jey invited him over and he gave an initiation.   

**Q:**  Then what happened after the government summoned the representatives of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>?   

**A:**  The investigation committee said, "It is very good that you have surrendered the chögö to the government. Now we will discuss the matter, but before we do that, it is better that you don't return for the night to your monastery, but rather go to Potala and spend the night there." Then all the people [monks] changed their facial experience.   

**Q:**  So these representatives were people like the laji [Tib. བླ་སྤྱི]?   

**A:**  No. They were not like the laji, but were college officials (Tib. ལེནེ [ལས་སྣེ]).   

**Q:**  Let me ask you again, when they asked them to come down, did they specify the names of who should come?   

**A:**  No, they just said that the representatives should come down. They were not specific.   

**Q:**  How many were there, roughly?   

**A:**  I don't remember all the names, but there were a lot of them.   

**Q:**  Roughly how many?   

**A:**  About 10-15 representatives.   

**Q:**  Then they were put into jail?   

**A:**  All of them were put into jail at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> [Tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོག] [in the Potala]. While pausing to rest while going up the stairs from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> to Sharchenjog, Rebe Gyawu asked Muge Gyagpa, "What do you think now?" Muge Gyagpa replied, "I don't [think] anything!" Then Rebe Gyawu said, "Right now we are going up, but when we come down these stairs we will all be dead men. Now there is nothing left." Muge Gyagpa thought that Rebe Gyawu was just joking because he had heard that Rebe was a loud mouth and not brave at all. In the jail, most of them were treated reasonably, except for Rebe Gyawu and Ngagpa Tratsang's Namdak Sherab who were ill-treated and quartered in the worst cells where there were scorpions.   

**Q:**  Did the monks in the monastery hear that they were arrested?   

**A:**  Yes, but they just remained there not knowing what to do because the officials were arrested and the abbot had fled.   

**Q:**  Were they taken up to the jail accompanied by guards?   

**A:**  No, they were just told to go up.   

**Q:**  Were they told that they had to go up to the jail?   

**A:**  No, they just said, "Go up."   

**Q:**  While they were discussing - before going into the jail - did the investigation committee tell them that they must hand over the monks who were physically involved in the Lhundrup Dzong trouble?   

**A:**  These people were the representatives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣ་ཆེན] The name used for the largest Khamtsen in Drepung (or Sera, or Ganden).">nachen</a> meeting and they were the ones who were backing the abbot. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> meeting was still meeting - it was in session. So the government sent a communication to them, after locking up the nachen representatives, asking them to hand over the persons involved in the Lhundrup Dzong trouble. Then, on the next day, Muge Gyagpa was released because he was the one who spoke out in favor of giving in to the government's demands in the nachen meeting.   

**Q:**  How did the government know about this?   

**A:**  I don't know how they came to know about it, but they knew. Then I heard that Muge Gyagpa had arrived [in Sera Jey], so I went to see him. We were in the same wing and we were quite friendly. I said to him, "You have come back?" He said, "Yes, but all my colleagues are still locked up. They released me because I had said in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣ་ཆེན] The name used for the largest Khamtsen in Drepung (or Sera, or Ganden).">nachen</a> meeting that we should hand over the abbot's chögö." All these stories that I have told you above - all these are from him.   

**Q:**  Didn't he regret speaking out in favor of handing over the abbot to the government?   

**A:**  No. If he had not spoken out then, it was certain that there would have been a war against the government. Although <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> had good weapons and a lot of monks, in the long run the government would have won.   

**Q:**  In any case, ultimately <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> lost to the government.   

**A:**  All the monks were cursing Muge Gyagpa. They were saying that he was a great disgrace, especially to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧར་གདོང་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) found in both Drepung and Sera Monasteries.">Hamdong Khamtsen</a>, which was the biggest and most powerful khamtsen.   

**Q:**  After he came back, did the government order them to hand over the main culprits?   

**A:**  If the abbot had not surrendered his chögö, then the monks were willing to fight. But when the abbot surrendered his robe, there was no question of fighting. They had already surrendered, so there was no question of putting up further resistance.   

**Q:**  Have you heard this: Just before the Mönlam and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> - before Rebe and Muge were arrested - the government collected a military force and camped it in front of Sera?   

**A:**  We heard that the government was gathering their forces - preparing them to be ready if needed. However, they did not bring them near Sera. If they had brought them, we would have seen them.   

**Q:**  I have also heard that at that time the government gathered their forces and made them drill and practice shooting, generally making a show of force and strength?   

**A:**  Yes. In Trauthang [Ch. jiao wu chang?] [the place used for military training] east of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, they were drilling and exercising. We just looked upon this as the regular military practice. They did not bring them near Sera.   

**Q:**  So then they handed over the monks?   

**A:**  At that time, the favorite [of the Dalai Lama] Kujar <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར་ཀུན་འཕེལ] had helped them [Sera] to buy 2,000 short-barreled English 303 carbines.   

**Q:**  The government wanted them to hand over the guns too?   

**A:**  No. They did not say anything about the guns at that time. Then the investigation committee moved up to the Potala after they had arrested the representatives and interrogated them. Mostly they interrogated and beat up Rebe Gyawu and Namdak Sherab severely with switches because it was these two and the abbot who wanted to fight the government. The abbot had escaped, so only these two were left and they got very badly whipped. They detailed 5 soldiers and one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅུ་དཔོན] 1. A minor military officer in charge of a squad of ten troops in the traditional Tibetan Army. 2. A minor official.">jupön</a> to guard Rebe Gyawu. That night a soldier who was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> was told to stand guard and this soldier treated him very badly because he didn't like Reting. He wouldn't let people come to see him or bring food for him. From time to time they would summon him to the investigation committee and interrogate him. During these sessions, they would beat him up. When he was being interrogated he was supposed to kneel down and answer their questions, but Rebe Gyawu refused to kneel down. Instead he would sit cross-legged. The monks said that when he was asked a question concerning the Lhundrup Dzong incident, he would say something entirely different, like how many monks there were at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>, how many pillars there were in the temple and so on. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a>rt, he would refuse to answer them. There was one particular soldier who was very mean to Rebe Gyawu. Sometimes Rebe Gyawu managed to procure some money and he gave the money to the mean soldier and asked him to go and buy a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> for him. He gave him 7 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> and 5 sho. The soldier, seeing an opportunity to make some fast bucks, went and bought the khata and gave it to him. He pocketed the change. The next time Rebe Gyawu was summoned in front of the investigation committee, he took out the khata and presented it to them. They were quite surprised and asked him where he had got the khata from? According to custom, prisoners are not permitted to present khatas. So Rebe Gyawu answered, "My khata is not an ordinary one. It cost 7 sang and 5 sho!" The official told him not to bullshit because how can a khata cost 7 sang 5 sho? Normally a khata cost only about 5-6 sho. So Rebe Gyawu said, "I gave 7 sang and 5 sho to this soldier and asked him to get me a khata. He got me this khata and has not returned any change, so this khata costs 7 sang and 5 sho!" The government got hold of the soldier, gave him a hundred lashes and removed him from duty. The new guard had heard about the previous incident and so he was more wary and obedient, for he feared that if he mistreated him, this guy might get him into similar trouble. Rebe Gyawu told the new guard, "You think you are guarding me, but actually you have been assigned by the government as my servant!"   

**Q:**  When did the government ask them to hand over their guns?   

**A:**  The government did not ask them to hand over their guns. So this trouble was over and settled. Then a new abbot was appointed by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>. He was a very learned old Geshe from Mongolia called Tendar [Tib. བསྟན་དར]. This abbot and Reting Rimpoche were from the same <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, but of a different <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a> - one was from Chakyung [Tib. བྱ་ཆུང] and the other was from Khadi [?]. Reting was from Khadi. Moreover, when Reting became Regent, there was one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> called Phöndo [Tib. ཕོད་མདོ] Dzong. Reting Rimpoche took this shiga from his own khamtsen - Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ] Khamtsen. So Geshe Tender did not like this. Normally such a Regent would help and try to make his own khamtsen richer, but this guy, instead of helping, was taking away the only shiga of the khamtsen. Therefore he did not like Reting and was very close to Taktra, who appointed him as the new abbot. The new abbot voluntarily handed over all the guns to the government, claiming that if they kept the guns it would give a false sense of courage to the monks and that when they had guns, the monks tended to feel that they could challenge anyone. So it was better not to keep the guns. This was his excuse. In reality, he handed over the guns to the government just to please Taktra.   

**Q:**  Were the monks given anything as compensation for the guns?   

**A:**  I saw the guns on the day when they were to be handed over to the government. They were laid out neatly on the roof of the tratsang. The guns were glistening with grease - in brand-new condition. Most of the monks were not very happy with the whole idea. They all stood around with dark faces and some of them had tears in their eyes. Then they had the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> carry the guns away.   

**Q:**  Some people say that there were only about a handful of guns. Is that true, or were there really about 2,000 guns?   

**A:**  There were about 2,000 guns. That is definite. The government gave money as a way of compensation for the guns - it would distribute 3 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> each to all the monks on every 22nd day of the 9th month. The capital for this endowment was given by the government as a loan with a very low interest rate. So every monk would get 3 sang every year from this capital. So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> sent out a message to everyone urging all the monks to attend the Lhabab Düchen [Tib. ལྷ་བབ་དུས་ཆེན] festival on the 22nd of the 9th month commemorating the Buddha coming back to the earth, because on this day the government was going to make the first distribution of 3 sang to each monk. So they urged all their monks to be present because in the future the government was going to give out the money based on the number of monks present on that day. So on that day some government official came, I don't remember who it was, but they made a big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> and served the rice gruel [Tib. མིང་བཏགས]. There was a congregation of about 5,000 monks. After the tonggo, there was a tratsang meeting upstairs. The abbot was presiding over the meeting. At that time, the most powerful and influential kudraks [rich and powerful monks] in the tratsang came and among them was Jiso Gyurme La [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་ལགས]. Sitting opposite him was one umdze and one gegö. This umdze later told me about this incident. The umdze told me that Jiso Gyurme was very upset because the abbot handed over the guns. Therefore, he did not appreciate the government giving a tonggo and money to the monks. However, to please the abbot, he stood up and said, "Don't you think we have done well by handing over the guns? If we had kept the guns nothing but problems would come to us. Now the government has given us a big tonggo for over 5,000 monks and it will be repeated every year. The government has given us a big endowment with very little interest. So don't you think it's very good?" He looked around at everyone but nobody said anything. The abbot was very pleased to hear this. He was beaming and looking around at everyone expectantly, but nobody said anything. So the silence was proving to be quite embarrassing. So the Jiso Gyurme repeated his remarks once again. Then an ordinary official spoke up, "Please don't say anything now - there is something," which meant that there was some problem, so don't speak now.   

**Q:**  In other words, this guy was saying that there was something wrong?   

**A:**  Yes, that is true. So after that remark Jiso Gyurme was greatly embarrassed and he sat down quietly. So these happenings were later related to me by the abbot.   

**Q:**  Earlier you told us that if the government was going to punish the monks, then Reting was ready to act. What happened to that?   

**A:**  Reting had great loyalty for his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and the tratsang was seeking support from him. The tratsang was grateful to Reting and Reting was also grateful to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  What was he going to do?   

**A:**  At that time Reting was saying that he was going to come to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>, but his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡེ་འཆང] A title some Labrang used for their managers/stewards.">dechang</a> [his labrang's official] stopped him.   

**Q:**  From whom did you hear this?   

**A:**  From my brother. He was one of Reting Rimpoche's attendants. So Reting wanted to go to Sera with about 30 of his people. [He wanted to] collect all his arms and ammunition and go to Sera and fight when he heard about the cruel and harsh treatment given out to his tratsang. Reting was saying that I brought him [Taktra] up first giving him the post of assistant tutor, then full tutor and finally made him the Regent. So he didn't have to be so cruel to my tratsang. Reting was crying and wanted to go and fight, but his managers counseled him not to go. They thought it would not be wise, so with great difficulty they were able to restrain him. If Reting had gone to Sera it was almost certain that war would have broken out between Sera and the government. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> still had their guns. So this was the beginning of the trouble between Reting and Taktra.   

**Q:**  Then how did it go?   

**A:**  The five well known people like Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ] Rimpoche, Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས], Jampey Gyentsen [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱལ་མཚན], etc, who were the close entourage of Reting as well as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> began to discuss among themselves what they should do to help them. This was the beginning of their discussions. They could not discuss this directly with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> because of the abbot who was pro-<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>. So they discussed it among themselves. Incidentally, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s democratic set up plan could not function properly in Tibet. Similarly, Reting also tried this once. This was just talk in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and was not discussed among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>. I heard this from my younger brother - not the one who was an attendant to Reting, but a younger one - who went to play mahjong with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> family. The next day he said that he was tired and was going to sleep for a while because he had been up the whole night. He then asked me to try and get him out of Reting's place. I said that it was not possible, and in any case, why would he want to leave Reting's service? So then he told me that Reting Rimpoche was planning to introduce a democracy [Tib. མི་སེར་རྒྱལ་ཁབ] in Tibet. This had not worked before because most of the officials did not want it, therefore there was going to be a lot of trouble and he wanted to leave Reting's service. He also cited Lungshar's unsuccessful bid to introduce democracy. Somehow this talk leaked out and people started encouraging Taktra to ask Reting to give him the regency. I think even the personnel of Reting Labrang encouraged Taktra to ask for the regency. I think that if the people had asked Reting not to go ahead and carry out the changes, he would have insisted and gone ahead. So they thought that it was best to get Reting out of action for some time so that he would forget about this whole idea. So they calculated that if Taktra asked Reting for the regency for a while, he would not refuse it. At that time, Taktra was a Tshogchen [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] Trülku. So various officials kind of deceived Taktra and told him if you could take the name of the Regent Trülku [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྤྲུལ], it will be good. So Taktra asked Reting if he could let him become the Regent for three years - just in name. He would hand over all the income of the Regency to Reting Labrang. Reting thought very highly of Taktra because he was his teacher and moreover they were very close. At that time Reting never thought that Taktra would later deceive him. So Reting agreed, but the government did not agree. They said, "If you want to resign, that is all right. But to select your successor, we must follow the normal procedures." That's why some kudrak didn't like Reting and some said this was very bad. Anyway, Reting said that he had already agreed for Taktra to become the new Regent and he insisted and did like the saying, "One person deciding for hundreds" [Tib. བརྒྱ་ཁ་གཅིག་གཅོད], so the government had to agree to it.   

**Q:**  So how did the trouble end?   

**A:**  Since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> did not hand over the regency, they thought that the best way was to try to set up a democratic form of government so that they would get more support. So this was their basic principle and in order to bring in a democratic setup it became necessary to eliminate the Regent.   

**Q:**  Did you know Khardo and those people?   

**A:**  I met Khardo and Nyungne Lama several times, but I didn't have a close personal relationship with them. Therefore, I cannot talk much about them. Usually the things I heard were from my younger brother, Tenzin Gyatso [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱ་མཚོ]. He was working for Reting and was very close to him. Reting liked him and trusted him. The reason why Reting trusted him is as follows: Reting was a marksman. So once Reting called all his servants and wanted one of them to hold up an egg in his hand so that he (Reting) could shoot it, but nobody dared to hold up the egg.   

