# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0209.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང] was a well-known Geshe from Sera Jey College. In this interview, he discusses how the Chinese tried to persuade Reting Chöndze [his younger brother] to return with a Chinese army to take revenge against Taktra. He also provides details on how Surkhang came to arrest Reting and how Rebe gya'u got banished from Lhasa. There is also a detailed discussion about the murder of the Sera Jey abbot and the Je monks' 1947 war with the government.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0209_03/H_0209_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  [The first part of this tape is missing. The recording starts below in the translation at "Note"] While they were staying in Ba [Tib. འབའ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> got married to the ex-wife of Udukpa and Udukpa became a monk in the Ba Nangsog Monastery. Most of the other Reting Labrang servants had gone to Chengdu in Sichuan. The main person in charge of them was Chöpönla. They contacted chöndze when they heard that he had arrived in Ba. At that time, the Communist Chinese leaders Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were there. They requested that chöndze come to Chengdu. Chöndze thought it was better to go rather than remain in Ba because the people in Ba told him that he should go because they were part of Chinese territory. So he went there and the Chinese welcomed him with a big reception to which they also called chöpönla and those people.   

**Q:**  At that time, had Chamdo been lost?   

**A:**  It was before Chamdo was lost. At that time, the leaders of Sichuan were Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua. These were the people who later came to Tibet. They welcomed him, and the Reting Labrang staff also welcomed him. Then the Chinese said to him, "You have suffered a great deal under the Tibetan Government," but he didn't give them any answer. Then they said, "Now what are you doing?" He said, "I am just staying in Ba." They then asked, "What do you have in your mind?" He said, "I have nothing in mind." After some time, the other Reting Labrang servants said, "Chöndze, you cannot say nothing because we have suffered so much and you have led us. We must fight and revolt again against the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Administration." Then the Chinese said, "You should not stay like this. You should go back to Tibet to fight and whatever soldiers you need, we will give you help from here. Whatever you need, take it from here." Then Chöndze said, "You are telling me this, but I won't do that." Then the Reting Labrang servants insisted that he was the most important one so he had to do it, but he said, "What we were fighting before and what we are fighting today are two different situations. Why I had to fight was because of Reting Rimpoche. He used to tell me that you are like the person in the proverb, 'The baby conch shell raised with milk is useful to fight the crocodile.' [Tib. དུང་ཕྲུག་འོ་མས་གསོས་པ་འདི། དགྲ་ཆུ་སྲིན་ཁ་ལ་ཨེ་ཕན་བསམ]. You will be used at the time when it is needed. That's why I had to fight." He told the Chinese, "At that time, we wanted to fight because we wanted to save the life of Reting Lama because he treated us kindly. Now he has been ruined and is gone. Now if you send us carrying a gun to fight with the help of the Chinese, we are fighting against Avalokitsevara, the Dalai Lama, who was recognized by Reting. Secondly, we have survived from generation to generation as citizens under Avalokitsevara. So it would be better to die rather than fight against him. So I can't do that." He decided not to do that. Then the Chinese kept them for a month and treated him kindly and then he thought that it was not wise to do that. Then the Chinese told him to go back and think one more time. "We will contact you again," they said, "and if you have new thoughts you can come back." They also gave him a lot of gifts, but he didn't take them. After a year or so, the Chinese met him again and asked him whether he had any new thoughts. He said he didn't but they talked about that with him for a month. Then the Chinese got a little angry, but they told him that he could go and come back whenever he wanted. They said, "Whenever you have any new thoughts you can come back and whatever amount of soldiers you need you can take even if it is ten thousand or twenty thousand soldiers. We can give you an official rank." A couple of weeks after the Chinese reached Lhasa, Chöndze returned home and then came to Lhasa and told me this story. Finally, when we were about to run away, I told him "Let's run away," but he refused to leave for India because he had a lot of children and family. He said, "I don't feel any regret whether I will be happy or suffer and even if I will die." Finally he died under struggle sessions.   

**Q:**  At that time, who were the main servants of Reting Labrang living in Chengdu?   

**A:**  There was Döyöntshang Chöpön [Tib. འདོད་ཡོན་ཚང་མཆོད་དཔོན].   

**Q:**  Who else was there?   

**A:**  Not so many. Maybe 7-8, but the important one was Döyöntshang Chöpön. Reting had some doubts and he sent Chöyogla [Tib. མཆོད་གཡོག་ལགས] who was from Döyöntshang, specially to find what happened in Lhasa. They were ready to escape. If there was any doubt, he said, he should immediately leave.   

**Q:**  Was it Chöyogla who was in Chengdu?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You mean doubts, like any fears?   

**A:**  Yes, any fears.   

**Q:**  He sent him when?   

**A:**  He was sent on 25th or 26th, and Reting was sealed on the 30th.   

**Q:**  Did he arrive on the day when Reting Labrang was sealed?   

**A:**  He arrived on the day when it was said that Reting was going to be sealed.   

**Q:**  Then was it impossible for him to return back [to Reting]?   

**A:**  If he traveled day and night, he could have reached there and Reting could have fled.   

**Q:**  He couldn't get there because Jangra Sharpa Chöndze was sent on that day.   

**A:**  If he could have returned that night, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> had very strong servants and they could have escaped even if they had to fight a little bit. However, he returned through Phembo and on the way he put up a tent at the river bank near the Reting river and stayed there. It seems that in Reting they were waiting for his return, but before he arrived a lot of [Tibetan] soldiers came and they informed Reting Rimpoche there were a lot of soldiers coming. Reting Rimpoche thought for a while and said, "Probably these soldiers might be going to Kham and they must be coming here to get protective talismans, so make some rice thugka for them." And the talismans were also readied. At that time, all the arms and ammunition were on the upstairs in the house and all the servants were downstairs. In between that, the Fourth Battalion Leader, Rushipa [Tib. རུ་བཞི་པ] of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment and also many other soldiers came and blocked access to Reting's private room so he couldn't leave and they [the servants] couldn't go there.   

**Q:**  Who else was there in the tent besides Döyöntshang Chöpönla?   

**A:**  There might have been other servants.   

**Q:**  What happened after they blocked the door of the private room?   

**A:**  Two of my brothers were in Reting. At that time, when the room was guarded, they said that the behavior of the soldiers was different and they had little doubt what this was about. Then Udukpa fought a little bit downstairs, so they immediately got hold of him and tied him with rope outside. At that time, Söshön was upstairs. So in the room, there was Rushipa. He prostrated and held Reting Rimpoche's hand in a polite way and said, "Please, you must go to Lhasa. I will guarantee that there will be no problem regarding the safety of your life." Reting Rimpoche was laughing and said, "Yes, of course. Okay." My other brother, Söpönla, had little doubt and he took out a pistol from his dress but Reting said, "No, no. Don't shoot," and then Surkhang snatched the gun from his hand. Then he said that he told Reting, "Wherever you go, please take me with you." Reting said, "You had better stay," but he said, "No. When you were good and prosperous, we enjoyed it and now you are suffering so I'd like to go with you." Then Surkhang said, "You can come. It doesn't matter." So then he and another <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a> who was a Tsawarongpa was brought with Reting up to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> plain. Reting was then brought to the Potala and they were brought to Trapchi. Later, when the Reting case was settled at the Assembly meeting, Lhalu said, "This söshön [Tib. གསོལ་གཞོན] almost shot us in Reting." At that time, Surkhang said, "These people take their pistols even when they go to the toilet. That's nothing." So with help of Surkhang, he had no punishment at all.   

**Q:**  At that time, Lhalu was also there in the room?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard he was there.   

**Q:**  We heard that when Reting was brought to Lhasa, there was a person riding near him holding a gun ready to pull the trigger. Didn't he say anything about this?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. When they reached <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> they were ready. One of the Sera monks ran out and he saw that he was the only person and if he tried to fight for Reting, they were going to shoot.   

**Q:**  Only one monk?   

**A:**  Yes. His name was Drungtö . He was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>'s <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་པོ་རག] A medium size khamtsen in Loseling College in Drepung Monastery.">Bombora</a> Khamtsen. Since then, the söshön family always gave two loads of the best flour and one carcass of pork to Surkhang every New Year's Day to express their gratitude. A few years later, he met Surkhang in Varanasi in India and he offered his respect. Surkhang looked at him and said, "I have definitely seen you." He told Surkhang, "You have not seen me. I am from Jangrashar [Tib. ལྕང་ར་ཤར]." Then Surkhang said, "I enjoyed taking that pork and wheat flour many times. How many children do you have?" He said, "I have two daughters." Surkhang said, "Now, it is your responsibility to educate these daughters." I forgot to tell you something. When they examined Rebe Gyawu, they had been beating him with a tremendous amount of lashes and his butt had wounds and sores that came into pieces. He couldn't take it any longer and one day he said, "I can't take it any more. I have a statement to make. I can't lay down like this and make the statement." So he sat down and he told them, "Please give me some snuff." He took the snuff and said, "Do I really have to make a statement?" They told him, "This is the investigation committee meeting, so you have to make a statement." Then he said, "If I have to make a statement, the situation of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> comes up to here is made by few of you. I can name it." [unclear] At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> immediately said, "This man is mentally disturbed. Please take him away." After that he had no more lashes.   

**Q:**  Where did you hear that? Did Rebe Gyawu himself tell you that?   

**A:**  He didn't tell me. I just heard it when I was in the monastery. When they were banished from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>, there were 14 Sera monks. Among them, the most important were Rebe Gyawu, Betsang Gyawu and Namdag Sherab [Tib. རྣམ་དག་ཤེས་རབ]   

**Q:**  Did they demote the Ngagpa Khembo [abbot]?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. He just resigned.   

**Q:**  How did he resign?   

**A:**  He was a dharma practitioner who would stay in caves. He was tough and he didn't want to be the abbot, so he resigned.   

**Q:**  When did he resign?   

**A:**  I think he resigned right at the time of the incident.   

**Q:**  What happened in Sera Monastery when Reting Labrang was sealed and those things were going on?   

**A:**  There was a disturbance in Sera. I don't think this is necessary.   

**Q:**  We need this. Please tell us about this.   

**A:**  In public, after Rebe Gyawu was given the lashing and just before he was put on an ox [and banished], he was wearing a white dress under which people could see his satin monk's vest. He looked back to the investigation committee who were standing there and he took off his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> and said, "Thank you so much. The government's law has one eye and it finally decided today." When he came along I heard that there were many people putting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves and hundred <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> notes into his dresses' pouch. He saw one big fat ox and said, "I am the son of a farmer, so I know how to ride an ox. Bring along the red ox." Then he put his butt upon the lower part of the ox's back where there was big piece of flesh and stretched his legs on the side of the ox's ears and rode it while saying some prayers. After that, when they went, Rebe Gyawu's ox turned its face towards and Sera and Rebe Gyawu said his prayers and also burst into tears. When they lashed him before he was banished, they just hit the whip on the ground and didn't hit it much on his butt. Anyway, Rebe Gyawu was banished to Drachen [Tib. སྒྲ་ཆེན] where he remained until the Dalai Lama took the power. Namdag Sherab was sent to Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན] where he died.   

**Q:**  Was the war in Sera very important?   

**A:**  At that time, the abbot was Tendar [Tib. བསྟན་དར].   

**Q:**  He was the abbot that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> appointed, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>'s Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ] Khamtsen was Tendar. Although he was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ལྷོ་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) in Sera Monastery.">Samlo Khamtsen</a> which was Reting Rimpoche's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, he never liked Reting Labrang so he was always looking to cause trouble for Reting. So things were moving in the government's favor and the abbot was not doing anything whatsoever [to oppose it]. The abbot was not taking any interest whatsoever. You will be surprised to know that the ones who actually led this problem and led the monks was a young incarnate lama who was well behaved and a very learned <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> known as Tshamtrü [Tib. མཚམས་སྤྲུལ] Rimpoche. Also there was a famous geshe known as Loga [Tib. བློ་དགའ]. Both of them were very well versed and well respected by the monks. These two talked to each other and then went to Lhasa and met Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ] Rimpoche to seek advise. Khardo was also one of the high and famous lamas in Sera Jey. So I don't know what they discussed, but according to the instructions, Tshamtrü and Loga called a meeting of a few of the trusted monks and senior monks at Miser Trongmo [Tib. མི་སེར་གྲོང་མོ] which is located behind Sera Monastery. This was a dry canal with no water. They held the first gathering there. At that time, I heard that Loga didn't have much to say at the meeting, but Tshamtrü was very eloquent. After their meeting, whether it was on that same day or the day after that, Khardo Rimpoche was arrested. After that, they came to seal Reting Labrang [house] in Samlo Khamtsen inside Sera. At that time, if the government had sealed it, it would have been okay, but the abbot of the Sera Jey voluntarily led those who came to seal Reting and he was also carrying the lamp and smiling at everybody.   

**Q:**  What was that lamp for?   

**A:**  It was to melt the wax for the seal. He was going here and there telling everybody about the sealing, but the other abbots like that of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> were walking behind them showing an unhappy, displeased demeanor. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> abbot was welcoming and jumping and doing these things. Therefore, the monks were very upset about his behavior. About that time, all the monks came out and were moving in large numbers wherever those people went. Then the abbot left and went back to his own room. There was one monk nicknamed "White Brocade," (Tib. གྱསེ་གརཔོ [རྒྱ་སེ་དཀར་པོ]) who was a servant of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Phünkang [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་ཕུན་ཁང]. He was from Bitu Khamt<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟན] The upper part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">sen</a>. He said, "Let's get advice from the abbot about what we should do." He was followed by all the other monks and they went inside the abbot's house. He took off his sen as a sign of respect and bowed down to the abbot and said, "The most highest and most important lama of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> is Reting Rimpoche and he is under these circumstances. As far as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> is concerned, he has treated Sera badly before and even today he doing so. So what shall we do? Please give us advice." At that time, all the monks were standing behind him. The abbot immediately took out his gun and pointed it at him and said, "What do you know about Reting Labrang?" and then shot once and killed Gyase Garpo on the spot. Then he still kept on firing while the other monks were pushing back. When he was shooting at the monks, one of his friends, an incarnate lama called Aka, was there and somehow Aka's thumb got wounded and the monks withdrew. Then the abbot ran away barefooted without his sen, carrying the gun. He jumped from the roof down onto another house called Yidamkhang [Tib. ཡི་དམ་ཁང]. By that time, from the Yidamkhang roof, he saw that the courtyard of Sera Jey was completely packed with ordinary monks and he started shooting indiscriminately at the monks, but no one was hit because he was kind of stunned. Then he jumped onto the actual roof of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  [Note: the Tape starts here] Maybe he was planning to run away. to escape where the two animals and the wheel decorations are there. He may be planning to go that way. ?   

**A:**  He maybe planning to run away to where the two animals and varjra wheel decoration [Tib. རི་དྭགས་ཆོས་འཁོར] were. He was planning to go that way. When the abbot was firing indiscriminately, there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧར་གདོང་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) found in both Drepung and Sera Monasteries.">Hamdong Khamtsen</a> called Lobsang Tempa. He ran back to his house and brought a sword. By the time the abbot was jumping down and reaching near the two animals and the varjra wheel, he caught up with him there. By that time, the abbot's bullets had run out and the geshe hit him with one sword blow and cut him through. Then he said to the abbot. "Kai! Bring the old man <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> now! The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of the abbot was from Samlo and also had a gun. He was also shooting and running around. There was another monk from Denma [Tib. ལྡན་མ] by the name of Gerge. While the chandzö started going around clockwise, Gerge started going on a counter-clockwise route. When they met at the center, he hit the chandzö with one sword blow and killed him there. The abbot had one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] A lama or abbot&#x27;s servant.">söpön</a> by the name of Tashi [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས]. He jumped from the window and escaped and went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a>'s House and informed Taktra about what happened there. After the killing of the abbot and the chandzö, nobody was leading the monks and all the monks were meeting here and there, but there was no leader. In between that, another incarnate lama called Tsenya [Tib. རྩེ་ཉ] came out and he went through the motions of being the war leader. The most respected and well known official in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> was Jiso Gyurmela [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་ལགས], who was from Bitu (Khamtsen). He told the monks, "Please don't do this. If we discuss things, everything will be alright." One Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> with a gun almost shot him dead, saying, "If he is saying we must not do this, he also must be a running dog of Taktra." Then Tsenya told this monk not to shoot him and saved his life, otherwise he was almost shot. Tsenya was known as the speech incarnation of Haryagiwa [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན], the most important deity of Sera Jey. The monks, therefore, probably thought that when Tsenya got involved, he would have tremendous supernatural power so they started running after Tsenya, but Tsenya had no greatness at all. One day he came to Sera's Bathi Khamtsen [Tib. སྦྲ་ཐི].   

**Q:**  What happened to Tshamtrü and Loga?   

**A:**  They also didn't have much to do. Then Tsenya took out the sword of the famous image of Haryagiwa and took the five colored scarf from the deity and put it on one of his young men accompanying him. Tsenya wore a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and walked around checking posts and giving the monks new names like "controller of the Tibetan Government" (Tib. deshung ngandü [sde gzhung mnga' 'dus].   

**Q:**  Had he already posted the monks? Or who posted them?   

**A:**  Tsenya posted the monks on the roof top of all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and then he called them deshung ngandü.   

**Q:**  What kind of weapons did they have?   

**A:**  They didn't have many weapons. The individual <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> (households) had 1-2 guns, some rifles and some pistols. One armory belonged to the Sera <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> during the 1911 war (Tib. the Water-Bird Chinese War [ཆུ་བྱི་རྒྱ་དམག]). They destroyed the armory and they found one cannon which was known as a "stupid cannon" [Tib. མེ་སྒྱོགས་ལྐུགས་པ]. There was nothing useful. No weapons at all. There were many old monks who had been in the 1911 war who know how to use those cannons. So they posted people here and there. Tsenya was supposed to be the important commander there. One day, when he came to Bathi Khamtsen, Tsenya who didn't know how to shoot guns was there with a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> named Lobsang Wangye [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དབང་རྒྱལ] who had a good gun he bought from Sichuan which had some kind of more powerful bullets. He [Tsenya] said, "I will shoot this gun once." He [the chandzö] thought that he knew how to shoot and gave him the gun but instead of keeping the rifle butt against his shoulder and he kept it over his shoulder and pulled the trigger so the rifle butt hit his face. He was so scared that since then he didn't pick up a rifle. That was their commander. After that, he had a pistol and whenever he shot, he didn't dare to shoot normally and kept it far away like this, so it wouldn't hit the target, right?   

**Q:**  At that time, did the government send soldiers or did they send any messages? What happened after the abbot was killed?   

**A:**  Then the government made preparations. There was no communication from the government at all.   

**Q:**  Could you see from the monastery when you looked down that they were making preparations in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>?   

**A:**  They started shooting and there was shooting up and down. The monks wanted to go down, but they couldn't go down to fight where the soldiers were. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> did a good thing when they held a meeting in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  At this time, did the people of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> talk with the people of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> to find out whether they were going to help?   

**A:**  No. Usually, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> was separate and they didn't talk with them. Some people were even saying that Sera Mey started shooting at Sera Jey. Sera Mey kept quite because most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> were from Sera Mey. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> did very well. The Kashag said that they needed a person to volunteer to take Sera Jey. Nobody volunteered, but then Kapshöba said that I will volunteer. At that time Kapshöba was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> [answer was not finished]   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  They [the monks] ran out of shells for the cannon so they put stones in it and fired. There was a monk from Gyelje Khamtsen called Yignyen [Tib. དབྱིག་གཉེན] who had some experience so when they ran out of cannons and everything, he used the tea churn [Tib. མདོང་མོ] and put stones and gun-power in there and fired it. It almost hit the armory down in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>. After one shot, one churn was ruined. The monks killed a lot of soldiers. Once Gerge carried a knife and the Trapchi soldiers had great difficulty to come onto the mountain top [behind Sera]. Whenever a soldier was killed, the soldiers cut off his ear and removed the earrings. The government counted the monks that were killed. There was one monk called Lonyima [Tib. བློ་ཉི་མ] from Denma who was sitting there and firing very strongly. After some time, the gun became so hot it didn't fire any more. Then he kept the bullet in his hand and hit the bullet with the pin for cleaning the barrels. The bullet went off and his hand was burned.   

**Q:**  How long did this fighting go on?   

**A:**  It went on for about a month.   

**Q:**  Do you mean firing 1-2 shots?   

**A:**  It went on for a month.   

**Q:**  How did you manage the water and food?   

**A:**  There was food in Sera.   

**Q:**  Did you have any communications with the government?   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**Q:**  Did many monks get wounded?   

**A:**  On that day, 3 people died. One of them was Lonyima. Then they lost control of their mountain top.   

**Q:**  They were not in the monastery? `   

**A:**  They were on the [mountain] top. At the western side there was a monk called Lobsang Samden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན] who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧར་གདོང་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) found in both Drepung and Sera Monasteries.">Hamdong Khamtsen</a> along with several others waiting there as volunteers. On this other side were the soldiers from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> and Gyantse Regiments. Lobsang Samden was there, but the other monks left to eat food. At this time the soldiers blew the trumpet telling the soldiers to withdraw. However, by that time the monks had ran out bullets and he [Lobsang] became angry and got up and hit his gun on the rock. As a result, the soldiers saw that he had ran out of the bullets so they came up and instead of withdrawing, they marched forward. The monk carried a sword and jumped out in the midst of a large number of soldiers. They hit him with gun butts because bullets didn't hit the monk. Then they knocked him down and killed him. After that, the monks who had gone to eat food returned and they were also killed by the soldiers so the mountain top was lost.   

**Q:**  On the top at the west?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What were the monks in the monastery doing?   

**A:**  Everybody was going to fight, but some people were sitting down there and delivering food. By the time that they lost the mountain top, the same old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> who killed the abbot came up to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> roof top wearing a blue cotton chupa. He told the umdze, "I am going to die today, give me some delicious food." The umdze said, "I will give you the food, but don't do it. It is useless to die." But he still said, "No, I am going to die." Then they made a good Bagtsa Markhu with the pieces of dough mixed with butter, dry cheese and sugar. He ate them all and he said, "Give me some snacks to eat on the way so he gave him dry peaches and he put them in his pouch. He didn't know how to fire a gun, but he had a dagger with him. Then the umdze immediately left and watched where he went. He went to the top floor where there were a lot of soldiers on the place called Namkhading [Tib. ནམ་མཁའ་ལྡིང]. There were two soldiers as the watchmen. When the geshe came, they turned the bolt and pointed their guns at him. Then the geshe said, "Don't shoot. What is the use of killing one man? I want to hand over the ringleader." So the soldiers put the guns down. At the moment they put down their guns, he stabbed each of them with his knife and said, "These are the ringleaders." He killed them and went over to where there were a lot of soldiers. Then they shot him, but it didn't affect him and he started fighting with his knife. So finally the soldiers hit him with their rifle butts and beat him to death. On the eastside, there was a place called Senge Pungpa [Tib. སེང་གེ་དཔུང་པ]. From there, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers were coming up. There was a monk from Denma called Tenzin Chömpel [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] who had been given a good gun and was shooting through his window. He killed many soldiers who were coming up. Then they saw one soldier who was coming with a flag from Senge Pungpa to put the flag on the top of Sera Jey. Some people were sitting there and everybody said, "I will shoot, I will shoot." Then a monk volunteered to shoot saying that he was the son of a Trapchi soldier, so today he would shoot. He shot his gun and the man who was bringing the flag fell down. When they went to look at the soldier they saw that it was his own father so he immediately took out his sword and stabbed himself so both the son and the father died there. Then the soldiers came through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> and reached the roof of the Ngagpa Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Where is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> located?   

**A:**  It is slightly to the west. The soldiers came via <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> because there was nobody blocking there--it was as if they had been lent that route. From the Ngagpa Tratsang roof, the soldiers started throwing hand grenades. If the monks could catch them in time, they threw them back and it exploded on the other side. Some of the grenades exploded, but they didn't do too much damage; some didn't explode at all. There was an old monk called Gegö Tenzin [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན]. One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> was about to throw a bomb from the top of the Ngagpa Tratsang but Tenzin got a gun from the toilet and shot through the toilet and hit the man he saw. At the same time he fell into the toilet and came out full of dust [talking with laughter, can't hear clearly]. Some soldiers were coming with kerosene oil and were trying to start a fire on the eastern side of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> where there was a house where they kept the xylograph [Tib. པར་ཁང] wood blocks. A <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> called Thamjö [Tib. དམ་ཆོས] got a gun and started shooting from there and prevented them from starting the fire. Gegö Thamjö said, "Now we will not be able to stand here. The Tibetan Government is going to destroy us, so before that, let us destroy our own things." He wanted to bring all the valuable things and wealth into the Assembly Hall and set fire to them. So Gerge, the other monk from Denma said, "Let them destroy it. Why should we destroy it ourselves? If you try to destroy it, I will kill you." So they had to stop.   

**Q:**  Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> was lost, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The soldiers were coming in and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was leading them. Then the monks decided, especially the ringleaders [to stop fighting]. They went back and they took off their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and put on their monk's robes and sat in their individual apartments burning incense and reading some books. Even Tenzin Chömpel who was one of the strongest fighters was in Denma house reading a book. When some of the soldiers came they said, "There is a very nice <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> here." In the end they never came to know the ringleaders so they just arrested some monks who were not fighting but just running around with guns.   

**Q:**  How did the soldiers get into the monastery?   

**A:**  The soldiers were led by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> himself.   

**Q:**  From where did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> come?   

**A:**  I forgot to tell you one thing. Many monks who were Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s and La Khamba went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཁང] to get weapons. At that time, Sandutsang House was under seal. The soldiers were on the roof top so they came from the other side of the house and made a hole through the wall and entered there. They killed all the soldiers there and then ate food and took the guns and everything. There was one young new monk of La, who didn't know which way to go. The next morning when the sun was rising, he was still carrying a gun and going around in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> area. So one soldier asked him where he was going. He said, "I went to Sandutsang house to get something." He really got a big beating. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was coming from the front, from the main gate. The monk called Gerge, the very strong fighter and his companions were going around in one of the houses. He sent other monks to lock at the door and finally he stabbed himself with a knife and fell down. The soldiers who were looking for Gerge were told that he was in there. The soldiers couldn't go in the locked door, so they jumped from another rooftop to that rooftop and then came down into the room and found that Gerge was already dead. Kapshöba stopped the soldiers from firing many cannon rounds. Some of the shells hit a little bit, but not much.   

**Q:**  Was that at the beginning or at the end?   

**A:**  At the beginning, probably he didn't let them fire much.   

**Q:**  I mean when the cannon shells hit <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> Tratsang 1-2 times?   

**A:**  It was at the later part. Then finally <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> came. He was wearing a white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and riding a horse in a very imposing manner. He dismounted his horse in the main Assembly Hall's courtyard and looked at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> and prayed for a long period with folded hands. By that time, some of monks were saying that he was disputatious [Tib. གྱོད་ཤོད] and praying, but actually he might have had different thoughts [meaning unclear]. Then he told them to bring a lamp and locked all the houses with two locks and sealed every room in the tratsang. He put 2 soldiers to guard each house and told them they would be responsible if anything happened there until the verdict was issued. When people looked at this, it seemed that he acted very meanly to Sera Jey, but actually when everything was over, Sera had not lost anything except a ladle and there was no damage. So it looks like Kapshöba helped Sera Jey by doing that. If he hadn't sealed them all, the soldiers might have taken things from the rooms.   

**Q:**  How many monks were arrested at that time?   

**A:**  I don't know the number, not very many.   

**Q:**  At that time, most monks had left, right?   

**A:**  The monks were all inside the monastery sitting in their rooms. The most important ones who were arrested were Tsenya and Jabra Bu Lama [Tib. ཇ་ཁྲ་བུ་བླ་མ]. Actually, they didn't know the ringleaders so they arrested very few people.   

**Q:**  At that time, did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> ask Drepung and Ganden for help?   

**A:**  They never asked for it. If they asked, they would have thought it was a disgrace to the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Did you hear that Reting Rimpoche died in prison?   

**A:**  Yes, I did.   

**Q:**  How did you hear that?   

**A:**  One of Reting Labrang's managers [Tib. ལྡེ་འཆང], a layman named Sonam Chömpel, said that he received a message that Reting Rimpoche had died, so he should come to take over. When he went into Reting Rimpoche's room, according to him, he said Reting was completely naked lying there. He said that he couldn't look above his knee because he felt so sad. At that time, they [government officials] said "You should check well. He just died and we didn't do anything to him. There isn't anything wrong, is there? Everything is alright, right?" He said, "Yes, yes."   

**Q:**  How did you get the message?   

**A:**  The government might have been sending messages.   

**Q:**  No. I mean the messages going on between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> and Reting Labrang in Lhasa?   

**A:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> was already lost. I was at the estate. Reting was killed after Sera was lost. The message came from the Reting Labrang's house in Lhasa to Sera Jey.   

**Q:**  When the war occurred in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>, Reting hadn't died, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When they brought Reting Rimpoche from Phembo, was there a plan to send monks and take him away?   

**A:**  Yes, there was, but they couldn't take him away.   

**Q:**  What was the plan?   

**A:**  The plan was that all the monks would be sitting at Senge Pungpa, but a few would go to watch when Reting was coming from Phembo Gola.   

