# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0209.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:**  , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང] was a well-known Geshe from Sera Jey College. In this interview, he details the Reting incident, especially how the soldiers were killed in Reting when they were guarding it. Thubden Thuwang describes what Reting told him, and about Reting's meeting with Taktra in Lhasa, and how Reting was actually strangled, not poisoned. Thubden Thuwang also provides details about how the English school was stopped in Lhasa.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0209_05/H_0209_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time, you said they were called one by one. How did that happen when those soldiers were killed in Reting?   

**A:**  I forgot to tell you that at that time the soldiers were asleep so were not attentive, they just bullied them and called them out. They decided to attack them when they were asleep and called them. The soldiers came out without even their belts on their chupa. They just walked out putting on their chupas.   

**Q:**  They didn't wear trousers?   

**A:**  They came out without pants or anything on. Then they started shooting them.   

**Q:**  Didn't the soldiers also have guns?   

**A:**  Yes, but they were not aware that they were getting attacked and didn't carry their guns. A few of them escaped. Most of them were killed without realizing what was happening.   

**Q:**  Please tell us again about in detail if you could remember when you met Reting Rimpoche before he left for Reting and after he met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, what did he say? This is very important.   

**A:**  Reting Rimpoche told me that on the 24th of the 11th Tibetan month, he went to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> in the Potala. He didn't have any reason for that, he just went to have an audience. When he walked in the room, he [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>] changed his face completely and Reting offered the Mendredensum. He [Taktra] didn't even ask him how he was keeping, like the normal courtesy talk [Tib. འཚམ་འདྲི] at all. He thought he didn't say the normal courtesy talk because they had a talk of returning the regency in three years, so there was no other reason except that he might have thought I will keep going on like that [Tib. མཇུག་གནོན]. Actually, Reting told me that he had no thought of requesting that on that day. Actually, Taktra had promised to return the regency in three years. No matter how important the recognition of the Dalai Lama was, I had already completed it. If I took the regency again, I couldn't do anything extra. So there was no need to be the regent again and I am very happy. I normally told my servant like this.   

**Q:**  How long did their meeting take place?   

**A:**  Reting didn't tell me about the time. If they didn't talk, then he wouldn't have stayed long.   

**Q:**  When did Reting go back?   

**A:**  He told me on the 27th of the 11th month.   

**Q:**  When did he go back?   

**A:**  He went back on the 8th of the 12th month.   

**Q:**  Didn't Reting send Gyagpönbu [Tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་བུ] to China?   

**A:**  It was the Döyöntsang who ran away to China, but Reting didn't send him purposely. I don't know about Gyagpönbu. Reting was definitely killed, but not by poison. When we went to Reting Labrang after Reting's body was brought there, there were 50 Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> monks doing the prayers there. One of the Lama Gyüpa told me t<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> when they put on the hat with five parts of the religious costume called [Tib. དབང་རྫས] on his head, they found that his neck joint was dislocated [Tib. སྐེ་ཚིགས་སློག] and people could turn his head wherever they wanted. Later, what I heard is that on the day he was killed, he wrote some note on a slate and told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> Phepo to deliver it to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> dzasa. It was given to the tsidrung nicknamed Phepo. Reting also gave a jade snuff-box and told Phepo that he had helped Reting and did lot of service for Reting here. Phepo in turn took the note to the Taktra Dzasa, but he threw it away. Anyway, Phepo told people that Reting screamed very severely. On that night, Gyagpön Kesang [Tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་སྐལ་བཟང] came along with Taktra Dzasa and definitely strangled him that night. That's what Phepo had heard. This Phepo talked personally to a few people. I heard from a third or fourth person who was the servant of the Jigyab Khembo who later was terminated.   

**Q:**  Before Reting was arrested, were both Nyungne Lama and Khardo Lama in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>?   

**A:**  He was also in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  So the letters were sent to each of them together when Reting Rimpoche was in Reting and the three of them were in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you see those letters?   

**A:**  No, I didn't see the letters, but I definitely know and heard that Reting first told them not to act at all. They insisted, so Reting then told them if you get up, then you cannot sit down. If you sit down, you cannot get up, so you must act. Moreover he said - as I told you the other day - democracy must now work. Otherwise, there is no way. So this was their determination. Later, probably he [Reting] had written to them, "Then go ahead and do whatever you can do."   

**Q:**  They wrote that, "if you don't allow us to do that, we have no alternative than to go away."   

**Q:**  Were those letters written by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>, Khardo and Nyungne or Khardo and Nyungne?   

**A:**  Though they discussed it and wrote it, but mostly it was Khardo and then Nyungne.   

**Q:**  Were they almost same age, Nyungne and Khardo?   

**A:**  Nyungne was older.   

**Q:**  Reting and Khardo, who is older?   

**A:**  Probably, Reting was 1-2 years older. Khardo and Reting were in the same class in the monastery.   

**Q:**  If they have democracy, Reting Rimpoche won't get any thing, so what would happen?   

**A:**  I don't know anything about this, but the democracy, whatever you call it, during the 13th Dalai Lama, they had some plan. So to continue that, that was their idea even before they resigned. Regarding the English School, there are two divisions among the government officials in Lhasa. One group was against and the other group worked in favor but the group in favor had less people. However, they had more influence and power and got it through. In the deeper inside, probably it was Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] who was one of the inner circles for making the democracy.   

**Q:**  Was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> there?   

**A:**  Probably, he was there and several others were also around. I won't dare to mention the other names. Many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> thought that once the school was started, the system and everything would have to be changed. They wouldn't establish just one school in Lhasa, but they would establish a lot of schools in various areas. This would gradually damage the feudal system. So the school needed to be stopped right now. Since they could not make any dent, they told the abbot, specially the Sera abbot, "You have to act. We can't do it. This will damage Buddhism. If you don't act now, you won't be able to act at all." So then they talked at the assembly meeting. It was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> abbot Ngagyen [Tib. ངག་རྒྱན] abbot who spoke very strongly against the school. Then the officials said, "as far as we are concerned, we are committed to doing this, it was approved by the regent and the approved document is here." The officials handed it over to the Sera Jey abbot and he was backed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> abbot. These two abbots went up to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> and the abbot told Taktra, "this is not possible because it will damage the religion." At that time, Taktra was very angry and this is one of the reasons why he hated Sera Jey.   

