# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0209.07   
##  : with Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐུབ་དབང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Thubden Thuwang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་མཐུ་དབང] was a well-known Geshe from Sera Jey College. In this interview, he discusses the Lhundrup [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ] Dzong incident, and how the abbot of Sera Jey escaped from Lhasa and how the government chased them and killed his chandzö. Also included are details of how the monks did not agree to Reting's appointment of the Töba Khembo as the abbot of the Sera Mey. There are details on the banishment of these monks.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0209_07/H_0209_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell me about the sources of the religious offerings [Tib. མཆོད་རྒྱུན] in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདན་ས་གསུམ] The three great monasteries around Lhasa: Drepung, Sera and Ganden">Big Three Monastic Seats</a>: Sera, Drepung and Ganden.   

**A:**  I heard that all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདན་ས་གསུམ] The three great monasteries around Lhasa: Drepung, Sera and Ganden">Big Three Monastic Seats</a> signed a pledge for doing the "loan investigation" [Tib. བུན་ཞིབ] and if they had any problems doing the investigating, all of three would stand together. They all put their seal on the pledge. Later, when the object of the loan investigation [means collection] included all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of the aristocrats, they could not carry out the investigation.   

**Q:**  What were they doing when they were investigating the loans?   

**A:**  This was for collecting the loans. At that time, the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> was Ngagyen [Tib. ངག་རྒྱན] and at that time, Reting had already resigned. Probably, at that time, the laji held a meeting together. I am not sure where they talked. When they had to go to do the loan investigation, probably many aristocrats got offended and Drepung and Ganden just left them in an appropriate way and didn't push much. At that time, there were about 40 some Sera Jey monks who were grain collectors [Tib. འབྲུ་འདེད] and grain stewards [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར] and they were divided and sent to many places to give loans and collect loans and calculate the interest [Tib. སྐྱེད་རྩིས] and look over things when they were doing the threshing. In the Phembo [Tib. འཕན་པོ] area, when they came to collect the loans, probably they couldn't collect the loans. Furthermore, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of Lhundrup Dzong [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང] happened to be the relative of Drunyichemmo Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང]. He didn't let them push the people and stopped the loan collectors. Therefore, the Sera monk called Chandzö Ngawang Samden [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསམ་གཏན] who was from the household of Didün Goranang [Tib. ལྡི་སྦྲུན་སྒོ་ར་ནང] and the monk called Gegö Namgyal. Chandzö Ngawang Samden was also a show-offish person. Then he came to ask the abbot of Sera Jey about the loan investigation. At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> abbot Ngagyen was very rash and thoughtless. When I first joined the monastery, he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> tshorampa [Tib. ཚོགས་རམས་པ] in the 2nd month and on the 4th of the 3rd month, he became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> abbot without becoming a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a>. So the ordinary monks were saying that it was too much that Reting did this. Reting Rimpoche told me that Traya Gelong [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ་དགེ་སློང] had saved the life of the former Reting who had misfortunes and ran away to China and Ngagyen is the rebirth of Traya Gelong. So he said that I have no choice but to appoint him the abbot to repay his kindness. So he just went around the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་ར] The special grove (&quot;dharma grove&quot;) in monasteries where monks formally met to practice debating.">chöra</a> holding incense as the symbol of being the gegö and then he held the ceremony of becoming the abbot on the next day. When the monks asked the abbot what shall we do since they couldn't collect the loans, the abbot said, "If you get the loan in a proper way, that's okay. If not, you can just kill him." This was his great mistake and the monk to whom he told that was also a rash and thoughtless <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> who was from a big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> and his household was also quite good. So the other grain stewards also kind of followed him and they went to Lhundrup Dzong. They discussed at first that they should talk tactfully, but if it didn't work out, then we can just kill him. When they went there and talked about that, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> probably stopped them and said that it would not be okay, not thinking that the monks will do something to retaliate. Then they hit him on his head with the clay tea pot along with the fire pan and also beat him with stones.   

**Q:**  I heard that they also hit him with a quarter piece of mutton?   

**A:**  Probably.   

**Q:**  Did they stab him?   

**A:**  They didn't stab him, but they stabbed and tore the cushion with a knife. At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> pretended to be dead after he got hit with the clay tea kettle and the fire pan. It was really monk's kind of work that they didn't check whether he really died or not, and they supposed they had killed him. On that very night, the dzong got up and ran away to Lhasa and submitted the petition.   

**Q:**  He died, right?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. He pretended to be dead.   

**Q:**  He died in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  At that time, he didn't die in Lhasa. He got treatment and recovered completely. After that, they gave a party and went to the picnic. After that, he got a new disease related to edema and died. Then they did the sky burial for him. Usually, people who were killed are not allowed to have a sky burial.   

**Q:**  At that time, it was said that Sera monks killed him and that Bumtang had submitted the petition and the monks should have heard about that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't kill him and the monks heard that the thing is messed up and Bumtang submitted the petition, but the monks didn't have anything to do until the verdict was issued. They were saying that this would not be good in the future.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. The monks didn't like the abbot very much because he was too rash. After that, nothing happened for a quite a while and then the government called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་སྣེ] The general name for all monastic officials.">lene</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> to attend a meeting for several times.   

**Q:**  Before that, they called the abbot Ngagyen, but he didn't come and left, right?   

**A:**  At that time, he didn't leave. Before that, the government said that the abbot had messed up things seriously, so the abbot should bring his yellow robe or chögö down.   

**Q:**  Did they say that they are going to demote the abbot?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Usually, when the government demotes a person, they would call them in person, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but the abbot would not go.   

**Q:**  So did they just send the chögö down?   

**A:**  Since things were already messed up, the monks held a meeting and discussed what to do and they said that the government in any case will punish the monks. Therefore, we should make war against the government. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>, there were eight big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and they held the meeting in Nachen Mitsen.   

**Q:**  What are the big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>?   

**A:**  Hamdong Jabral [?], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚྭ་བ] A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tshawa</a> [Tib. ཚ་བ], Lhopa [Tib. ལྷོ་པ]. Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ], Bathi [Tib. སྦྲ་ཐི]. The middle size <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> are: Denma [Tib. ལྡན་མ], Ngari, Gomde [Tib. སྒོམ་སྡེ]. And there were 6 mitsen.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> were there?   

**A:**  There were 16 and they were called the 16 Nachen. The 16 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> held the meeting in the hall on the top of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Did all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> managers attend the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. Among the most powerful speaker was the abbot and the next was Rebe Gyawu who was called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> gyawu. They discussed at the meeting that now things are messed up, so if the government wants us to hand over the abbot, we can't do that. So it would be better to fight. At that time, the government was telling them to hand over the abbot. One day, they held the meeting and at the meeting, the most powerful speaker was called by the nickname, "Famine Fat," Muge Gyagpa [Tib. མུ་གེ་རྒྱགས་པ] who was from the common house [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁང] Jirishar. He was poor and he used to sell butter and tea leaves. The reason why he was called this nickname was because he made the monks have famine [by charging a high price when selling the butter and tea] and he himself became fat [rich]. He was the most powerful representative in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧར་གདོང་ཁང་ཚན] The name of a residential unit (khamtsen) found in both Drepung and Sera Monasteries.">Hamdong Khamtsen</a> and he said at the meeting, "If the government wants us to hand over the abbot's chögö, I think it would be better to hand it over to them because he is only one person. If there would be trouble, it would be trouble between the government and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> and it would become big case." Then the abbot got agitated and he folded up his chögö and put it at the front of Muge Gyagpa and said, "If this does not harm the reputation of the 2800 monks of the Sera Jey College, there would be harm for me the abbot. So here is the chögö." Then he just left that place.   

**Q:**  He went back?   

**A:**  Yes, he went back to his shag. Then they handed over the chögö to the government. On that night, the abbot Nyagyen ran away to Lhasa to his house called Kedung and there he had relatives and one of them was called Chandzö Pema Dorje [Tib. པད་མ་རྡོ་རྗེ]. On the next day the abbot ran away from Kedung house in Lhasa with his relative and some other Triu Khamba. By that time, the government was just amused by his chögö and never thought that he would run away. After that, when they inquired about the abbot, he had already ran away and they chased the abbot.   

**Q:**  Who chased them?   

**A:**  The government sent many soldiers to chase him and later somewhere in Dome or Dotö, probably the soldiers almost caught them and they exchanged fire and I heard that the father of Döyont<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> [Tib. འདོད་ཡོན་ཚང] who was the First Family [Tib. ཁྱིམ་ཚང་དང་པོ] was one of the soldiers. He said the abbot ran away separately and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and 2-3 servants stayed together and they fought with the soldiers and the chandzö was killed on the spot, and they took his head and his hands. The abbot was able to escape and he disguised himself as a beggar and begged for food in the Chamdo area. So they didn't know that. They brought the head and the hands of the chandzö and arrested 2-3 monks and handed them over to the government. They said that this is the head and the hands of the abbot. When the abbot was begging in Chamdo, he said that there were soldiers near the bridge and he was very scared, but he went to beg for food from the soldiers and said, "Please give me some tsamba." The soldiers said, "Get the hell out of here! You beggar." [Tib. རྒྱུགས་ཀས་ཕར་སྤྲང་པོ་འདི] Then the abbot crossed the bridge and could escape. Once when the abbot was begging for food, Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] saw him and he looked at him and said, "These kind of pilgrims might not be good. There could be strange people among these people." The abbot said, at that time, I was trembling from fear. Then Lhalu didn't pay attention and left. After that, all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་སྣེ] The general name for all monastic officials.">lene</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> were called to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> and interrogated. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] was one of the investigators and he told the monks, "You monks are not allowed to go back to Sera. You <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a>uld go to the Potala. Then they knew that they were going to get imprisoned in the Potala and all of them changed their facial expression and they went to Potala. When they were going up to Potala, Rebe Gyawu asked Muge Gyagpa, "What do you think?" Then Muge Gyawu said, "Now, there is nothing to think about." Then Rebe Gyawu laughed and said, "Today, we walking up this way, aren't we? Later, when we come down they will drag down our corpses. There is nothing to think about." At that time, Muge Gyagpa thought that Rebe Gyawu was just acting tough. How could he be so determined? Actually, Rebe Gyawu kept his word and did whatever he said. He always acted very recklessly [Tib. ཡ་མེད] and didn't answer properly when they interrogated him and just said [an answer to a different question] that the size of the assembly hall of Sera is so big and there are such and such number of the monks. So he was lashed so severely that almost all of his flesh on his butt was gone. But he was determined to die and acted stubbornly. At that time, they left a soldier who was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> as the prison guard and he was treating Rebe Gyawu very harshly. Therefore, he told the soldier to go to buy a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf and gave him 7 sang and 5 sho for this. The soldier thought that a khata won't cost that much. So he can eat [skim] some from that and he gave him the khata but didn't give him the change. Normally, prisoners were not allowed to use [give] a khata when interrogated, but he used the khata. When he was asked where he got the khata, he said that the soldier gave me this khata and I didn't get this easily as it cost 7 sang and 5 sho. Therefore, they lashed the soldier and drove him out and stationed a new soldier.   

**Q:**  In the past, when Reting Rimpoche appointed the abbot, the monks didn't agree to it. Was that Ngagyen?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was the abbot called Töba Khembo Dromtö Chöndze [Tib. སྟོད་པ་མཁན་པོ་འདྲོམ་སྟོད་ཆོས་མཛད]?   

**A:**  He was the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> College. This was at the time of the Reting Regency.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  The Töba Khembo was the abbot and Reting said that he should be appointed as the abbot of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> and the monks disagreed. For that, Reting and Sera Mey confronted each other. The monks said we can't appoint an abbot position twice [from the sma college]. If we change the abbot, the replacement would have to come from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> College.   

**Q:**  So the Töba Khembo abbot was selected by turns from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨད] The Mey College of Sera Monastery.">Mey</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. If the Töba Khembo became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> abbot, the replacement would come from Sera Jey. If he would become the abbot of the Me while he was still the Töba Khembo it would a double abbot. So this would not be okay. At that time, Sera Mey said that we will put forward the candidates and then the regent can appoint one. Otherwise, it would not be right to appoint the abbot without having other candidates. At that time, Reting pressed quite powerfully and the said that the Töba Khembo should be appointed as the abbot of Me, but the Sera Mey didn't agree.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the monks hold a meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, if it did not work out [as they wanted], they were planning to make war against Reting.   

**Q:**  The monks held the meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they held the meeting of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> (College).   

**Q:**  There was no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞོན་ཁྲལ] The work obligations all young monks have to do for the monastery (it literally means &quot;youth tax&quot;).">shöndre</a> in the meeting, right?   

**A:**  I am not sure about that. But they had very good solidarity and whatever the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་སྣེ] The general name for all monastic officials.">lene</a> told them, the monks would do that. So the ordinary monks didn't need to attend the meeting.   

**Q:**  How did they mediate between these?   

**A:**  I have no idea how they mediated.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  This was just after Reting took the regency. Probably, it was in the Hog Year, or the Mouse Year.   

**Q:**  After that, Reting heard about the monk's disagreement for appointing the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and then he had to just leave it and probably, the Töba abbot was demoted and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨད] The Mey College of Sera Monastery.">Mey</a> abbot was appointed according to the wishes of the Mey tratsang.  

**Q:**  Why was he demoted?   

**A:**  Because there was the trouble. I heard from Kungö Shasur [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་བཤད་ཟུར] that the main instigator for the Töba Khembo was the servant of the Töba <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] Abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khembo</a> who later became the Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས] in Dharamsala. Later, I didn't know what the conclusion of that incident was. [See M. Goldstein. "A History of Modern Tibet: The Demise of the Lamaist State," 1989, pp. 350-353 for a discussion of this incident].  

**Q:**  At that time, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> almost confronted each other, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a danger that they might confront each other.   

**Q:**  After the monks involved in the Lhundrup Dzong incident were lashed, what did the monks do? Didn't they say anything? When the government told the monks to hand over the ringleaders, they didn't hand them over, but later when they said that they are going to talk and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་སྣེ] The general name for all monastic officials.">lene</a> went there. So the government deceived them, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they couldn't do anything because all of the better monks were arrested and the abbot had left. I think it was good what Muge Gyagpa said that we shouldn't do that. Otherwise, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> had about 2,000 303 English Carbines which were left there during the time of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la. If they would use them, there would have been a lot of casualties no matter what the result would have been. Some of the monks were arrested which harmed the reputation of the Sera Jey a little bit, but I think it was good that they didn't fight.   

**Q:**  Many monks were arrested?   

**A:**  At that time, they banished 14 monks including 2 monks from Mey.   

**Q:**  How were the monks from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨད] The Mey College of Sera Monastery.">Mey</a> involved?   

**A:**  There were 2-3 grain stewards from Sera Ngagpa and one from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་པོ་རག] A medium size khamtsen in Loseling College in Drepung Monastery.">Bombora</a> who were also among them when they went to collect the loans [in Lhundrup]. One of the Ngagpa monk was called Namdag Sherab [Tib. རྣམ་དག་ཤེས་རབ] was banished to Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན]. I heard t<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> he was a very tough person and when he was beaten, he didn't say a single word of apology. Rebe Gyawu was banished to Hor Bachen [Tib. སྦྲ་ཆེན]. They also lashed them [again[ for the departure lashing. Before that, Rebe Gyawu had been appointed as the Sera Damji [Tib. འདམ་སྤྱི] which was also called Jindzö [Tib. སྤྱི་མཛོད] but he hadn't held the ceremony. So he was wearing a new brocade vest and new boots and people could see the brocade vest under the white, inferior chupa. Rebe Gyawu knew many kudrak. So one of them gave him some liquor to drink before he was lashed. While he was kind of drunk, they lashed him, but not very severely. Then he got up and took off his hat and saluted to the investigators and said, "Thank you, you have made the decision today with the blind law of the government." At that time, the Lhundrup Dzong didn't get any punishment because it was supposed that the monks killed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> and the monks didn't get the chance to prove that he was not killed as even his body was done the sky burial.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> was saying that they didn't kill him, right?   

**A:**  Yes, if he was killed, it was not allowed to have the sky burial. Muge Gyagpa told me that he recovered from the beating and held a party, and after that he died from edema and his body was done via sky burial. I heard that Rebe Gyawu rode a red ox while praying to Drolma [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ]. When he reached the plain called Wobgyethang [Tib. འོ་བརྒྱལ་ཐང], his servants were waiting there with his horses and clothes and when he took off the white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>, he had many hundred <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> notes in his pouch. And then he put on his new traveling satin dress. He had a small cangue on his neck. So he wrapped a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> on that and he also carried a Mauser pistol and a silver amulet. He put on his eyeglass and rode a mule. When he told the soldiers to do this and that, the soldiers were afraid of him. When they reached Bontö, he was invited to a household to stay there and they almost forgot that he had had this misfortune because he came in an imposing manner and he also left in an imposing on the next day. When he reached Hor Bachen Dzong, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> came for his reception and the dzongpön didn't treat him like a prisoner. And when they gave him his arrival lashing, they just hit the lash on the ground. Then his cangue was also removed and he just stayed there doing his prayers. Later, Rebe Gyawu became the clerk of the dzong. When the Dalai Lama took power, all of the prisoners were released and they came back. At that time, the abbot of Tratsang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱེས] The name of one of the largest colleges in Sera Monastery. It was the college of Reting Rimpoche.">Jey</a> was called by the nickname <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> "Lump of Gold," Serdogdog [Tib. གསེར་རྡོག་རྡོག] and his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> was called Seril ("round gold ball) [Tib. སེར་རིལ]. When the banished monks went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོག] 1. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone. 2. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together.">tshog</a> (prayer assembly) again, the chandzö told them that you are not allowed to sit in the front row because you have been punished by the law of the government. So they felt kind of embarrassed and sad, because if they had to sit among the new monks because they were punished, they had been punished because of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> matter, not their individual matter. So they didn't go to attend the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཇ] The prayer session sponsored by the tratsang (college) at which tea was served to its monks who attended.">traja</a> (college's prayer assembly) and decided to wait until Rebe Gyawu arrived back. Then they heard that Rebe Gyawu had arrived and they took some tea and went to see Rebe Gyawu. They told him what had happened to them. Rebe Gyawu burst into laughter and said, "it doesn't matter. I will go ahead and you guys just follow me." On the next day, there was a traja and Rebe Gyawu wore the monks uniform of the Jindzö and rode his horse and went to the traja in an imposing manner and the others followed him. When he dismounted his horse on the stone floor, the abbot of the tratsang came down to receive him by pulling down his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟན] The upper part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">sen</a> from his shoulder and saluting him. Then Rebe Gyawu sat at the head of the front row and the others also followed him and sat on the front row and nobody said anything.   

**Q:**  When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> submitted the petition, Lhundrup Dzong was not dead, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, he had been beaten, but was not dead.   

**Q:**  Where did they do the sky burial for his body?   

**A:**  Maybe it was done in Lhalung [Tib. ལྷ་ལུང] Hermitage near Drepung or in Parikhug [Tib. བྲག་རི་ཁུག].   

**Q:**  When Rebe Gyawu and those monks were lashed, were the Sera monks very much worried about that?   

**A:**  Yes. They didn't feel happy.   

**Q:**  Why didn't the monks cause some disturbances if they were not happy?   

**A:**  Maybe they thought it would be useless to do so because their heads had been arrested. It would be useless to cause a disturbance without a good leader. At that time, I heard that Reting Rimpoche was in Reting and he cried like a child when he heard about the monks getting lashed and banished. He said I am grateful to my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and they had a such a bad misfortune. So I am very disappointed because I trusted [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>] and I had received religious teaching from him and I trusted him and handed over the regency to him. But he treated my tratsang so badly. So we can't tolerate this. Probably, he planned to come to Sera with about 30 people and fight. But his attendants didn't let him go. If Reting had come, there would be a serious disturbance because the tratsang had those weapons. I heard Reting Labrang also had about 1,000 automatic Mauser pistols [Tib. ལན་ཁྲུ་སྦག་སྦག] bought from Russia. At that time, the Reting Dzasa and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> prostrated while crying and stopped him from going to Sera, saying that misfortune had already happened there. If you go there, it won't be good. I heard that Reting got sick from that time. But after awhile, Reting said, "I had offered the regency in a strange manner. During my regency, there wasn't any trouble and my main duty was to recognize the incarnation of the Dalai Lama. I was able to do it without any mistake like taking a precious stone from the ocean. I don't want anything more than that. So I don't care whatever bad he does. I am not going to think about it and it is better to leave it like this." As soon as Taktra got the regency, he made an announcement saying that there will be no more traders of the Guger Labrang [Tib. སྐུ་སྒེར་བླ་བྲང] [regent] which had caused trouble to the miser. During Reting's [regency], he sent many traders, so he implied that this was wrong. Therefore, Reting's servants told Reting, "Look at this announcement. Probably it means that he [Taktra] is going to suppress Reting Labrang and it is not going to be good." Reting didn't pay attention to that and said, "Nothing will happen."   

**Q:**  How old was Khardo [Lama]?   

**A:**  He was older than me. Reting died when he was 37 years old. Khardo and Reting were born in the Dragon Year and they were also in the same grade. After that, Khardo and Nyungne told Reting that you should think about some plot [Tib. ངན་སེམས] regarding the political situation, but Reting insisted and told them not to do that. Finally, Khardo told Reting if you don't think about this, I can no longer stay like this. So I am not going to stay in Sera. I am going to go on a pilgrimage while begging for food and stay at Mount Kailash for retreat in a hut. Then Reting laughed and told Khardo, "The best thing is do not do any bad things. In case, you want to do it, then I don't have any objection. You will get a small hut to meditate. You don't need to worry about it." Later, it they plotted against the life of Taktra.   

**Q:**  Did Reting Labrang really plot against the life of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>?   

**A:**  Probably they did. They had talked about him returning the regency in three years.   

**Q:**  Did they really have that talk?   

**A:**  Yes, they definitely had that. Reting himself told me this.   

