# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0042.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Seysey [Tib. གསེར་གསེར]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** June 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Seysey [Tib. གསེར་གསེར]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 62  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1929  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Seysey [Tib. གསེར་གསེར] is a Khamba who was a leader in Chushigandru. In this interview, he talks about Targye Gomba, his homeland, how Targye Gomba monastery was completely destroyed and about how they fought with the Guomindang troops with support from the Tibetan Government. He also talks about how the Khambas came up to Lhasa and started Chushigandru under the leadership of Andrutsang Gombo Tashi, and how they went to Lhoka. He discusses the 15 day attack on Tsetang during which he was wounded and explains how Chushigandru broke up into smaller units and stationed soldiers in various places in Lhoka. Finally, he discusses how Namseling was sent by the Kashag to talk with the Khambas.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0042_01/H_0042_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Where is your homeland?   

**A:**  My homeland is in Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ] and the name of my household is Drushi Tshang [Tib. ?]. I am called Seysey.   

**Q:**  In which area was your homeland located? And what was its border demarcation in the past?   

**A:**  In the past, Derge Gamtog [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྐམ་ཐོག] was on this side of the Yangtze River [west side]. The areas above the river [west of it] belonged to the Tibetan Government and the areas below the river [east of it] belonged to the Guomindang.   

**Q:**  How far is Targye Gomba from the border?   

**A:**  If you go down [east] 6 miles from Targye Gomba, you will reach Beri [Tib. བེ་རི]. If you go up [west] 8 miles, you will reach Derge and some nomad places. If you go to the Sog area, it might be about ten miles but I haven't gone there. It is also the same distance if you go to the north [Tib. ཆང].   

**Q:**  In the Targye Gomba area, you had to pay the taxes to the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  We have to deliver a grain tax to the Guomindang according to the size of the land.   

**Q:**  Was there a Guomindang office for collecting taxes, like the dzong (district) in Tibetan areas?   

**A:**  The taxes had to be delivered to Ganzi [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས] which was the biggest dzong (district).   

**Q:**  The government of the Guomindang was in China, so were there like districts in the local areas?   

**A:**  In Ganzi, there was an officer called Sago [Tib. ས་འག྄ོ] which probably was like the district head. There were Chinese officials there. We had to go about 4 miles to Ganzi from our place to pay the taxes.   

**Q:**  Before the Communist Chinese came, you had to pay the taxes, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Before the Communist Chinese came, was there any trouble between the Tibetans and the Guomindang (GMD)?   

**A:**  Yes. There was a great deal of trouble with the GMD. They used force against us and our monastery was totally destroyed. We had the backing of the Tibetan Government.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the trouble?   

**A:**  As I told you before, there was a place called Beri and people from that area and we had a dispute and we used force against them. Their commander lost the battle so he took refuge with the GMD. The GMD backed him by sending troops and we were backed by the Tibetan Government. It was a long war and at the end we lost the battle and the monastery was totally destroyed. Not a stone was left untouched. We retreated to Chamdo and remained there for about two years. The Tibetan government negotiated and we were once more able to return.   

**Q:**  Was it in 1949 when the Chinese communist came to this area?   

**A:**  Yes, I think so. I was already in Lhasa at that time.   

**Q:**  What did you hear about the first arrival of the Chinese?   

**A:**  When they first arrived, they said that they were going to Tibet to liberate the people who were oppressed by the Lamas and higher ranking Government officials. They said we are going there to help these people and improve the country.   

**Q:**  Some say that the Chinese were very good when they first arrived?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. That is truly correct. They did not even tax us and the road construction was not yet begun. Up to our area, the GMD had made a road. They [the Communists] improved this road. They hired transport animals to move their goods and paid lavish transport fees. People always collaborated with them and people used to give them whatever they need.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  Then they marched to Chamdo and Chamdo surrendered.   

**Q:**  The Chinese were good in your area first and then what did they do? Did they want to make reforms or what?   

**A:**  Later the Chinese said that reforms were necessary. Monasteries and affluent people must share their land with the people. Then land reforms were carried out and then they said that the people do not require arms and they must surrender all the rifles they own. We did not surrender arms because we knew by that time that their plan was to destroy the monasteries and Lamas and affluent persons whose lives were at risk. We did not agree to these and from all direction small revolts started.   

**Q:**  When the revolt started, were you there?   

**A:**  No, I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When you were in Lhasa, did you get all the news from your area?   

**A:**  Yes. There were many people coming and going, and we heard all the news. There were many traders going to China and returning and they mentioned that reforms had started in China and many higher class people were executed and everything was being taken away. This news came to us and they were very true.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese asked [them] to surrender the arms, they first did not surrender, isn't it so?   

**A:**  We did not surrender our arms. For about 273 years we did not surrender. They agreed that we could keep the arms, but later they again asked us to surrender them. We said we were allowed to keep our arms but now you wanted us to surrender again. They said the previous officers were gone and now we want you to surrender all the arms.   

**Q:**  In 1950, when the Chinese first arrived, did any people collaborate with the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. here were many well-to-do people like Lo Nyendra [Tib. བློ་སྙན་གྲགས] who made Tsugdrang or some [Chinese] rank. You must be knowing Tasotsang Künga Lodrö [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་བློ་གྲོས] who is now in Mussoorie. Tasotsang is the one who previously lived in Darjeeling. Yes, that's him. He was also a Tsugdrang. He worked for a long time and he would be able to tell you much more. He knows your father.   

**Q:**  Is he still living?   

**A:**  Yes, he is still living. His elder brother was Taso [Tib. ?] Chöndze. Their daughter was married to Ngari Rimpoche. He would be able to say a lot. They did not volunteer to work, but they were pushed to work with salary. They did not ask for salary, but they were forced to take it. The main office was at Ganzi and he often had to go there.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese indoctrinate people and did they set up a Women's Association and a Youth League?   

**A:**  No. They do not have these.   

**Q:**  When trouble first began in your area, were there many people from that area living in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, there were many.   

**Q:**  How did Chushigandru start?   

**A:**  They revolted against the Chinese and many people escaped to Lhasa. The Chinese were saying that the Khambas were sowing dissension between the Chinese and Tibetan Governments and they threatened to send the Khambas back to their homeland. The Khamba leaders got together to discuss this issue and had agreed to leave Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were the Chinese suspicious of the Khambas in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, very much so. They were afraid that they might start trouble in the city.   

**Q:**  Did they send spies to the various houses?   

**A:**  There were many spies looking at how things were going on.   

**Q:**  Last time you said something about...in the evening what was that?   

**A:**  Sometime during that period, the Chinese said that the troops are going to exercise at night and they will fire their rifles here and there, but you should not be concerned about this. You should leave your doors open. We will also be coming into the houses. Thereafter, the exercises took place. They were firing in the streets and troops were massing everywhere in the streets. This is the real and true fact. Then the Khambas were alerted and they thought that this was preparation for an attack.   

**Q:**  How did the Chushigandru establish in Lhasa and were there some meetings called?   

**A:**  It was first started at Andrutsang's home. From Targye Gomba's an able man named Ngadru [Tib. ངག་དྲུག] was there for discussions. Andru said that judging from all sides, it looks there going to be trouble and before we face any trouble it would be better if we get out of the city. This made the Khambas leave Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How did you first get into the [Chushigandru] organization?   

**A:**  When everyone left for the South [Lhoka], we also joined them.   

**Q:**  How did they leave Lhasa, I believe so many left in one day?   

**A:**  Yes, that is correct [that they all left]. They all left in batches taking with them their rifles and ponies. Those who did not have rifles and ponies, they bought them and left. In about a two month time period, everyone got out of the city.   

**Q:**  Weren't there people who stayed back also?   

**A:**  Yes, many had stayed back also.   

**Q:**  Last time you mentioned about a senriy divine lottery about whether to leave or stay back. To whom did they ask to do the senriy?   

**A:**  The question whether to remain in the city or vacate the city was made to the Jowo Rimpoche [statue] via a divine lottery (senriy). It was decided to leave when the senriy said go.   

**Q:**  When you and others left, where did you go?   

**A:**  We left and went to Drigutang [Tib. གྲི་གུ་ཐང] where the headquarters were already established. When all were assembled there, Andru decided to send half of the fighters to Lhasa and half to remain at that place.   

**Q:**  How many groups were there in Chushigandru?   

**A:**  There were about 30 odd groups.   

**Q:**  Where were the different groups from?   

**A:**  They were from Minyag [Tib. མི་ཉག], Tawu [Tib. རྟའུ], Dongpa, Ganzi, Beri, Targye Gompa, Lingtsang [Tib. གླིང་ཚང], Derge, Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ], Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས], Baba [Tib. འབའ་པ], Litang [Tib. ལི་ཐང], Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་འཕྲེང], Drawu [Tib. ?], Chamdo, and there were many.   

**Q:**  Before arriving in Lhasa, there was no Chushigandru, is it correct?   

**A:**  I have not heard about any.   

**Q:**  What happened in Lhoka? Was Andru [Gombo Tashi] the leader?   

**A:**  There were many leaders. Each [regional] group has its own leader. All the men were volunteers and no one was conscripted and given payment. All the leaders were equal and of the same rank.   

**Q:**  What did you do there?   

**A:**  I was in-charge of the company who would attack Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] which was the only area where Chinese troops were present [south of the Yarlungtsangpo River]. So we went and attacked the Chinese there.   

**Q:**  Was there a battle there? When?   

**A:**  Yes, and many were killed or arrested [It started on 22 October 1958]. I was also wounded and had to lay in bed for two months. Fighting lasted for about 15 days, but we could not break through. A month later, there again was fighting that lasted for about a month. Chinese were throwing hand grenades while we had none, and we were throwing water and urine bottles. Both sides suffered many casualties.   

**Q:**  What arms did you have on your side?   

**A:**  Our arms were very poor. Some had 303 rifles, Pamali rifles, bora, etc. We had about 5 different kinds of rifles and ammunitions were scarce - some had about 100 rounds, but others had only 5 to 10 rounds.   

**Q:**  Later on, was there some help from U.S.A., and what happened to it?   

**A:**  While I was there I heard that the U.S. had dropped rifles, and that was correct. They did drop arms. There were rifles that took 303 English Carbine ammunition, a few guns, and a few Sten-guns. There were not many - maybe about 100.   

**Q:**  So it did not help much?   

**A:**  No. Instead of helping, it brought the Chinese out in strength. There were a large number of people who revolted against the Chinese at a [place called Jara Pembar [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར] where much more arms supply were dropped. Before distributing all the arms, the Chinese attacked and they lost all the arms and the territory [Note: He is talking about a drop made after the Dalai Lama had fled Tibet and Lhasa was lost.].   

**Q:**  How were the groups of people stationed in Lhoka?   

**A:**  They were all merged together and did not remain as separate entities. There was one group at Gongkar Dzong [Tib. གོང་དཀར་རྫོང], one group at Tranang [Tib. གྲ་ནང], there were groups each at Chongye [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས] Monastery, Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི], the Lukhang Drukha [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་གྲུ་ཁ] ferry site, and in many areas. There were 200/500 fighters at each place. Andru and his men left for the northern area in order to fetch arms and ammunition from Shang Ganden Chöngor monastery [Tib. ཤངས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. Their aim was attack towards Lhasa, but the Chinese having motor roads to get supplies, their effort to took many months. [Note: Their aim actually was to return to the main headquarters in Lhoka after getting the guns].  

**Q:**  The Tibetan Government could not support openly, but was it supporting you secretly?   

**A:**  No. There was no support of any kind, but there was moral support from everywhere. But nobody dared to come out openly.   

**Q:**  Didn't Tibetan government troops also join the Chushigandru?   

**A:**  Yes, but they were not sent by the government. They came as volunteers. Many had come. Then Namseling and Khenjung Ngöshi [Samjola] came to negotiate with the Khambas. They said that the Khambas should now give up the struggle and return to their homeland, and that if they did this there would be no accusations for their past deeds.   

**Q:**  When they first arrived, who did they talk to?   

**A:**  I was at Chongye when they arrived. Alo Dawa from Litang and Bachu from Derge sent a messenger to call us for talks and altogether about 36 men rode down to their place while they were coming up. We met in between. They said, Oh Seysey is here. We didn't know that you were here. If we had known, we would have asked you to come. They said that they were sent from Lhasa to ask you not to fight, but to negotiate and wanted to know how things were going on and where was the headquarter of Chushigandru. I replied that it was very good that you had come but there was no way to give up the fight. Our headquarter is located at Tsöna and Baba Gen Yeshe [Tib. རྒན་ཡེ་ཤེས] was there with many other leaders. Then they went there for discussions.   

**Q:**  Did they have discussions with them?   

**A:**  Yes, they discussed and then they stayed back at the headquarter and started working seriously with Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  Were the two officials planning to stay back [in Lhoka] from the beginning?   

**A:**  Yes. They told me when they first met me that they were sent by the Government to negotiate, but we do not plan to return to Lhasa. Moreover, we met Dalai Lama before our departure and told him that we are leaving for the Lhoka and the Dalai Lama said take care and try to save your lives. It was now impossible to return, so they stayed with us and took up major responsibility.   

**Q:**  How long did they remain?   

**A:**  They stayed about 7 or 8 months. We were [moved to] at Lhagyari, and they did work there.   

