# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0015.01   
##  : with Yeshe Khechok [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁས་མཆོག]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Darjeeling, India  
**Date of Interview:** ca. 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rinpoche  
**Name:** Yeshe Khechok [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁས་མཆོག]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca60  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Yeshe Khechok was a well-known dobdo monk in Loseling College. In this interview, he discusses the Dobdo's tobtsang [Tib. ལྟོ་ཚང་སྐྱིས་སྡུག] club and life as a dobdo, including the sport competitions, the thugpa serving in the prayer assemblies, the fights between dobdos, and the banning of the toptsang by the Gyerong Abbot of Loseling.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0015_01/M_0015_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In the past, you were in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When we were in the monastery, there were four monks in your family?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The first was the ex-khembo of the Deyang College; his name is Sipo right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was the second?   

**A:**  The second one was Deyang Gusho [Tib. སྐུ་གཤོགས].   

**Q:**  Is he your relative?   

**A:**  Yes. Another one was Khyenrab [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ] who has the good voice in chanting (dönsang [Tib. འདོན་བཟང]) in the tratsang (college). He and Nyare Amcho [Tib. ཉག་རེ་ཨ་མཆོད] were the same period as me and all together we had 4.   

**Q:**  You were the smallest, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did you enter the monastery?   

**A:**  I entered the monastery when I was 4 years old.   

**Q:**  How did you come to Loseling?   

**A:**  At first, I entered in Deyang at the age of 4 and I was there for one year. Khyenrab [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ] has taken me to Loseling.   

**Q:**  So at that time, Khyenrab is already in Loseling, right?   

**A:**  Khyenrab was a senior monk of Loseling and he entered long time ago.   

**Q:**  He is a senior monk, but who was the khembo?   

**A:**  When I first joined the monastery, the khembo is Lhopa [Tib. ལྷོ་པ].   

**Q:**  At that time, Sipo khembo was in Deyang right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did Khyenrab come to Loseling when his brother, Sipo khembo, was in Deyang?   

**A:**  That was because we were the miser of Namgyal [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] Tratsang and we were from Tsena [Tib. tshal sna ?] Village.   

**Q:**  Where is Tshena located?   

**A:**  Tsena is down there on the other side of the Ramagang [Tib. ར་མ་གང] ferry port and the lower part of the Shungsep [Tib. shug gsep]   

**Q:**  Was that a chöshi (monastic estate) of Namgyal Tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes. From our village, we had to pay the yearly tsamba salary to the monks of the Namgyal Monastery.   

**Q:**  The whole village belonged to Namgyal Monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, the whole village belonged to Namgyal Monastery. There were 175 monks in Namgyal Monastery and we had to pay three bo [Tib. འབོ] of tsamba for each monk in a year.   

**Q:**  In a year?   

**A:**  Yes, in a year.   

**Q:**  Did they collect grain from every family?   

**A:**  No. They didn't have to collect the grain. Each family would bring about 50 or 100 bo according to the size of their fields.   

**Q:**  Did they lump all the tsamba together?   

**A:**  No. we had to take them by ourselves. Before we made the tsamba, we have to clean up the grain very well, so it should be without a single stone in it. We separated just the white barleys and soaked it in hot water and then roasted it and made tsamba. When they checked whether the tsamba was good enough to pay for the monks, they would make a torma (a religious offering) and keep it over night. On the next day, if there no crack appeared on it, it would be qualified for distribution among the monks.   

**Q:**  So this was the rule of Namgyal Monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you have to hand over the tsamba to the nyerpa?   

**A:**  No, You had to go to the tratsang (monastery) and they would call every family's name and monks would come to get the tsamba.   

**Q:**  If you belonged to Namgyal Monastery, you had to do the monk's servant work, trayog [Tib. གྲྭ་གཡོག] and you had to join in Namgyal Monastery, but you didn't join Namgyal Monastery so how did you get to join Drepung?   

**A:**  No, I was pulled up by my relatives.   

**Q:**  Did you have to get the permission from Namgyal Monastery to join in Drepung?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have to ask for the permission, there were many people like that. Everyone could go by themselves.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have to get the chödrö, a special permission for being a monk?   

**A:**  Yes, we have to have the chödrö from the Namgyal Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have pay one tranka for that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you do after you came to Loseling from Deyang?   

**A:**  Then, I lived in Loseling permanently.   

**Q:**  Did your home pay all the expenses for you?   

**A:**  Yes, my home would send all the expenses, if not I didn't have anything.   

**Q:**  Did your home send you enough?   

**A:**  Yes, they would send everything.   

**Q:**  Then you were very happy,right?   

**A:**  Yes, because it was very enjoyable. We didn't go to get gye (alms) and we were wandering around everywhere. I sent poor monks to get water for me and I paid one sang or ten tranka for one bucket of water.   

**Q:**  Who fetched the water?   

**A:**  There were some poor monks. Poor things! Sometimes I gave them one small bag of tsamba because I had plenty of tsamba. From home they would deliver tsamba, meat, yak dung and tea leaves.   

**Q:**  Did they usually deliver them?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Would you send message when it had almost run out?   

**A:**  Yes, as soon as I send a message, they would send them immediately. In winter, they would come to drop the things while they were coming for the shopping to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did they sometimes deliver them, even you haven't send messages?   

**A:**  Yes, they would deliver when they come to Lhasa for shopping. I usually go home and stay there during the summer.   

**Q:**  When you came to Loseling from Deyang would you have to withdraw from the kyidu (the monastic organization) or not?   

**A:**  I had to withdraw from the Deyang kyidu.   

**Q:**  What did you do when you withdrew from Deyang?   

**A:**  There was nothing else to do, but just withdraw from the Deyang kyidu.   

**Q:**  To whom would did you have to tell this?   

**A:**  We had to tell the Deyang's gegö (disciplinary official). (disciplinary official). There were no khamtshen (residence halls) in Deyang?   

**A:**  Didn't Deyang have khamtsen?   

**A:**  No. There were no khamtshen in Deyang and Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] Colleges.   

**Q:**  When you withdraw from Deyang, did you have to tell the gegö that I am going to Loseling?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you have to say it while pulling down your shawl from the shoulder as a sign of respect [Tib. གཟན་སྐྱུར་ཕབ]?   

**A:**  Yes, we have to pull down the shawl and to pay one tranka and a khata. And the gegö asked me why do you want to move to Loseling ? I just told him that because I have relatives in Loseling. At that time, I was just 5 or 6 years old, so I didn't know much things to say. My relatives came and took me away.   

**Q:**  Would Loseling ask you why you withdrew from Deyang?   

**A:**  No, they never asked like that because there were too many of us.   

**Q:**  In Tsethang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] [khamtsen] did you give the donggo (ritual ceremony) for the chöndze status?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. I was just an ordinary monk.   

**Q:**  Then, did you have to do the shöndre (young monk's work tax)?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to do the shöndre.   

**Q:**  You must have hired somebody to do the shöndre for you?   

**A:**  I hired someone.   

**Q:**  Did you remember what kinds of shöndre there were in Tsethang (khamtsen)?   

**A:**  Oh my God, if the tratsang (college) required some monks to collect number of large skin-bags of butter from a place, they would send a message to the khamtsen and then by seniority we had to go.   

**Q:**  If the tratsang required something to be collected/brought, then would the chabril (monastic official) or the nyertsang (monastic steward) send the message?   

**A:**  The message would be sent from the chabu (monastic manager). Whatever the chabu needed, they will tell the gegö and he would tell the chabril. Then the chabril would tell the Chabu's assistant (chabyog [Tib. ཆབ་གཡོག]), then the chabyog would go to the khamtshen to deliver the message.   

**Q:**  For example, if the nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང], the steward of the storehouse, needed something, did they have to ask the chabu?   

**A:**  The nyertsang had to ask chabu whatever they needed.   

**Q:**  What if bungdzö (a type of steward) needed something, who did he have to ask to?   

**A:**  The bungdzö also needed to ask the chabu for whatever the college (tratsang) needed. Then the chabu would order the gegö.   

**Q:**  Did the Bungdzö have the right to order the gegö?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**Q:**  Are you sure about that?   

**A:**  They would not order except if they have certain reasons.   

**Q:**  For example, if the bungdzö received many skin-bag of butter, then did the bungdzö have to ask the chabu to send some monks to collecting those or was the bungdzö allowed to directly ask the gegö?   

**A:**  It was okay if the bungdzö directly asked the gegö.   

**Q:**  Then it was not necessary to ask the chabu?   

**A:**  Anyway, bungdzö and chabu were two different officials. Both of them could give orders to the gegö.   

**Q:**  Then, both of them could order the gegö, so the bungdzö did not have to ask the chabu?   

**A:**  No, they didn't need to ask.   

**Q:**  Now it is clear. Then when the chabril got the message, what would he do?   

**A:**  He would tell the chabyog, "you have to go to such and such khamtsen and tell them the tratsang needed some monks to collect such things like skin bag loads of rice." Then we had to go wherever they sent us such as to Lhasa or to do work in the tratsang, or work in the chöra. Wherever we worked, they would look after us. When the khamtshen gegen got the message, he would tell the monks whose turn it was to work then. When it was our turn, if we could carry the item, we would go but if it was too heavy for us, we would hire somebody.   

**Q:**  When you hired somebody, how much did you have to pay? I don't think there was a rate; it depended on your willingness.   

**A:**  Yes, there was absolutely no rate.   

**Q:**  You didn't study pecha?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  What prayers have you memmorized?   

**A:**  I have memmorized Mönlam Namgye [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་རྣམ་བརྒྱད] which is the prayer text.   

**Q:**  Did you have to recite the tratsang's chöjö [Tib. ཆོས་སྤྱོད], the special prayers recited in the tratsang.   

**A:**  Yes, I did. And I used to recite a little bit of Ngöntok Gyen [Tib. མངོན་རྟོག་རྒྱན]   

**Q:**  You had to recite it in the tratsang.   

**A:**  Yes, everyone could recite those.   

**Q:**  You didn't join the dönsangnga [Tib. འདོན་བཟང་བ] (the monks who have good voices in chanting)?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  Who was your guarantor monk (khagthek gegen [Tib. ཁག་ཐེག་དགེ་རྒན])?   

**A:**  My khagthek gegen was one of my older brothers. In our khamtsen, it would be okay for the guarantor gegen and the food giving gegen, (the toter gegen [Tib. ལྟོ་སྟེར་དགེ་རྒན]) to be done by one gegen (monk). If you got separated from the (monk) shag (household) (you were living in) then you had to search for a guarantor gegen and you have to find food by yourself.   

**Q:**  What was the guarantor gegen's responsibility after you have separated from the shag?   

**A:**  He had to take the whole responsibility of the gidru's (young monk's) behavior and if the gidru did something like stealing, fighting, and telling lies, the guarantor gegen would have to go to the sheyngo.   

**Q:**  When you have acted disorderly or carefree [Tib. སྣང་བ་སྐྱིད་པོ], before you entered in the dobdo's club (tobtsang [Tib. ལྟོ་ཙང]). Would the guarantor gegen say something?   

**A:**  He wouldn't say anything because he was related to me. Due to the kindness of our parents, there was no worry about anything, so we just enjoyed and lived carefree; we didn't do anything bad.   

**Q:**  When we were in the monastery, there was a duty such as debate in the tsog (monastery prayer assembly) called tshoglang [Tib. ཚོགས་ལང] and one had to give the tonggo called rigdra [Tib. རིགས་གྲྭ]. Did you have to do like that?   

**A:**  In our khamtsen, except for the pechawa (scholar monks), the others didn't have to do anything. Because there were not many monks in our khamtshen, I had to be the khamtshen gegen when I was just 14 years old.   

**Q:**  How many monks were there in Tsethang?   

**A:**  There were only 300 monks when I was a monk.   

**Q:**  Of those, how many monks were residing in the monastery permanently?   

**A:**  There were probably about 200 monks residing permanently. The rest of them were working in different places. Some of them would go to Tö [Tib. སྟོད] for trading, and some went to the shiga (estates) to work, and there were ngünyer [Tib. དངུལ་གཉེར] and jatsü [Tib. ཇ་ཙུལ]. jatsü is a position some monks have to do in Loseling but not in Gomang]. There were 30 people in the tsondu (council/assembly). Because of that, the turn of the khamtsen gegen came on me when I was just 14 years old.   

**Q:**  What did you do before you were khamtsen gegen?   

**A:**  We had to do the shöndre before taking the duty of khamtsen gegen. After you completed khamtsen gegen, you would be in the a monastic position called bashara [Tib. བར་ཤར་བ].   

**Q:**  In Nyare khamtsen, after being the nyerpa you would be in the bashara, and then you have to be khamtshen gegen. It was different. After one completed doing the [caretaker of] the Tara Temple, (the Drölma Lhakhang [Tib. སྒོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང]) you would be nyerpa (steward), right?   

**A:**  We had to do shöndre until we became the khamtshen gegen. After that, you would be bashara, then ngünyer and jatsü and grain steward (drunyer [Tib. འབྲུ་གཉེར]).   

**Q:**  Who would appoint those positions?   

**A:**  The tsondu (council/assembly) would do the senriy (divine lottery) in front of the Shri Devi [Tib. ལྷ་མོ] and appoint them.   

**Q:**  The tsondu would choose the names? Wasn't it done turn by turn.   

**A:**  The Jatsü and nyerpa would be three year term and after that it would go turn by turn.   

**Q:**  Was it above the khamtshen gegen and older?   

**A:**  Yes, it was.   

**Q:**  Have you done ngünyer and jatsü?   

**A:**  No, I had just completed khamtshen gegen and I never did ngünyer and jatsü.   

**Q:**  Did your brother do it?   

**A:**  No, my brother was dönsangnga.   

**Q:**  Did dönsangnga have any special things?   

**A:**  Yes, the dönsangnga didn't have to do anything.   

**Q:**  What about the pechawa?   

**A:**  They didn't need to do shöndre.   

**Q:**  Didn't the dönsangnga have to do shöndre?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. There were just 2 or 3 dönsangnga.   

**Q:**  Was he the khamtsen dönsangnga or the tratsang dönsangnga?   

**A:**  He was tratsang dönsangnga. There wouldn't be any dönsangnga in the khamtshen.   

**Q:**  Was it because there were just 2 or 3 dönsangnga, that they didn't have to do the jatsü and the nyerpa?   

**A:**  Yes, if you did not do dönsangnga, then they would give you all the jobs.   

**Q:**  Did the dönsangnga have to be khamtshen gegen?   

**A:**  Yes, they had to.   

**Q:**  How did you join in the tobtsang (the dobdo's club/organization)?   

**A:**  I joined the tobtsang before I got my turn for the khamtsen gegen. At that time, I was 12-13 years old.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for you to join the tobtsang?   

**A:**  Being a dobdo and carefree and wearing good clothing, and other dobdo of tobtsang teased [Tib. སྙད་བརྐོ] me a lot.   

**Q:**  How many tobtsang were there in Loseling?   

**A:**  There were three tobtsang; the first were the ones who join the competition of which the jump was main item (chogyag [Tib. ཕྱོགས་རྒྱག]). Under that, there were two other groups.   

**Q:**  These two groups were supposed to be the future candidates?   

**A:**  Yes, for example, if your monks are going to compete with Sera, if the Sera called 15 monks and if there were weak jumpers among your monks, I will pull up some better jumpers from my group to help you.   

**Q:**  Then the tobtsang kids teased you?   

**A:**  Yes, they teased me because I was wearing good clothing. Our khamtsen usually had many young monks who were agreeable for being here. In summer, we went for picnics with toptsang kids. They told us to join them because I was good in sports [Tib. རྩེད་མོ]. I said no because the tobtsang has very strict discipline. They deceived me and said, "it doesn't matter, if you are good in sports there are special privileges." So they took me to Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  You mean in Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Yes, there is a platform for jumping in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  I don't know that; where was that?   

**A:**  It was inside the wall of Norbulinga in the regiment.   

**Q:**  How did that happened?   

**A:**  The soldiers were like dobdo and the gusung (Bodyguard) regiment and Drepung were friendly to each other. Sera and Trapchi were friends. This was because of the situation of the locations. The gusung regiment and Sera did not get along well.   

**Q:**  Did the gusung regiment give some space for jumping behind their regiment?   

**A:**  Yes, they gave us the space, when toptsang was preparing to make food they would call young dobdo to the stoves. At that time, the dobdo didn't have to take anything else except a wooden bowl and a small bag of tsamba, because we had many sponsors. They would tell us that you have come here today, now you have to enter the tobtsang and there were 25 of us and we joined the tobtsang. Then we have to give one khata and one tranka to the senior of the tobtsang. The tobtsang had a large box for keeping money and documents. We had to take off the monks lower garment, shamthab [Tib. གཤམ་ཐབ] and wear only the vest and the underpants and stand in a line. After all of us gathered, we had to recite the prayer for burning incense called Namdag Chöku [Tib. རྣམ་དག་ཆོས་སྐུ] and then they would serve the tea. The seniors would advise us saying that it is nice that you all are here, but all of you must think about how "the enemy called Sera Je [Tib. བྱེས] is like a tiger opening its mouth. Therefore, we have to be like a wild yak and defeat them" [Tib. དགྲ་སེར་བྱེས་པ་སྟག་ཁ་ལངས་འདྲ་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་པ་དེ། འབྲོང་གིས་མཉེད་པ་ནང་གཞིན་མནེད་དགོས]. If you have any trouble, the tobtsang in common would help you. You should not fight, in case you have to fight you would never be alone, the tobtsang will support you, so you shouldn't be scared. Don't provoke them, but if they provoke you, you are not allowed to except defeat. If you except defeat in fighting, you would get a penalty from your tobtsang. If you have any problem, the tobtsang will take care of you. Now, we became members of the tobtsang.   

**Q:**  What did you have to do after you got admitted into the tobtsang?   

**A:**  We had to practice every month.   

**Q:**  Did you feel yourself that you belonged to the tobtsang and felt proud of it?   

**A:**  Yes, we felt proud and we had to practice the sports for many years. We had to practice on alternative days for a long time. During the winter, we had to practice early in the morning and in the evening; twice a day everyday.   

**Q:**  How long did it take when you practiced sports in the morning?   

**A:**  We have to go just before day break.   

**Q:**  All the members of the toptsang, 25 or 26 persons would be coming for the practice?   

**A:**  Yes, they would. They had made a drain with falling water from the rock and we had to take a bath in winter.   

**Q:**  So that was before daybreak?   

**A:**  First you have to take a shower and the belt of your underpants would freeze and you had to run on sand which reached up to the waist. It was very hard and everybody was sweating a lot.   

**Q:**  If you couldn't run in the sand, did they beat you?   

**A:**  No, they didn't, but the seniors would be sitting in a corner watching us.   

**Q:**  What if one couldn't run in the sand?   

**A:**  Then they just have to try it again.   

**Q:**  Where would the seniors be sitting?   

**A:**  The senior would be watching from the corner and he would teach us how to run and how to lift up our feet. Some of them would put sand in the monk's boot called resom [Tib. རས་ཟོན] and practice running.   

**Q:**  That was the practice for jumping right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the evening at the place called Nam Thangkhuk [Tib. གནམ་ཐང་ཁུག] which was located in the orchard called Phodrang Jangsep [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་ལྕང་གསེབ], there was a platform there that was almost two storys high where a person would stand down and stretch his arms upwards and a person would stretch his arms from the top and both the hands would hardly touch. You have to be able to jump from that height on the pile of sand. If you couldn't jump on that sand, you will land on the hard soil and few people broke their legs but not many people.   

**Q:**  Then, if you break your leg, you wouldn't be able to do anything?   

**A:**  The Tobtsang would be taking care of you if you had broken your leg. Because the platform was so high, when you land on the hard soil your heel will get kind of smashed and then we had to take rest for 2 or 3 days.   

**Q:**  Was there any way of recovering it from it?   

**A:**  Yes, it would be recovered if they massage with warm oil.   

**Q:**  Where did you practice dokor [Tib. རྡོ་སྒོར], throwing round rocks?   

**A:**  Dobdos had 12 different kinds of sports.   

**Q:**  Let's count those 12 different sports starting from the 4 different jumps.   

**A:**  Four round of jumps [Tib. མཆོང་སྐོར], 2 Kyangdo, [Tib. རྐྱང་རྡོ] throwing stone, 2 mando [Tib. མན་རྡོ], throwing stones while lifting arms, 2 gyabdo [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ] throwing stones from behind, 2 kupdo [Tib. rkup rdo] throwing stone from back side while standing on the platform on your big toes.   

**Q:**  Where did you have to go to practice dokor?   

**A:**  We would practice all 12 sports. When we practice, first we practice the 4 jumps and then start the kyangdo. They wrapped the rock with a peace of cloth and put it on the platform and serve a wooden bowl of tea to us which is called kyangja [Tib. བརྐྱངས་ཇ].   

**Q:**  Was the rock very precious? From where did they get the rock?   

**A:**  We have to make it.   

**Q:**  Were there people making this rock?   

**A:**  Yes, we have to order the mason specially to make it, and the rock should be hard and heavy. There were some rocks that were small but very heavy. If there were 20 people who came for practicing, we would be divided in two groups of 10 each and we would bet.   

**Q:**  What did they bet?   

**A:**  They bet to serve tea and the food where dough is mixed with melted and dry cheese and sugar (called Baktsha Marku [Tib. བག་ཚ་མར་ཁུ]) was served. Mostly they bet Baktsha Marku. The one who lost, had to prepare a large house where the food would be served. When they bet tea, we called the betting tea gyenja [Tib. རྒྱན་ཇ]. It should be very thick with lots of butter in it. If you put a trangga garpo on the grease of the tea, it should not sink. Some people would be nasty and put a trangga garpo on the grease and if it would sink in the tea they would make you put some more butter in it. It was a very happy time and lots of fun, but we didn't get any education.   

**Q:**  Did they treat the toptsang kids with leniency when the tratsang would have to punish them?   

**A:**  Yes, they did that a little bit.   

**Q:**  Did the officials treat you a little bit nicer?   

**A:**  Yes, they did, If not, it would be difficult if the kids misbehaved because there were about hundred toptsang kids.   

**Q:**  In the Loseling tobtsang, there were almost 100 kids right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were more then 100.   

**Q:**  In the tobtsang in Loseling, from every khamtshen the monks would come to join it, right? Were there monks from the far away places like Khampas?   

**A:**  Yes, except for those from Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] and Minyak [Tib. མི་ཉག].   

**Q:**  The monks from Triu wouldn't join in the tobtsang because their discipline was too strict, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So why didn't the Minyag monks join?   

**A:**  Most of the monks were pechawa and even though they were tragyün (monks from far away), they wouldn't join in the tobtsang. There were monks from Nyarel [Tib. ཉང་རལ] who joined in the tobtsang. From all the khamtsen there were about 3-4 monks joining and there was also some from Gyerong [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང].   

**Q:**  Were there monks from Phara [Tib. ཕ་ར] Khampa?   

**A:**  No, there weren't.   

**Q:**  Were there any from Gowo [Tib. གོ་བོ]?   

**A:**  Yes, there were 4 monks from Gowo. They were nicknamed the "thin chöndze" (Chöndze Kampo [Tib. སྐམ་པོ]) and they were from Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did the tobtsang help you if you become poor and you don't have anything to eat?   

**A:**  Yes, they will help you. For example, in summer we often go for picnics. The poor persons didn't have to bring anything and the tobtsang would give them everything.   

**Q:**  This was given from the toptsang in common?   

**A:**  Yes, all the foodstuffs are piled up there and you have to take whatever you want. There were many donors from Lhasa and they would serve the food.   

**Q:**  Who was going to search for the donors?   

**A:**  During the Mönlam, two senior leaders of tobtsang and the best in the sports would go to search for the donors in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Usually there were 4 seniors in the tobtsang?   

**A:**  If your tobtsang is good, then you can have one senior, gengo [Tib. རྒན་འགོ] if not you have two. There were some rich tsidrung and the monks from Muru [Tib. རྨེ་རུ] and Shide [Tib. བཞི་སྡེ] would be the donors. Some of them would become donors voluntarily. Some of them would say we would like to come to watch your sport, then we had to invite them. The donors would be sitting at the right and left side of platform. When we jumped, the donors were watching us like this when we swayed our legs in the space.   

**Q:**  How would you sway your legs?   

**A:**  I have to sway my legs like riding a bicycle just before I reach the landing place I have to stretch my legs. This is called drerug and when we do this we have to bend down our body and the next is called Kangkor [Tib. རྐང་སྐོར] and Kanguk [Tib. རྐང་གུག]. The most skilled person would take off their blessing ribbon on the platform by putting their legs in the ribbon. It was the most exciting one and their body should be very flexible to be able to bend through the blessing ribbon.   

**Q:**  Where did you have to go to throw the Gyabdo?   

**A:**  All of these would be thrown from the same platform and you have to hold the stone with only three fingers when you throw Kyangdo, and with some persons the rock would slip and they would drop the rock. You have to run while holding the stone and you have to walk backwards as soon as you threw the stone. Some of them would jump just after they threw it. The Sera kids would throw the Kyangdo, but Drepung wouldn't.   

**Q:**  You had to jump without walking backward, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You are allowed to do that?   

**A:**  Yes, allowed, because we had to show different skills to the donors, one person had to throw Kyangdo twice, you would lose if your rock fell behind at the space of a needle's eye. They would measure the place with the size of the needle. Then you have to throw Mando and Kupdo and when you throw the Gyabdo, we have to go down there and pile up the earth and you have to stand on your toes and throw it while turning your body around.   

**Q:**  Did the sponsors give anything to the best players?   

**A:**  Yes, they would give prizes.   

**Q:**  What prize they would give?   

**A:**  They would give underpants, shamthab and vests (töngag [Tib. སྟོད་འགག]). Some of them would accept to be the sponsor and give clothes. If they give money, we have to give it to the toptsang in common.   

**Q:**  Did the tobtsang common have quite a lot of money?   

**A:**  Yes, they had a lot of money.   

**Q:**  What did they do with the money?   

**A:**  They lend it to get the interest.   

**Q:**  Did the senior toptsang do this?   

**A:**  Yes, they would appoint 5 people who consisted of the seniors and other wealthy persons. Some of them entered the toptsang even though they never competed, because dobdos were happy-go-lucky and they were kind of engrossed with sports. Those people had to do the work, like making tea and cooking food. Nyare Atsara [Tib. ཉག་རེ་ཧིན་ཨ་ཅར་ར] was there too.   

**Q:**  Did he do the geyok [Tib. དགེ་གཡོག] later?   

**A:**  Yes, he did. The lama, Kusho Mani [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས་མ་ནི] helped them so much when it was the time for the jumping competition with Sera. It would be our turn right after they were done. Kusho Mani was the donor and made the iron daggers/pegs [Tib. ལྕགས་ཕུར] for the tents. Before that, we didn't have the iron daggers/pegs. Later, it was taken up by the tratsang and put it in the chapel of the protective deities (Gonkhang [Tib. མགོན་ཁང]) of the tratsang. Kusho Mani had ordered them to make one of the small images on the iron daggers/pegs that looks like Nyare Atsara, because he was an expert in all 12 kinds of sports. Kusho Mani's gidru (diciple) nicknamed "hawk" (Pingkuma [Tib. པིང་ཁྱུ་མ]) whose actual name is Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] is in Nepal now. He was not so good in sports and his team lost so they ran away. There was also a dobdo in Bompora [Tib. སྤོམ་པོ་ར] Khamtsen called Kyinag [Tib. སྐྱི་ནག] who was from Kyinag. Altogether, there were 4 dobdo in Bompora.   

**Q:**  Did Kyinag run away?   

**A:**  Yes, he did, so the Sera monks composed a song criticizing him: Kyinak came first to get the neck rope. [Tib. སྐྱི་ནག་སྔོན་ལ་ཡོང་ནས། སྐེ་ཐག་གོན་གག་སླེབས་བྱུང]. We had a dobdo who was left-handed so they made another verse: [Tib. སྐྱི་ནག་སྔོན་ལ་ཡོང་ནས། སྐེ་ཐག་གོན་གག་སླེབས་བྱུང། ཟ་རུ་གཞུ་གུར་བཞག་ནས། རྟེན་འབྲེལ་མ་ཡག་ཚར་སོང]. "skyinag came first and got the neck rope, the left-handed one was left behind, so there won't be good fortune."   

**Q:**  We heard that Ugyenla [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས] ran away in a coracle when they lost the game.   

**A:**  Ugyenla had great loyalty to the dobdos and he scolded us and said "what are you people doing?" He used two lines saying, "you didn't know Dharma well when you were left in the mountain regions, and you didn't know how to work when you were in left in the village." [Tib. ཕུ་ལ་བཞག་ན་ཆོས་མི་ཤེས། མདའ་ལ་བཞག་ན་ལས་མི་ཤེས]. The senior leader of the toptsang would send messages saying things like such and such a person should come to the tratsang tomorrow for work, and then we all had to go. When there was a donggo ceremony and thugpa had to be served, all the people in the tobtsang had to go to serve the thukpa. All the ladles had been given to the toptsang, because other monks didn't know very well how to serve, and if you don't know how to serve the thukpa, it would be short. The Toptsang advised us that the thukpa should served evenly and you should serve two ladles and you should not pour out the thukpa and give thukpa to the shameless people who are taking extra shares. You should think that leftovers is same as leftover water and shortage is like being short gold [Tib. ལྷག་ན་ཆུ་ལྷག། ཆད་ན་གསེར་ཆད].   

**Q:**  Did they teach you how to serve the thukpa?   

**A:**  Yes. They would tell us it was given by a poor geshe's donor and should not be wasted. So you had to look in the caldron; that meant we should not serve a lot.   

**Q:**  Would the toptsang senior tell you this evening when you had to serve the thukpa tomorrow?   

**A:**  Yes. The tobtsang senior would come near the caldron where they serve the thukpa and he will watch.   

**Q:**  What kind of clothing would the tobtsang senior wear?   

**A:**  He would wear the same clothes as other dobdo. Then the senior would go in the assembly hall, the (dukhang [Tib. འདུ་ཁང]. After that, there were the chabril, gegö and jama who would take care of it. But some people were saying "the hungry ghost is the caretaker of the god of wealth's storage room." [Tib. ལྷ་རྣམ་སྲས་བང་མཛོད་ལ། འདྲེ་ཡི་དྭགས་ཀྱི་དཀོན་གཉེར] and they will deliberately serve lot of thukpa.   

**Q:**  Did you have to learn how to serve the thukpa?   

**A:**  It wouldn't be alright if you didn't learn to serve the thukpa. Some of them didn't know how to serve and they hit hard with the ladle on the wooden bowl and almost broke the bowl.   

**Q:**  They would serve thukpa to the trüku very carefully, making it in the shape of a small ball, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The chabril wouldn't let the persons who didn't know how to serve the thukpa go to serve the front row, right?   

**A:**  No, he wouldn't. As soon as the chabril saw him, he would know that person wasn't good and the chabril would take him out from the crowd (of servers).   

**Q:**  The chabril would beat the monks a lot, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There was a chabyog [Tib. ཆབ་གཡོག] nicknamed "donkey herder" (bungok [Tib. བོང་བུ་བ] because he hit with his stick everywhere on the body. Sometimes he hit on some dobdo's mouths and the dobdo was bleeding and the blood was dripping into the thukpa. Then we had to take the thukpa in the kitchen and put it on the fire and had to wash the bucket with water. That's why he was called "Bungkok" When we were running in and out to serve the thukpa, we were touching the ladles of each other to play around as it would make a sound like, "thak thak thak." He would also hit our faces with the stick and make the same sound, "thak thak thak." Therefore, the monks would yell at him in a scolding manner, "Hey bungkok! Don't make the sound thag thag."   

**Q:**  Have you had any fighting experiences?   

**A:**  Yes, I have. One of my opponents was from Drepung Gungru. He is now in the military regiment [in India]. One day, when we were coming back from Lhasa on the Kyangthang gang [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་སྒང] plain, both of us were dressed as dobdo and we pushed each other. I had a long sword kept on my backside and a key which weighed one kg. I purposely ordered this key from the blacksmith in Sera. I was an expert in hitting with the key. If you don't know well how to hit with the key, your key chain would be cut by the knife. Then I told him, "If you want to fight, let's go to a corner to fight."   

**Q:**  What was the reason for fighting?   

**A:**  Both of us were drunk with chang beer. He said, "You must think well." He implied that I should surrender. But I wouldn't give up and I told him, "Let's not go on the main road, let's go off to a [remote] corner." I thought of cutting him down at once near the rocks by the Nechung [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] Monastery. I told him to stop there and then he climbed up on a rock and said, "Don't do this. We don't have any reason, so it is pointless to do this." I said, "That's right. We don't have any reason for fighting, but you are a dobdo and I am too and whoever surrenders, it would be shameful, because I am not an ordinary one in Loseling" Then I told him let's not fight and we agreed and went back to the monastery. One day, just before the kurim [Tib. སྐུ་རིམ] ritual session was held, when I went to the tshomja (College's Prayer Assembly with tea), I was sitting at the head of a row in our khamtshen. There was a very nervous monk who was serving tea on that day, and he poured the tea carelessly, so I got angry and scolded him, saying, "Don't you know how to serve the tea?" After the tsog (Prayer Assembly) was over, he came to my shag (apartment)and said, "Why did you scold me? I want to meet a person like you. Come outside if you have the courage to do so." Then I said, "Are you sure?" He said, "I am sure." So I told him, you can bring weapons if you have any. I don't need weapons for people like you." Actually, I had a short knife which is normally used by the lama gyüpa [Tib. བླ་མ་རྒྱུད་པ] monks and I carried it in my vest, my töngag. Then I took him to the gorge and people saw the two of us fighting. They were watching from the west gate. As soon as we reached there, I seized his chest and stabbed him with the knife and he fell face down. When I pulled out the knife, the handle was in my hand but the knife blade got stuck in his body and he fell down on the ground. I told him, "Now I am going to kill you with a rock by hitting it on your head." He said, "Please don't kill me! Have mercy on me." Then I left him there and returned to my shag. On the way, some monks were shouting from Deyang, "Po Tshena [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་ཚལ་སྣ] of Tsethang went to fight and now he might have killed someone down there." They used to call me Po Tshena because I was from the place called Tsena. After some time, he came back and he had become completely yellow (in complection).   

**Q:**  He probably had too much bleeding.   

**A:**  On the next day, he disappeared. Maybe he went to Lhasa, I don't know. I fought like that many times. Once at the door of Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] I had been hit with a knife from my back side when I was walking ahead. There was a telegraph office, (tarkhang [Hin. tar Tib. khang]) near Tengyeling. In that area, usually many Sera dobdo monks would gather and we had a quarrel on boys [boyfriends]. There were some good boys from Sera [handsome boys]. I had a dobdo friend who liked jumping very much, but he couldn't make good jumps. I went outside with him and all the Sera dobdo monks were drunk inside the house. Then a handsome boy came out to urinate, and I caught him by the hand and took him to the roof of the Tengyeling (Labrang) and stayed there for awhile. The boy told the dobdos on the next day, and they came to take revenge and they said, "You had caught the boy and you did such and such." I said, "Yes, I had to do that, so anyway, I am sorry. Please accept my apology to you." Like this, we could settle things. After two days, when I was going around in the Barkor Street where they sell aluminum pots, I met that dobdo [who had said that to me]. I had no knife but I was carrying the key. It seemed to me that he had a knife. Then when he was looking to the right and left side, I hit him with the key and it made a sound of "seeng." He turned his body twice and fell down on the ground. I ran away at once, since their khamtshen was close by and I thought they will gang up and also I had no knife with me.   

**Q:**  Have you ever been taken to the monastic officials, the lene [Tib. ལས་སྣེ], accused of fighting in the monastery?   

**A:**  I never fought in the monastery and have never been to the office.   

**Q:**  Have you ever been to the Nangtsesha (Lhasa "mayor's" office) for for fighting in Lhasa or somewhere else outside?   

**A:**  I fought very carefully and have never been to a court of law. Those who have been to the court of law were fighting in the crowd, so they were immediately caught. If you really want to fight, you should fight just as two people, and then you would know who is the winner and who is the loser.   

**Q:**  Oh! The real dobdo's fighting was that they fixed the time and went off to fight; they didn't have any mediators, did they?   

**A:**  No, they didn't need to have mediator because they want one of them to win and the other to lose. If there was fighting among the people, they wouldn't know who won and who lost and then the sheyngo will catch them.   

**Q:**  How many thabyog were there?   

**A:**  In the past, in our tratsang there were the thabyog and the water carrier, the chuma [Tib. ཆུ་མ], one person called chutsaba , 4 fire makers or metongwa [Tib. མེ་གཏོང་བ], and 24 water carriers. Altogether, there were 25 people.   

**Q:**  Where did they come from?   

**A:**  They came from the same source where the tsogchen thabyog (kitchen servants) came from. All of them came from Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག] village {situated below Drepung along the road).   

**Q:**  Thambag was not the miser (subject) of the tratsang (college), so why did they come?   

**A:**  No, no. No matter how much gye (alms) and tea the monks would get, they would get the same [so it provided income to them]. Beside that, they would get some extra tea and thukpa called tshabsik [Tib. ཚྭ་གཟིགས].   

**Q:**  What is tsabsig?   

**A:**  It was the extra share of tea and thukpa.   

**Q:**  Did they have to deliver it to them?   

**A:**  They would take them home in the evening in buckets.   

**Q:**  Did they have to make a request to be a thabyog?   

**A:**  Yes, they did, because this was the only way of making the living in that village.   

**Q:**  Loseling had 25 thabyog so how many did Gomang have?   

**A:**  Gomang probably had many, but Deyang had just 5 or 6.   

**Q:**  How many did the tsogchen (the main assembly hall for the monastery as a whole) have?   

**A:**  The Tsogchen had a lot, but I don't know the exact number. There were 5 people just for carrying the firewood.   

**Q:**  From where did they bring the firewood?   

**A:**  They had to bring it from the firewood-yard, the shingra [Tib. ཤིང་ར], near to the kitchen.   

**Q:**  Where is the firewood-yard?   

**A:**  It was at the back side.   

**Q:**  Was it near the kitchen?   

**A:**  Yes, it was. They had to bring the firewood loaded on oxen as a tax.   

**Q:**  The jiso (the top business manager) has to prepare the firewood, right?   

**A:**  It was the duty of jiso to bring the thorn-wood as firewood.   

**Q:**  Then, what would they do with the pile of used tea leaves?   

**A:**  This was very strange, even though they piled up 1 or 2 wooden buckets everyday (of used leaves), but it wouldn't get increased at all.   

**Q:**  Didn't the villagers take them for the purpose of fertilizer on their fields?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They said if they used them for fertilizer, I heard that the field would get insects. I don't know, maybe they took it after it got dried up. The tsogchen's caldron was put near the used tea leaves.   

**Q:**  You mean nowadays?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was the pile of used tea leaves there since the beginning of Drepung?   

**A:**  Yes, it was there when we became a monk and it became a little more during the Chamön [Tib. བྱམས་སྨོན] rite.   

**Q:**  Was there a ritual called Chamön?   

**A:**  Yes, it was just before the Tibetan New Year.   

**Q:**  Who would give the tonggo for the Chamön?   

**A:**  It would be given by the Drepung jiso.   

**Q:**  Did you work as a jiso (manager of the Drepung monastery as a whole)?   

**A:**  I have never done it.   

**Q:**  Okay, thank you for taking your time. Please tell me how did Gyerong [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] khembo dismiss the tobtsang and when did the tobtsang start in the past?   

**A:**  I don't know when it started. I heard that it was there from the early times. In the past, the tobtsang senior told us that he knew about the tobtsang during 3 generations ago. The Tobtsang had a special right and even the government didn't say anything during the Mönlam Festivals if the dobdos would wander around. One day, when all the dobdos had gathered, the (Loseling) Gyerong Khembo said, "You all (all dobdos) have to attend the tshog (prayer chanting Assemblies) as well as the chöra. (debating grove)" In our tratsang, they had the same problem as Gomang's problem.   

**Q:**  You mean to say the problem in Gomang between the monks who study the pecha (texts) or did not in your tratsang almost had the same problem right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did the problem come about?   

**A:**  The the tratsang khembo (college abbot) said like that.   

**Q:**  What did the tratsang khembo say?   

**A:**  The tratsang khembo said, "It is not fair for the pechawa (scholar mon ks) to have to attend the prayer chanting assemblies and chöra whereas the dobdos didn't have to, and they were just having picnics all the time. So we should dismiss the tobtsang dobdo club." At that time, we received a letter from Sera calling on us to come for the competition of jumping. We told the khembo that we received this letter and we are going to go for the competition. But the khembo wrote a letter to Sera saying we are going to dismiss the tobtsang and you should also dismiss it (in Sera). Sera pretended to agree to that, but in fact they didn't. The khembo insisted that we disband the Tobtsang. When the jumping competition time came, our senior toptsang had already been dismissed. But under that, we were the second tobtsang and we didn't dismiss our tobtsang.   

**Q:**  Gyerong khembo didn't dismiss your tobtsang right?   

**A:**  Yes, because the abbot (khembo) didn't know that there were three tobtsang. He knew that there was only one tobtsang. We had so many good kitchen utensils which were kept in the tratsang gönkhang (the chapel where the protective dities are kept). All of those there belonged to our tobtsang. Things like a very large cooking pot made from copper designed with great wall of China [Tib. རྒྱ་ནག་ལྕགས་རི] around the edge. We purposely ordered a large tent from India along with silk rope and iron pegs. Not only that, but the tobtsang had a large amount of money and when we were having picnic parties, toptsang distributed five sho [Tib. ཞོ] for each monk in the whole tratsang.   

**Q:**  Did all of you tell the khembo, "Please don't dismiss the tobtsang." when he was insisting that you do so?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  He never listen to that?   

**A:**  No. He never listened to us. We explained to him that our tobtsang was doing work because we had loyalty to Loseling, and not for the benefit of one or two individuals. So if you dismiss the tobtsang, Loseling Tratsang would get a bad reputation. For example, it is like saying that we only need the ones who study religion and not the picnic parties. As we all know, when Kabshöpa [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] had given a contribution to make a caldron for Loseling, did the pechawa hold up the caldron? It was we, the dobdo who held the caldron. And many of our people got injured; some of them had their legs broken. If there were no dobdob, the work couldn't be done. When some of the pechawa went to help the coppersmith, they refused them and asked for the dobdo to help them. The Toptsang kids, the dobdo were stronger than others. So we brought up the caldron to Loseling without demolishing the house. We were in the toptsang for many years, so please let us play (a competition) at least once, and after that we would do whatever you said. After saying that, all the dobdos cried and also said if not, you should expel all of us from the organization. Even though we couldn't do the dharma practice as our parents had wanted us to do, but we wouldn't do something to get a bad reputation for Loseling. We also said to the khembo that if it is in your hands, please expel all of us from the organization now. Then the khembo said, "I couldn't expel you, I am just a khembo, if you don't want to listen to me, you can do as you wish." Then all of us cried. All the pechawa conciliated between the khembo and us. Otherwise, something bad was about to happen. It was summer, so most of the tobtsang members were in the villages. If it had been in winter when all the Dobdo members were there, we would have finished off the khembo. [Tib. ཏག་ཏག་བཟོས]   

**Q:**  Yes, they would beat the khembo because they also did beat the khembo in Sera?   

**A:**  At that time, Sera asked us, what are you going to do? We will do the same thing as you do. We replied we will do what you want to do. Then we decided to give up during this khembo. Later, the khembo will be changed.   

**Q:**  At that time, the khembo was Thabkhe La [Tib. ཐབས་མཁས་ལགས], right?   

**A:**  Yes. On the day they dismissed the tobtsang, all the dobdo were wearing their best clothes, and made the (Dobdo style) foldings on the lower robes, applied soot on their faces, kept their beards and sat on the top floor of the tratsang. All the pechawa sat down there and they felt so sad saying, "poor dobdos"! Until now they were in picnic parties and they had to do whatever work there was in the tratsang like pounding Arka earth (for roofs), carrying big stones and they built a well-known stove for Loseling. Now we really feel mercy for them." We were told that the gegö disciplinary official also felt sad about it.   

**Q:**  Who was the Gegö? Maybe he was also a tobtsang member.   

**A:**  He was from Tsang [Tib. གཙང] and he was kind of short, He was the gegö. Then the tobtsang was dismissed, and after that we rose against them.   

**Q:**  Did you?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. One winter day, they summoned us and said, "the toptsang had already been dismissed, now what are you doing? We said, "We are assisting the toptsang and we have been serving the tratsang (college). When the senior tobtsang was dismissed, there was nobody working for the tratsang. We would like to serve the tratsang and let others pratcice the dharma." However, we were not allowed to remain and we were told, "Now you all have been punished and each of you have to bring 300 baskets of Arka earth. I was told about that because I wasn't there at that time. I had gone to Kongpo.   

**Q:**  Why did you go to Kongpo?   

**A:**  I went there for trading. Then they refused this and they told the khembo, "Please come and check our shag (apartments); we don't have anything; we need to have enough to eat when we go to dig and bringing up the Arka earth. We also need sacks to put the earth in. We even didn't have a pot of water in our shag. Please come and check. The tratsang had confiscated all the kitchen utensils and even a shovel and pick-ax when they destroyed the toptsang." Anyway, we were just ignored. Then the dobdo nicknamed "leopard cub" or siktruk [Tib. གཟིག་ཕྲུག] and some of the other dobdo studied pecha. I was called to the tratsang as soon as I returned from Kongpo.   

**Q:**  Who came to call you?   

**A:**  Some one was sent from the khamtsen. However, my name was already in their hands (the abbot's). At that time, I shaved my beard this much long. As soon as I entered in the office, the khembo asked me, "Are you the Tsethang Dobdo?" I said, "Yes." Then he said, "Look at you! "What do you look like with this beard?" I didn't say anything, but took off my shawl and stood there with my head bent down. Then he said, "From tomorrow you have to bring Arka earth and work on the upper floor of the tratsang by yourself." I promised roughly, because I had many donkeys so I thought I could load the donkeys. When I got back down there, all of them were saying you shouldn't have promised to accept the punishment. So on the next day, I went to the khembo and I said, "Please forgive me, but I can't do this." The khembo said, "No, that won't be okay." Then I said, "I just want to be expelled from the kyidu." Then he said, "You will be whipped with switches tomorrow." I said I had decided to do as you say." Then I went back and told the others that the khembo ordered the gegö to whip me with switches 300 times tomorrow. The next day, I cut my hair little bit shorter, because I had to go into the prayer assembly hall, the dukhang [Tib. འདུ་ཁང]. Friends of mine said, "Don't worry and go and get the whipping ewith the switches and if you need to, then go to Dekyilinga [Tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ཁ] (the Indian governmnet's office which had a doctor and a dispensary). We all will help you. All of the 25 dobdo gathered and they told the thabyog, "All of us will come to the outside door of the dukhang and we will be watching when you hit whip him with the switches. If you make even a small wound on his buttocks, we will kill you in Thambag [Tib. དན་འབག] village along the road (where the thabyog live)." Therefore, even one thabyog didn't dare to come to hit him. At that time, a man brought about 20-30 switches of one meter length and piled them on two sides (of me). I told the man who was holding my head to hold it tightly and told the feet holder to hold them straight. I thought it would hurt because I had never gotten whipped before. I thought that there is no choice but to get it. Some of my friends used to get hit with the switches and they taught me how to bear it better.   

**Q:**  What did they teach you?   

**A:**  Because we were wearing the dobdo's lower robe, shamthab [Tib. གཤམ་ཐབ], they taught me to fold the robe and pull it up and put it at one side of the buttocks, so the switches would hit on the ground on the other side and on this side would be hit on the robe mostly and won't get hit much on the buttocks. On the next day, the gegö told the thabyog to bring me inside to the khembo before they whbipped me with switches.   

**Q:**  I think the monks who whip with the switches might have told the khembo, right?   

**A:**  On the next day, between the first and second tea of the tsog (Pprayer assembly), I was told to prostrate at the front row.   

**Q:**  Now was there no whipping with switches?   

**A:**  Yes, there was no whipping with switches. I was sitting at the edge of the row. It was a special tea offering that day that was given by a trüku incarnation and I told one of the tea servers to bring the tea quickly to me. The tea was full of grease and I ate pag (kneaded tsamba) with it. Then the gegö was calling me.   

**Q:**  Did he call your name?   

**A:**  He called from my name because he knew where I was. He yelled at me and said, "Get up, get up and come here! You Tsetang Dobdo!" All the monks were looking at me and I was embarrassed and pretended to be doing something behind the pillar and was moving very slowly towards him. When I came closer, the umdze named Drubtho la [Tib. སྒྲུབ་ཐོབ་ལགས] who was from Guge [Tib. གུ་གེ] had already started the prayer and I didn't have to prostrate. The gegö was just watching and didn't say anything. But, when we went to get the gye (alms), the gegö said, "you incorrigible [Tib. རྫབ་ཆེན] guy. Why didn't you come when I called you. Anyway, I am sparing your life today" The chabril was laughing.   

**Q:**  Did the khembo say anything later?   

**A:**  He didn't say anything.   

**Q:**  Did he think that you had prostrated? Didn't he see it?   

**A:**  The khembo was inside the dukhang, he had probably forgotten it.   

**Q:**  When the gegö called you, didn't the khembo see you?   

**A:**  He wouldn't see me, because I was sitting in the edge of the row. Everyone was laughing at me. The prayers had started, before I reached there.   

**Q:**  Nothing happened afterwards?   

**A:**  Later, we had intended to establish the toptsang again, but it wasn't allowed to because Chushigandru had already been started. Then I stayed in the monastery for quite awhile and then I went to join Chushigandru.   

