# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0051.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Katmandu, Nepal  
**Date of Interview:** March 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 58  
**Date of Birth:** 1936  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང] was born a bound peasant/miser belonging to the Dalai Lama's family on Drongtse Estate in Gyantse. He became a servant to the Dalai Lama's mother when she went to India in 1956, after which he was told to stay in Kalimpong to assist Jenkhentsisum, which included the Dalai Lama's older brother, Gyalo Thondup. In this interview, he talks about the various tasks he did for Jenkhentsisum, mainly carrying messages between Kalimpong and Phala's group in Lhasa and also to Chushigandru in Lhoka. He also talks critically about the poor organization and discipline of Chushigandru in Lhoka after Gombo Tashi and his troops got cut off from Lhoka in the north. Finally, he talks about his escape from Tibet in 1959, his work for Gyalo Thondup in Kalimpong after 1959, and going to the U.S. for CIA training in 1961.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0051_01/H_0051_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  My name is Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང] and I was born below Gyantse on the Drongtse [Tib. འབྲོང་རྩེ] Estate. Drongtse was an estate belonging to the Yabshi family. My house was known as Gula [Tib. ?] Labrang. So we were Yabshi's miser. In 1956, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama were invited to India for the Buddha Jayanti. At that time, the Dalai Lama's mother came to our estate and [said] she needed a servant to go to Kalimpong. We were in school, and about 15 boys were called and they said they needed some to go to India as servants. So I was chosen and came to India with the Dalai Lama's mother. We went in a vehicle from Drongtse to Yadong and then to Gangtok. We went ahead and the Dalai Lama was to come later. We were very well received by the Sikkim King at the Nathula [Tib. སྣ་སྟོད་ལ] Pass and then were taken to the palace and received by a procession of monks carrying sacred items. We stayed in Gangtok for about 2 days and then went to Kalimpong. Then the Dalai Lama arrived and we went along with his mother for a pilgrimage to all the places where the Dalai Lama went. After that, the Dalai Lama was to go to Tibet, although in his heart he did not wish to return. The people said that if he goes then there are problems so the Dalai Lama should not go to Tibet. Discussions were held with the Indian government and our Kalimpong Dedön Tshogpa [Tib. བདེ་དོན་ཚོགས་པ] did their best and requested that the Dalai Lama should stay. At that time, I didn't know much, but I heard that the Sawang also asked the Indian government and Nehru said it was not alright [to stay].   

**Q:**  During this time, there was a section who was asking the Dalai Lama to return. Another section, Jenkhentsisum and some of the members of the People's Association were saying he should stay.   

**A:**  The people were thinking that the Dalai Lama would have a difficult time and it would be best if he would not return and remain. Then in the meantime, Nehru could discuss [Tibet] with the Chinese so that there would be no difficulties regarding the Dalai Lama's power and so on after he would return. [Jenkhentsisum] must have requested many things like this. Nehru spoke with Zhou Enlai a lot saying, "There are some difficulties on the matter of Dalai Lama's return. The Chinese should not make any changes in the Dalai Lama's power and Tibet's internal political affairs." Zhou Enlai made a lot of guarantees saying, "The Dalai Lama should return and that would be very good. It is not okay at all if he would not return. We will not interfere with the power of the Dalai Lama at all." So Nehru believed in the Chinese Premier's guarantee and he told the Dalai Lama, "You should in return and it would be very good to return. The Chinese have guaranteed that they won't meddle with your power and they won't touch Tibet's politics." That's what I heard. Then the Dalai Lama returned. After the Dalai Lama's returned, some of the kudrag who were siding with the Chinese insisted that they wanted to take back the government's gold and silver that had been left in Gangtok. The ones who were staying here said that it should not be taken back. So officials who were inside and outside were at loggerheads. The later pushed hard and did not let the gold go back. That's why it remained in India. Then the Dalai Lama returned and his mother did too. While I was at Kalimpong, I was serving Sawangchemmo [Gyalo Thondup] and members of the Dedön Tshogpa were meeting. They were gathering people for the Dalai Lama's life security and organizing people to be sent to Tibet to make a revolt and such things. For example, people like Litang Athar and their kind. Athar and probably there were 20 odd Khambas. They were gathered together and taken wherever the Dalai Lama went and were used where needed. Then I was told [by Gyalo Thondup] to stay as there was work here. So I stayed and mainly worked at Yabshi. Whatever work that was needed for the common good, like being a messenger, etc., I was sent. I did not met Andru in Kalimpong, but three of his people were at Kalimpong. We got introduced to each other and though we did not have education, we served sincerely, and were very reliable and were doing whatever we were told to do. I was told that I was very good, and along with a fellow from Gyantse named Namse [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས] we were told that we had to go to Lhasa. When we got to Lhasa, it was said that Sawangchemmo's [Gyalo's] spies were in Lhasa and so the Chinese were keeping a strict lookout. At Sharsingma, there was the Tibetan and the Chinese check-post. The Tibetans were on the other side of the bridge. They did not do anything except collect the tax called Jasho [Tib. ཇ་ཤོ] ("te tax"). However, at the Chinese check-post, it was said that photos of me, Namse, and Jangchub Jimpa [Tib. བྱང་འཆུབ་སྦྱིན་པ] were posted. We were told that if we went across at that check-post we would be arrested. Litang Athar and others had gone before us. They had weapons and medicines to take.   

**Q:**  They were taking weapons?   

**A:**  It was not allowed, but they were smuggling them in. When they got to the check-post they had a shoot out. Three of them were killed and they lost all their things.   

**Q:**  Who was with Athar?   

**A:**  There were about 4-5 Khambas. They did all kinds of things and they got in. They had an argument with the Chinese and since they carried pistols in their dress pouches they began shooting. Three were killed and Athar and someone escaped. Medicine and important things intended for Chushigandru were lost. While the two returned, we were going to Lhasa. And so we decided to send things with the traders and coolies.   

**Q:**  What were you taking with you?   

**A:**  Mostly, it was medicine equipments and documents. They [Gyalo, etc.] didn't let us take the wireless equipments. So we got the message that we would not get through. We took the items and stayed near Yadong. We wore Yadong wood collectors dress, and with ropes and axes we crossed the bridge. It was sort of dark and the Chinese didn't notice us. In Yadong when we were staying in the lodging inn, the Chinese came asking if any newcomers had arrived. It was only a few days since Athar and the others had the shoot out and so they came to check all travellers. Our hosts said that no newcomers had arrived, even though the two of us were hiding inside the house. Then we went to Phari and then Gyantse. We have our homes at Gyantse, but we dared not to go there. We thought that if our families knew about us, then the Chinese would also come to know. So without meeting any of our family, we went to Shigatse. While we were at Shigatse, Chushigandru took the arms from Shang Ganden Chöngor and fought the Chinese at Wuyug [Tib. འོད་ཡུག]. For this reason, we were detained for 5 days saying that we could not go. We were the first travellers [after the ambush] and there were many arms and wrecked trucks all bloody. We had with us about 7-8 civilian trucks led by a Chinese truck with a mounted bren-gun, followed by another of the same kind. They were on high alert, saying that the Khambas would come. They were very afraid. So like ordinary people, we went to Lhasa. There we did not have a place to stay. We did not contact Yabshi since at that time, there were all sorts of people among the kudrag. Kungö Depön and his wife Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ] were people with Chinese titles so we also wondered how they would be. Andru's house at Lhasa was totally surrounded and he said that it was not safe to stay there, so we stayed at the house of his relative Shalotsang [Tib. ཤག་ལྷོ་ཚང]. So we were kept there. The house was big with not many people. So Andru kept us there. During the day, we never ventured out. Only under cover of darkness did we go out and then we gave our messages and letters. For about 6 months we stayed there hiding.   

**Q:**  Dedön Tshogpa was consulting with Phala Drönyerchemmo and who were the letters going to?   

**A:**  We sent them to Kalimpong through some monk officials and traders. If there were letters to be sent from Kalimpong, it was sent to the two of us through Khamba traders and the two of us. We also sent them through Khamba traders going to Kalimpong and Lhoka. If the Dedön Tshogpa wanted to contact us it was done through traders. There was Dhenyertsang [Tib. གདན་གཉེར་ཚང] Kungö, 3-4 monk officials and about 2 lay officials.   

**Q:**  Was it Tseja Gyentsen la?   

**A:**  Yes. Now I have forgotten the names of others.   

**Q:**  Kelsang Yeshela [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས]? [note: This must be Lobsang Yeshe.]   

**A:**  No. Kelsang Yeshela went to Lhoka and became the leader of the Amdos and was in Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  What about Tema Joka [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོག་པ]?   

**A:**  There is Thubden Dawa [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཟླ་བ] who works at All India Radio in India. Then there is another, Dhenyertsang Kungö. I can't recall other names. When we got there at Lhasa, there was the main person we contacted. We got in touch with him twice. Then one day when we went there to deliver letters, it was said that he was dead. We looked and there were many Chinese around. It's said that he was poisoned. We suspect he was killed [by the Chinese] because of our work [our cause]. I don't know what happened, but it was so sudden. One night when we went there, there were many people and when enquired, they said that he was dead, that he was poisoned. There were many Chinese there so we didn't dare to go there. After that, we contacted Drönyerchemmo and when we needed food or things, he would give it to us and we would report to him. From Lhoka they reported that they needed arms and the Tibetan government sent Namseling to become the Governor of the South, the Lhoji [Tib. ལྷོ་སྤྱི], and to advise the Khambas to stop their rebellion. This was what the Chinese were told and so he was sent to be Lhoji. But in reality the Chushigandru needed grain and the government was giving grain as their salary from its granaries. Actually, the Kalimpong Dedön Tshogpa must have been saying to the Tibetan Government, "Please give us the plans and weapons." If they would get plans, they [Jenkhentsisum] must be able to get support from foreign countries. However, the Tibetan government at that time was in the most difficult situation because even among fellow Tibetans, they became kind of impure, having people like variegated colors [Tib. ཁྲ་ཁྲ་བ་ཁྲ]. So one could not trust the other and no plans could be actualized. If one asked what they needed, the Tibetan Government could not say specifically what they wanted. At that time, the Kalimpong Dedön Tshogpa with Gyalo Thondup was asking the government what they needed; arms, people. Then they asked what were their plans. There were absolutely no plans. If there were plans, it seems that the Americans were probably going to do something like sending soldiers, arms, money. Anyway, they were set to do something. If the government had said send such and such arms and we have people ready [to use them], or if they had specifically said send such and such trainers, they would have sent them at that time. It is said that they would send them. However, our Tibetan Government had no plans. On the one hand, there were good kudrag. Then there were others who were only interested in getting Chinese salary and standing on the Chinese side, and who quietly sent messages to them. In the Tibetan Government it was very difficult for one to trust the other. And so they had a lot of difficulties. While we were staying in Lhasa, the Chinese announced they had killed Andru Gombo Tashi. Andru was hit with a cannon shell, but he was not dead. The Chinese must have looked through binoculars and saw him fall. Andru had gone to the north and we did not get any replies. So there was really no need for us to stay. We asked Kalimpong and [he/they] said to return for the time being. On the way Namse and I both visited our homes at Gyantse. We stayed there for a few days. We thought of staying for about month. The moment they heard that we had come home, the Chinese started sending gifts and sweets. Then they started getting very suspicious and watching what we were doing. My parents were afraid and said that we could not stay too long because if we did, then the Chinese would fix us up somehow. At Drongtse, there was a Chandzö called Shingbe. He was not trusted since people said that he has something to do with the Chinese. The Chandzö said that we have to go to Gyantse and we will be dined. We didn't stay at Gyantse for more than 20 days. The Chinese were suspicious and bothering us by asking [others] where we came from, what we were doing and how long we were staying. So we thought that there was no use in getting arrested and decided to go to Kalimpong. We went to Gyantse that evening and left messages for the Chandzö that we were coming in a few days. We went in a vehicle from Gyantse, slipped into Phari and stayed for a day. There we met other Yabshi servants who used to work with us. They said that we should not go through Yadong since our photos were posted at the check-post. From Phari we crossed the pass and came via the Khamphu Chutsen [Tib. ཁམ་བུ་ཆུ་ཚན] hot springs. The hill was forested and it was full of Chinese wood cutters. We hid in the forest in the daytime and at night, when the wood cutters returned after their day's work, we crossed the pass and reached Lachung [Tib. ལ་ཆུང] [in Sikkim]. There the police were suspicious, and they arrested us and took us to Gangtok. We sent messages to Sawangchemmo [Gyalo] informing him of our predicament. Since he had good contacts with the King we were released. We reached Kalimpong and there we heard the news of increasing political unease in Lhasa.In Chushigandru, there was a group who were doing an excellent job. There was another group of False Chushigandru. The organization among the Chushigandru was not good since each group had their own chief, Pön [Tib. དཔོན]. In the villages, the Chushigandru people who were not part of the main group raped the women. When it was said that the Chushigandru were coming, people used to hide their women. It was no problem to exchange horses for food and they did that. But there were many forceful things done and a lot of problems occurred. We at Kalimpong were saying that the situation was such and such. So we need to advise them and make publicity in the main camp of Chushigandru since they were getting a bad reputation doing such things as robbing and raping women. So someone had to go from here and so Kungö Wangdüla had to go. . So there was a lot of news saying that Chushigandru was doing many lawless things when we arrived Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  It's said that there seems to be quite a difference in the organization when Andru was there and when he was absent.   

**A:**  When Andru was there, we could see that it was like some sort of regiment. When he was not there, it didn't seem to me to be like a regiment. Each one had their own group. There was no way to command them, e.g., to say you go here and there and do this and that. Each one would do as it liked and they did not listen to the outsiders. Each group had anywhere from 50-60 to 10 members in their group. The salary they were getting came from the government [Tib. གཞུང], but the government could not provide them weapons. Wherever they needed to fight they went, but when it came to an important situation there was no way to give orders. It depended on how clever each person was or how brave. The smart ones would flee and the brave ones stayed. When Andru was not there, there was a regiment, but it was all disorganized. There weren't any plans with maps in hand saying go here and there like the way it's done in the military. They could not do that since each listened to one's own group. If I told one group to go here, they will say I don't want to go. If the situation is dangerous they will not go, but if it is not, then they will say I will go. When we went to Lhoka, Andru Jinda was all the way in the north and we never met him. The connection with Lhoka was sort of cut off. There were a few rider/messengers sent, but the Chinese were in the middle and had stopped them. So there was one base at Lhoka but the better soldiers were with Andru in the north. This was the stronger regiment and was well-disciplined since they all obeyed Andru Jinda. Without Andru, there was nobody else who the people would listen to. So things were disorganized. They just did some fighting and maintained the regiment. Until the Dalai Lama left, the Chinese didn't have kind of confidence about the situation in Lhoka and they never made an all-out advance and suppression. If they had suppressed us day and night, something would have happened. We were guerilla fighters fighting during the day and hiding at night, and so the Chinese sort of could not judge the situation very well and did not [try to] suppress us 100 percent. After the Dalai Lama left, then they advanced all-out and suppressed 100 percent. At that time, Andru and those people were down there [in Pembar] and we were up there [in Lhoka] and there was nothing we could depend on. We did fight, but the Chinese shelled us and then we could not even see the Chinese. All we had was one 305 English Carbine and a pistol. If we shot once we would be out of bullets. There was no place to get bullets, so one hesitated to shoot. When it came time to shoot, we could not even see the Chinese. The ones who stayed later did meet the Chinese, but where we were, the Chinese never came. The Chinese just advanced and people fled. When the Chinese fired their guns and we could not even see them, then there was nothing to be done. There was no way to challenge them. We were not prepared, we had no arms. These days I reflect back and think how the hell we could have fought when we couldn't even ride our horses properly. I had one rifle, a pistol, a knife, an amulet with the protective talisman, a dress. When we laid down and tried to hide we couldn't do it well since we were so laden. The Chinese can hide even behind a small rock. So how could we fight? We just went for the sake of going. After the Dalai Lama came to Lhoka, Kungö Jampa Tsöndru returned [to Tibet] since he was sick. So Kungö Wangdüla and I stayed. We asked the Dalai Lama and the Kashag [about returning] and the latter said that it was okay to return. So we returned, and approached the Dalai Lama and told him we were returning to Tibet. We got an audience and we received Jigje Mahe protective talismans and we were supposed to return. We returned for a day and a half and then came back to the Indian territory. Then it was said that we had to hand in our guns, which we did. At the Indian border there were only about 25 soldiers. At the border we were stopped for about 20 days or so. We were not afraid nor did we know what was happening. The Chinese did not bully us, though the Kudrag and lamas were so afraid. I used to speak some Hindi and a little English so I was the interpreter. There were tens of thousands of people, but only Kungö Wangdüla and I spoke some Hindi. It was so sad. I thought it was sad that the Tibetan Government was losing it's country and it was so revered, but there was not one who could speak the language. So we worked really hard helping the sick and being interpreters, and didn't even have time to eat. The Kungö were so scared and they kept saying that it was not good to stay here because the Chinese would come one night and take us away. They used to wear their blankets and sit upright rather than sleeping. Even if we told them that the Chinese would not come, they used to say "No way." They were so scared. We were there for about 15 days. Since I knew some Hindi, I was sent to Tawang with the first batch of a hundred or so. I didn't have anything to eat and we came begging for tsamba until we reached Tawang. The government gave me a mule but this mule was exhausted and could not move. So I left it there and got to Tawang. We pitched our own tents. Once in Tawang, after a few days a name list was made and we got our salary [rations]. I was not that fluent in Hindi, however I interpreted and took the sick here and there, etc. In this way I stayed for a long time. While Kungö Wangdüla and I were at Tawang, Andru Gombo Tashi and his men came via the Magola Pass. Earlier the Kungös had told the Indian Government that Andru was our guerilla leader, and so the Indian Government gave him a warm welcome. It was said that we had to go and receive him. We did, and the Indian soldiers were also lined up in formation. Many refugees came and since they didn't get something to eat, they robbed certain villagers. They had guns they killed yaks and sheep since there was nothing to eat. The Indian Government received reports about this from the Mönpa people and so Gen Yeshe [Tib. རྒན་ཡེ་ཤེས] and I were sent by Andru to collect the guns before Tawang. We were told that if we couldn't collect the guns, take away all the bolts from the guns. Andru and his men had come via the Magola Pass and so they had handed in their guns at Tawang. Before that there was about a two day journey and they did not have anything to eat so they had robbed. We went to get the guns and handed them in at Tawang. We were staying close to Andru, and he and his bodyguards were provided well by the Indian Government. We the people had salary [rations]. I had met him about once earlier, but it was from this time that we came to know him. [Then follows some details of his activities in India, about getting beaten and imprisoned because he had an Indian map and they suspected him of being a Chinese spy - then he was sick, went crazy for a while, and was penniless and hungry, and he ran away and arrived at Siliguri and then Darjeeling.] The Indian Government didn't collect any train ticket for about 2 years when the Tibetans said, "Dalai Lama." Then I got to Siliguri and then Darjeeling. So I explained my situation and told Yabshi to pay for my taxi fare and I stayed in Yabshi's [house]. At that time, the situation in Tibet was alarming. The guerilla warfare plans for starting an organization, these had increased and not decreased. At first, the Indian government did not know of our organization in Tibet. They [Indians] had spies all over on Sawangchemmo and others. Finally the Americans and the Indians worked together and then things were easy. This must have been in 1962. Before that, like in 1961, we were already sending people to the States but the Indians did not know this. Outside the Yabshi house, the Indian spies would stay there watching what Kungö and everyone did. So we would put off the lights around 9 pm. and pretend to sleep. Then around 11 p.m. we all got up and we had all of our men hiding on the roads in Darjeeling. If there wasn't a reliable driver, then Sawangchemmo himself drove and we collected the people [going for training by the CIA]. Then near Jalpaiguri, Sawangchemmo gave us a compass and told us to go there directly and then return. Then with the compass, I took the men, crossed the river, and then returned. Once we got there in Pakistan, we gave the flashlight [signal], and then I handed over the people and I returned alone. Sometimes, one got lost and sometimes dogs chased you. Once Sawangchemmo and I went to take the people. We had 2-3 hours to go and 3 hours to return [on foot]. If you could not return within that stated time, the car would leave. Once when I was returning alone, a village dog chased me and the villagers started screaming that there was a thief and came out with their sticks. So I ran for my life and did not know where I was running. I was lost and it was almost dawn, and I could not find my way. My clothes were all muddy and so was my whole body. If I ventured outside, people would be suspicious. There was a bridge and I washed all my clothes and was totally nude and I hid nearby for half a day. When my clothes were dry around 4 in the afternoon I went to the main road and went to Siliguri. There I drank some tea and then returned to Darjeeling and then I travelled to Kalimpong to contact the Chushigandru in Gangtok. I went twice to Gangtok crossing the bridge below Darjeeling. There are 2 check posts and both times I crawled at night. This is what I did in India. Before the Americans and the Indians worked together, we had to watch out for the Indians. There was no way any work was done during the day. It was all spy work at night. Once the Dehradun [Tibetan] Regiment started, the Americans and the Indians were working together. We went to Gangtok, Bomdila, etc. At that time, the Indian government used to send a man along and so it was great, we had no fear at all. You just gave the name to the Indians and they would book the train tickets. We went all over to the settlements to recruit soldiers for the Dehradun Regiment. It was hard work, but without fear. In 1961, I went for training to the States, for guerilla warfare. I went to Okinawa, etc. I trained for a year and a half and returned. I was to go to Mustang, but later I was not sent. So I was to stay at Delhi and work. I was in Calcutta in 63-64. I told Kungö that I wanted to get some education, but he wanted me to work. I took leave and then went to Dharamsala and had an audience with the Dalai Lama, and met his mother and explained my eagerness to study. Kungö Depön said that it was not possible to go for education right away and to work at [the] Security Office. So I was working as the Dalai Lama's bodyguard during the night and during the day I was handling passports, etc. I had two opportunities to go to the States, but at that time for some reason, I don't know, these Kudrag never liked me. So they never sent me to the States even though I got two opportunities. So I thought they would never send me and they told me to go to the Delhi Officials Training School [Tib. ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ]. Even though it was called Officials Training School, it was geared for work in the settlements. Some English was taught, health, raising pigs and chickens, building toilets. For a year and a half I did that and then I was told to go to Mundgod settlement to work under T.C. Tenthong. This was the first camp of 500 people. I stayed for 6 months. I was alone and then I left. Then Sawangchemmo called me to Delhi and then sent me to Ladakh where many refugees had escaped.   

