# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0051.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Katmandu, Nepal  
**Date of Interview:** 10 March 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Unknown  
**Name:** Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 58  
**Date of Birth:** 1936  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང] was born a bounbd peasant/miser belonging to the Dalai Lama's family on Drongtse Estate in Gyantse. He became a servant to the Dalai Lama's mother when she went to India in 1956, after which he was told to stay in Kalimpong to assist Jenkhentsisum, which included the Dalai Lama's older brother, Gyalo Thondup. In this interview, he talks about the start of Chushigandru and the Tensung Tanglang Magar (Defend Buddhism Volunteer Army), and how he was taken for training by the CIA. He discusses the poor discipline among the Khambas in Lhoka, and how some others would pose as Chushigandru fighters and rob families and rape wives. He also discusses the situation in India after 1959.   

---  
### Tape 2  

---

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> started, was it first known as Tensung Tanglang Magar? Then who joined from Gyantse, and the monasteries, etc.?   

**A:**  Many joined from the monasteries. From Shigatse, many joined under the name of the Tensung Tanglang Magar. The same was true of Gyantse. At first it was called the Tensung Tanglang Magar and slowly it became <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> [Note: the opposite is true]. Anyway, whatever it was, it was done for the sake of religion, so even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people did not argue about the name. They [khambas] said all kinds of things. At first they were saying that they were the ones who brought His Holiness out [to India]. Yes, Chushigandru was there, but Chushigandru was there only beyond the Kyichu River. Even then, there were people from all three regions, from monasteries and from the Tibetan military. It was not just Chushigandru. When His Holiness came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, it was the Lhasa people [with him] and one can say that there were no Chushigandru fighters. It was due to the plans that Phala made and the blessings of the gods that His Holiness was able to come out. Once in Lhoka there were people from all regions. But Chushigandru was saying that they brought His Holiness out. When I was working in security, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> Ongmola came to seek an audience with His Holiness. Some of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་དམངས] 1. Refers to &quot;the people&quot; in the collective sense. 2. It is also sometimes used to refer specifically to the People&#x27;s Associations that existed in Lhasa in the 1950s.">mimang</a> said that she could not have an audience. Ongmola was staying with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> Lonyendra la. The mimang rushed there and we as security stopped the mimang. Lonyendra la was saying, "What can you people do. We brought His Holiness out." So we heard these things and they talked as if they suddenly took His Holiness from his bed and put him in their dress's pouches. This is incorrect, but we don't argue. After coming to India, when people were air-dropped at Charapemba, there were an equal number of Ütsang people. They were our friends and relatives, like Treytrey and many others. I was to be dropped also, but they said I was too young. I don't know how capable I would have been, but I was saying that I wanted to jump and I wanted to go. Gen Tempa Triley was not dropped because he was too old, and I was too young. The rest were people from all the three regions and not just <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s. If you examine carefully, most of the work was done by Ütsang people, but they have taken the name. However, we don't argue, saying that it's for the cause of religion and politics and that we are all of one flesh. When the Mustang base started, out of 1,500 people, 80 percent were from Ütsang. The Khambas knew each other and occupied the best positions. Writing letters and sending wireless messages were done by Ütsang people. The Khambas usurped the power and got better salaries. But we don't argue. In Tibet, the Khambas were the majority, but in India the majority of the Chushigandru were from Ütsang. The reason being that they couldn't stand up to the Chinese [in Kham] so the men could not remain on their land and they came to Lhasa where they could stay there burdening the government. So the government said that they should leave, and so secretly the Tensung Tanglang Magar was started and they went to Lhoka. So each Khamba went with their own horses and arms. Gradually the government and the Ütsang mimang fed them. Wherever the Chushigandru went, the people were giving them food, horses, and guns.   

**Q:**  Were the dzongs doing something secretly?   

**A:**  Yes, they were giving things. If they were not, then it was demanded [by the Khambas]. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> people gave a receipt for the things with the idea of paying [it] back later. This was in the organizational rules of Chushigandru. Others rules said that they could not rob, etc., and that when they were desperate, they then gave receipts for grain and horses. So the real Chushigandru gave receipts. Others took the name of the Chushigandru and robbed things. Forget about giving receipts, these one did worst things, but we could not control them. Among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people, those in Chushigandru did not rob. One section of the Khambas was Chushigandru. Another section used the name of Chushigandru and were robbers.   

**Q:**  It is also said that there were some that had been sent by the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that is also what is said, but, anyway, whatever it is, the people were Khambas. They robbed and in certain places they tied the husband up and the wife was raped by 3-4 people, which was terrible.   

**Q:**  Later, when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> went to Lhoka it is said that about 10,000 rural militias were recruited. Some say that they had really high hopes for the Americans, but at that time in 1958, it seems that the arms could not be dropped. What was the reason? Were the Americans not dropping anything.  

**A:**  The Americans were dropping things. At that time people like Athar were dropped and they were sending messages to the Americans. As we look at it, they [the Americans] needed plans, like how many people were there, what arms and people had to be trained to use them, isn't it? So since there were no plans, I think that the Americans were thinking that if they dropped the arms, then the people would not know how to use them. At that time Athar and them were there and when they wired messages, the Americans should have dropped things, right? Anyway, arms were dropped and a yellow tent (gur sebo) was dropped. It was a lot of money. So there is a lot of talk about that.   

**Q:**  I've heard of Gur Sebo ("Yellow Parachute"), but I don't know what it was.   

**A:**  Money was dropped in the Gur Sebo and there were a lot of problems about that in Kalimpong. There were a lot of problems in Kalimpong [with people saying] that Sawangchemmo[Gyalo Thondup] and Athar took the money and things like that. I don't even remember the circumstances now. The Americans were dropping arms and they dropped them twice. I don't think the Americans had any problems regarding dropping these since they were in Pakistan in good strength. When we went to Pakistan for training, the airstrip was full of American planes. When we got there, 15-20 of us would be loaded [up] onto a huge plane and taken. In Pakistan they would open our eyes and we were allowed to look. However, in other places we could not look except when we were over the ocean. Once we approached land, everything was locked up and we have no idea where we went. When they landed for refuelling they give us military food packets. Then we were taken in cars that were attached to the planes, so we had no idea where we were taken.   

**Q:**  Last time I spoke with you, you mentioned that from Gyantse there were some volunteers.   

**A:**  Yes, there were volunteers from Gyantse. I mentioned one person earlier who is distantly related to us. They were dropped in Lhasa and these days one of them is here. His son is working in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Workshop [Tib. Refugee Self-Help Center in Darjeeling]. It was begun and run by Gyalo Thondup's wife since the 1960's. His daughter is the wife of a lama here. When their father was here, the kids were in Tibet and when his kids came to India, he was dropped into Northern Tibet [after the revolt] where he was killed. We have this Gyantse volunteer person here and he is supposed to be here at 2 p.m., but he did not come [today]. But you can visit him and if this is not possible, then you can look at his book. I will get that for you and you can read the Gyantse section. If he says that he has no time to come, then I will bring the book. When are you leaving?   

**Q:**  On Sunday.   

**A:**  I wonder what happened. He is supposed to be here at 2 p.m. He is a better source than me and it's in his book. At that time there were a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people, but they made much attention to taking credit. A year or two ago what happened was that there were a lot of talk about Mustang and we made a name list of Ütsang people. People say <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, however the majority were from Ütsang. They [Khambas] take all the credit, but anyway, we just decided to leave the matter.   

**Q:**  His Holiness came to India and returned in 1957. To receive him returning, Yuthok <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> and Drunyichemmo Angula came and then [requested His Holiness] not to return. After that they stayed in Kalimpong and worked. At the time they were there, there also was Lukhang and Jenkhentsisum. Later, Alo Chöndze and Phünkang Lhajam were sort of together and separate from Jenkhentsisum. What happened? What was the problem? Was it the American relations? Or internal problems?   

**A:**  I can't say for sure, but I think it was internal. For example, Phünkang Lhajam was very "tricky" and likewise so was Alo Chöndze. He only went wherever there was some advantage, and if he found out there really wasn't, he immediately turned his back on it. He was that type of person. A person must have some aim, and to achieve that the road can be difficult or easy. However, being tricky, and looking only at the advantages and then turning one's back, he did that a lot. And Phünkang Lhajam was very powerful around that time and got a lot of assistance for Tibetans, which she is said to have taken. She gave a lot to those she liked and she looked down on the Tibetans, saying that "We Sikkimese may be like a small stove, but the fire is hot." So everybody criticized her for her high-handedness. Anyway, she was a powerful, educated and daughter of the Sikkim King. She took all of the Tibetan assistance and ate it up. [Paljor's note: He is referring to the period of 1959 to the 1960's. What he says is well-known to all. She was my mother's 1st cousin. My uncle Ragashag was the head official of Darjeeling and he was the 1st cousin to Phünkang Lhajam. They had a lot of problems regarding Tibetan Refugee assistance and probably had a falling out. She is well-known to all for her majestic airs and high-handedness].   

**Q:**  It is said that Alo Chöndze, Baba Yeshe and others got some salary. The latter thinks that the Kungös paid them from their own pockets. If there was a salary, then would you think that it was coming from Tibet?   

**A:**  Regarding this, there was the Kalimpong Dedön Tshogpa, and I think it was given from there. The reason being that when it was said that Alo Chöndze was coming from Tibet, the Dedön Tshogpa and all went to receive Alo Chöndze at Siliguri. While they were there, he was given all the assistance. All the kungös went to Siliguri to receive him. So I don't think it was coming from Tibet and the Dedön Tshogpa probably had some money. Actually they could not look after things properly, otherwise the Tibetan Government had the Tibet House [Kalimpong]. Later, they could not kick the tenants out. They were able to do so to some extent later, and so Kungö Champa Dondrub [I think he means Champa Tsündrü] and Wangdüla were able to stay there.   

**Q:**  Was the Dedön Tshogpa getting any money from the Kyidu and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་དམངས] 1. Refers to &quot;the people&quot; in the collective sense. 2. It is also sometimes used to refer specifically to the People&#x27;s Associations that existed in Lhasa in the 1950s.">mimang</a>?   

**A:**  No. Newly arrived Tibetans were poor and long term residents would not be interested. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> and the[not finished] must have been trying to get some aid, but I can't be sure. There wasn't any collection of donations and any pressuring of the people, and the newcomers were all beggars. Early residents didn't know about the Tibetan situation and didn't know even exactly where they belonged.   

**Q:**  There were some Kyidus like Panjain Kyidu, etc.   

**A:**  Yes, there were many. For example in Darjeeling they had the Rickshaw-walla Kyidu, the Das Member [10 members]. Tibetans really had not much connection with them [they were made up of early residents]. Later, some of them joined Kyidus since they could get refugee assistance. The better-off ones were political. Later when the Tibetans got established, then they felt a sense of Tibetaness and sent their children to Tibetan schools. So they joined in the Tibetan activities. Earlier, they had lost their Tibetaness and the Indians never knew much about them. So they stayed like tribals.   

