# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0051.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kathmandu, Nepal  
**Date of Interview:** 13 March 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 58  
**Date of Birth:** 1936  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Urgyen Tsering [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཚེ་རིང] was born a bound peasant/miser belonging to the Dalai Lama's family on Drongtse Estate in Gyantse. He became a servant to the Dalai Lama's mother when she went to India in 1956, after which he was told to stay in Kalimpong to assist Jenkhentsisum, which included the Dalai Lama's older brother, Gyalo Thondup. In this interview, he discusses how Jenkhentsisum sent him to Lhasa to deliver and take messages/letters, how he met Phala directly, and also how he was sent to Lhoka in 1959 from Kalimpong to advise Chushigandru about their bad behavior and provide some training, but how he didn’t have time to do much since the uprising occurred. Finally, he talks about going back to Tibet from India to try and hold some territory as a base for the future, and how the Khambas have wrongfully taken credit for enabling the Dalai Lama to escape in 1959 and for the Mustang operation.   

---  
### Tape 3  

---

**Q:**  When His Holiness came to India [in 1956], you came with His Holiness' mother to India. Which places did you go [to]? It seems like many mimang had come. I met Taktse Rimpoche and he said he had come and that there was one American. Did you hear anything at that time that some Americans came, etc.?   

**A:**  No I did not. At that time I had come to Kalimpong and His Holiness with His Holiness [mother] came to many places for pilgrimage, such as Varanasi, Gaya, Delhi, Calcutta, everywhere as GOI guests. It took roughly over a month. After that His Holiness was in Gangtok. I was staying in Kalimpong. Even though the Indian government was responsible for His Holiness' safety in India, when it was said that His Holiness was coming for pilgrimage, the Tibetans in Darjeeling-Kalimpong, the Dedön Tshogpa, people like Gyadotsang Wangdü, Litang Athar, and others (about 20 or so), were gathered and they went wherever His Holiness went and were sort of like a security team .... After His Holiness returned, the Dedön Tshogpa had to work and I was told that it would be good if I worked, so I was kept at Yabshi [House] in Kalimpong. What we were doing was taking messages to Kalimpong and back, and finding people to go to Chushigandru. We got them together in Kalimpong and Darjeeling, and Dedön Tshogpa was sending them to take messages back and forth. In Lhasa, the Tibetan government, Andru, the military, Amdo Jimpa, and the three monastic seats, met at Drepung/Lhasa and they made a pledge, which they signed in blood according to Tibetan custom. So this had begun. We went to Lhasa to get information on the Chinese and we took letters to Phala, and if he had anything to send to Kalimpong we took them. We also took the communications of Chushigandru to Drönyerchemmo and got replies through him. Andru Gombo sent us to stay with Shalotsang since his house was surrounded by Chinese [spies]... [See Intv #2]. While at Lhasa it was said that Gyalo Thondup's men were there and people who knew that we were from Kalimpong asked questions. The Chinese were also asking around. We only travelled at night. The Chinese said that Andru was killed in the north and announced this on the radio. So we thought we might get arrested and returned in 1958. Both of us stayed at home in Gyantse and the Chinese were very suspicious [see Intv #2]. Then we got detained in Gangtok, but got to Kalimpong. After New Years, Gyalo Thondup said that Namse or I had to go to Lhasa and to Lhoka. So we did a lottery and Namse was to go to Lhasa and I to Lhoka. Then there was the Kalimpong Dedön Tshogpa with Champa Wangdü la and Champa Tsündrü la. The two of them and the two of us were given advice and made things ready to go. We had to give advice [to] the Chushigandru and the mimang, and also give them lessons/training [Tib. ལོབཇོང]. We had to advise them since they were getting a bad reputation. I was to go to the main base. We had radios to listen to, things to put in the papers and medicines to take. We had to teach and advise the people at the base, and teach the mimang. We were to listen to world news and make them know it. We left via Assam, got to Ranggapara and had a lot of difficulties getting pack animals, etc. We got to Tawang and the Tibetan border before the work had hardly began. With a lot of confusion, His Holiness came. In the month's time that we were there [with Chushigandru], we were not able to do our work as planned. We went to see His Holiness and met the Kashag and said His Holiness would go to India and we would take the arms and return and fight in Tibet. The Kashag said that if we could do that it was good and gave us copies of orders saying that we should get full assistance. So we returned, and a day and a half later ran into many who were fleeing. We stopped them, saying that "You cannot flee and whatever needs to be done [in India], His Holiness is there and he will do it." So we stopped them and had meetings. The women and children were allowed to leave.   

**Q:**  So the idea was to hold land and?   

**A:**  We said that we need to hold a small piece of land and it would be easier for His Holiness' work. And even if we have to get [outside] help it would be useful. If we did not have any land, then where were we going to get the help. If we had a small piece of land, even if we asked for help and things to be dropped by air, then they would do it right? Many people were coming via Sayla saying there was no use for us to go since the Chinese were coming. We said that we were going. We left early and when we reached the middle of the pass, it was around just passed noon and the Chinese had already reached the summit. Then they fired their cannons, but we couldn't see any Chinese. Though we tried, it was not possible to stay and we withdrew. At the check-post there was Dawa Babu. It is said that a long time ago he was Reting Labrang's servant and the Indian government’s best intelligence agent. He knew Tibetan and we met. He said to get all the arms together and we handed [them] to the Indian government check post.   

**Q:**  When you first went to Lhasa, what were you supposed to do? Was it regarding the plans of the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  When we were at Lhasa, we got message replies. We were kids and had nothing to say to the government. However, we were asked to work since we were believed in and trusted. We stated our opinions and also got news about the Chinese at Lhasa, about their military, schools, etc. So we wrote letters and sent news to Kalimpong. We gave the letters, but we didn't know the contents.   

**Q:**  Did you meet Phala directly?   

**A:**  We meet Drönyerchemmo directly since we did not dare trust sending letters and messages through servants and others working around him. One difficulty meeting Drönyerchemmo was that if it was too late, one could not go. The bodyguard soldiers were there and we had to speak with them first before we could meet Phala. When we were meeting with him, there were no servants with him. When servants served tea, he waited until they left and then spoke.   

**Q:**  I know it's been many years, but do you remember what he spoke about?   

**A:**  No not really. He asked us what we heard in Lhasa. Then we told him that we had to leave for Kalimpong since we couldn't stay like that [in fear]. He said that it was all right, and we requested and received traveling expenses. And he also send some Kayi [His Holiness' letters].   

**Q:**  To Kalimpong [unfinished]?  

