# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0028.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ]; Real name Tashi Wangdü [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་འདུས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ]; Real name Tashi Wangdü [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་འདུས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ], whose real name was Tashi Wangdü [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་འདུས], was a shengo [Tib. ཞལ་ངོ] in the Trapchi Regiment of the Tibetan Army. In this interview, he discusses how his household in the traditional society was required to provide a soldier as a corvée tax because it held arable land from the Tibetan government called a "military gang" [Tib. མགང]. He discusses his life as a soldier and the rules in the regiment when it was travelling using corvée taxes for horses and pack animals. He talks about the history of the Gyajong Regiment and how new taxes were levied to start the Gusung and Trapchi Regiments. He discusses the manorial estate system in the old society and the attempt to merge the Tibetan army into the People's Liberation Army. Jabo talks about how the People's Association formed and the defection of a Chinese officer to the Trapchi Regiment. He also discusses how Barshi came to his troops in the Potala telling them the Dalai Lama had been invited to the show at Chinese military headquarters, and their meeting about this and how they went to Norbulinga the next morning on March 10th. He also describes the killing of Phagpalha and the injuring of Sambo.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0028_01/H_0028_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Where were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in Jartö [Tib. སྦྱར་སྟོད] which is located at the upper part of Jar Sangnga Chöling [Tib. སྦྱར་གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་གླིང].   

**Q:**  When did you become a soldier?   

**A:**  I became a soldier in the Trapchi Regiment when I was 14 years old.   

**Q:**  To whom did Jartö belong?   

**A:**  We were a government taxpayer household [Tib. གཞུང་རྒྱུགས་པ] under the Nyan Lhüntse Dzong [Tib. གཉན་ལྷུན་རྩེ་རྫོང].   

**Q:**  How did you become a soldier? Did you go to become a soldier privately?   

**A:**  Our household held a military gang [Tib. དམག་རྒང] of arable land which was 18 khe in size. Consequently, we were obligated to send one soldier to the Trapchi Regiment and half a soldier to the Bodyguard Regiment [Tib. གུསུང་མགར]. We didn't have to work for any of the other taxes called Dur [Tib. འདུར], for example, the horse/carrying animal corvée obligations (Tib. ཏཝུ་ཁེམ [རྟའུ་ཁལ་མ]).   

**Q:**  Did you have to send the corvée horses and the pack animals?   

**A:**  When the soldiers and the adrung (government messenger) traveled, the (other) miser would send the corvée horses for us. Whenever the whole regiment [Tib. མདའ་ཁག] would travel from Lhasa, they would travel according to the rules and the Lhasa Tshopa [Tib. ཚོ་པ] [who was in charge of corvée transportation in Lhasa] would send our corvée horses. When the soldiers were going to leave on the next day, they would send a dingpön, a jupön and one servant ahead as the advance people [Tib. སྔོན་འགྲོ་བ]. These would arrange the lodgings for the depön, two rupön, four gyagpön and the trumpeters. The rupön and the gyagpön and the trumpeters got corvée horses. Each of the soldiers had a corvée pack animal, but they had to walk all the way. They didn't have any corvée horses to ride. As soon as we arrived at a relay station [Tib. སཙིག], another shengo and jupön and a soldier would go ahead to make the lodging arrangement for the next day. The former shengo and jupön who had arrived the day before were not allowed to depart. They had to remain there and hand over the things like carpets to the miser while the gembo would issue a receipt saying that had gotten all the things [that head been lent to the soldiers] back. In case some items were missing, the gembo would tell the depön and rupön and they would not send that shengo as the advance person again to arrange the lodgings. The regiment would pay [the villagers] 1 trangga for each pack animal and 3 sho for each corvée horse. The source of this was tax money that had been paid to the regiment as a substitute for sending a corvée soldier [Tib. དམག་དོད] from the four areas of the north [Tib. བྱང་རིགས་སྡེ་བཞི] and from Tö Ngari Korsum [Tib. སྟོད་མངའ་རིས་སྐོར་གསུམ] [note: i.e.,distant nomad areas]. Some people were saying that the Tibetan soldiers were travelling like the beggars or horse sellers and they would rob the miser. There wasn't anything like this. If the shengo or the soldiers had some problems with the miser, this will be investigated when they arrived at the destination like Chamdo and Nagchu and some of the shengo would get demoted. If the matter was a minor one, they would be given a warning not to do it again in the future. Normally, a regiment had one depön, two rupön, eight gyagpön and 20 shengo. These got corvées horses and the trumpeters also got horse corvée because they had to follow the depön. The teachers and the jupön had yaks for riding. Each of the soldiers had a pack animal for loading food and other things and they had to walk all day even when they went [far away] to Chamdo. The soldiers would depart earlier so we would get to the destination at the same time. Usually, the shengo and the soldiers would go ahead to arrange the lodging. They would stick the names of the depön and the rupön on the doors of the houses where they were going to stay. This was called the Tsershag [Tib. མཚེར་ཤག]. They would also stick labels where the soldiers were going to stay. When the soldiers traveled, the discipline was very good.   

**Q:**  Later, where did you live? Did you live in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Mostly, I used to stay in Lhasa. At that time, the leaders treated me well and I was quite carefree compared with the other soldiers. I used to go to practice the trumpet in the morning. At that time, two shengo's would go to Lhasa every day to do patrolling. Their duty was to supervise whether or not the soldiers were fighting and gambling in Lhasa. Sometimes, when there were serious law cases, it was possible that the shengo would get demoted. When I went to Drigung, I was able to make an accomplishment and for this I was appointed as a major as an reward. The major and the shengo are the same rank and the major was a kind of additional shengo. At that time, mostly, I was staying in Lhasa so they said, "We don't need to have two shengo go on patrol because the major is in Lhasa. And they decided to send only one shengo to Lhasa. They didn't do this to treat me nicely; they did it because there was a kind of danger in Lhasa. At that time I told the leaders that if I have to help the shengo like this, can I have the opportunities to go wherever I would like to go such as going to collect the army uniforms and so on? They said, "You will get all the opportunities that you want to go. You don't need to go to pull the palanquin of the Dalai Lama. This was called Jamdren [Tib. བྱམས་འདྲེན]. And you don't have to stay in the regiment as an obligation and go to get the barley loads [Tib. འབྲུ་དོད]. You also don't need to go to patrol around the outer part of Lhasa. Please do the patrolling inside Lhasa and the shengo will pass down whatever orders were given from the regiment." Normally, when the soldiers asked for leave, they would be given a certificate for that. If the soldiers didn't have that, they could be seized. They were not allowed to wander around in Lhasa recklessly. When there wasn't any problem during the day. [When there were problems] the shengo would go to report this to the depön and seek instructions from the depön. Then the depön would give the instructions, for example, saying the magji or two of the depön would come to the regiment on the next day and you have to make the arrangements. While I was in Lhasa, if something urgent happened at night like soldiers fighting, I had to go to the regiment even at night from Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in the Trapchi Regiment altogether?   

**A:**  There were 1,000 soldiers and 52 military officers [Tib. འགོ་པ]. In addition to that, there were 8 soldiers who were called Dingphar Gye [Tib. ལྡིང་འཕར་བརྒྱད]. These soldiers were the additional soldiers sent by some of the households who had an obligation to send a soldier. As for the 52 military officers; there were 40 shengo, 8 gyagpön, 4 rupön. The depön came from the ranks of government officials. Mostly, they came from the senampa [Tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] rank. At that time, the depön was the son of Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་སྲས]. There were also a few depön who were not senampa.   

**Q:**  Were there any specific areas from where the Trapchi Regiment's soldiers came? And did most of the soldiers come through the military gang land tax process?   

**A:**  Yes. The majority of the soldiers came to the regiment because their families held 18 sönkhe of land. This [grant of farming land was] called a military gang [Tib. དམག་རྐང]. Holding this land meant the family didn't need to do corvée work for any other taxes; they only had to send a soldier. " The uniforms were sent from home and the soldier also got 2 khe of barley per month as their salary from the government. And there was also money paid to them as a tea and butter allowance, and finally we were paid 42 sang per month. The soldiers of the Trapchi Regiment came from Ü, [Tib. དབུས] or central Tibet and from the 18 dzong in the Lhoka area and from the Kongpo-Dakpo-Jar areas (Tib. Jardag Kongsum [Tib. སྦྱར་དྭགས་ཀོང་གསུམ]). And there were also soldiers from the kudrak households in Lhasa. At the time of Kelsang Gyatso [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ], the 7th Dalai Lama, there was a very powerful person called Drung Phola [Tib. སྒྲུང་ཕོ་ལྷ] from Tsang [note: i.e., Pholhane]. I heard his estate was around the Drongtse [Tib. འབྲོང་རྩེ]. At that time, many Chinese came to Lhasa. This was originally caused by the Mongols at the time of the 5th Dalai Lama saying that they will help. Later, the Chinese also sent people saying that they were soldiers and each ten people had a gun. After that, Pholhanas told the Chinese that the Chinese soldiers should go back because Tibet is a small place. Later, he died and he had two sons. One of his sons was called Jigme [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད] and he took the post of the Ngari Garpön [Tib. མངའ་རིས་སྒར་དཔོན]. Another son was called Gyurme Namgyal [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. He was in Lhasa and inherited [the ruling authority] from his father. The Chinese gave him a kind of title called Wang saying that he had to succeed his father. The son in Ngari was killed. Gyurme Namgyal told the Chinese that they should withdraw their army, but the Chinese didn't listen to this. Therefore, 3,000 Tibetan soldiers were recruited and it was called Gyajong [Tib. རྒྱ་སྦྱོང] or literally "the Chinese trained Army." This was for driving out the Chinese. Then the Chinese sent wireless [at that time a message] to China saying that Wang Gyurme Namgyal is holding the Chinese politics in his hand. The answer was to destroy him. [The subject then talks in detail about how Gyurme Namgyal and his servants killed the Chinese --> The Gyajong Regiment became the Trapchi Regiment. There were 1,000 soldiers from Shigatse and 1,000 from Gyantse. The Gusung Regiment of the Dalai Lama was recruited by conscripting one additional corvée soldier from each four soldiers from Tsang. It was called the Shina tax and Regiment. The government also conscripted one additional soldier from each two soldiers from Ü. It was called the Nyina tax and Regiment. The families of these corvée soldiers already had been given 18 khe of land as military gang so the government didn't give any additional land basis for the additional conscripts.   

**Q:**  Did they pay the soldiers a monthly salary?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  From where did the money come to pay the salary?   

**A:**  This was paid from the Phogang Office. At that time, the official in charge of this was Gangtö Jagdrag [Tib. གངས་སྟོད་ལྕགས་སྤྲག]. In the 1950's, Jensel Kumbela [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས], the one who used to be the favorite of the [13th] Dalai Lama, was in charge of the government granary and the salary was paid from there. Before that, the salary was paid from Shöl. The ordinary soldiers would get 42 sang as their tea and butter allowance and we, the majors, would get 84 sang. At first, when I became a soldier they were paying a tsamba salary and a tea and butter allowance of 2 sang, 6 sho and 7 and a half karma. At that time, a round brick of tea cost just 10 trangga. When we sold the salary [in kind], we could get 3 sang. Later, we sold the salary for 4 dotse [200 sang]. Actually, the tsamba salary and the clothes and boots were sent from home. At that time, the regiment would send soldiers to collect the uniforms from the families who were obliged to send corvée soldiers [Tib. གླ་བདག]. The woolen materials were measured by a unit consisting of a person's outstretched arms. The employer (family) would seal the end of the roll of the woolen materials (for making clothing) and we had to hand this over to the regiment and they will check whether it was all right or not. The soldiers who would go to collect the uniforms were not allowed to seek any kind of bribes. Later, the Phadang [Tib. ཕ་དང] Regiment, which was the 14th Regiment, was established. This was called the Drugna [Tib. དྲུག་སྣ] Regiment. The 13th Regiment, or the Padang [Tib. པ་དང] Regiment, was the Drongdrag Regiment. Its depön were Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] and Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང]. My regiment was called the Trapchi Regiment because the regiment was located in the place called Trapchi, but actually it was the Gyajong Regiment.   

**Q:**  Did the government taxpayers, the kudrak and the monastic estates also have to send soldiers as a tax?   

**A:**  The estates that belonged to the aristocrats [Tib. གེརཔ] might have to send soldiers as a tax. For example, the Surkhang household itself didn't need to send soldiers, but they had many other estates and those estates might have had to send soldiers as a tax [depending on the kind of land they held].   

**Q:**  Did they also count the number of sönkhe of land when estates had to send soldiers?   

**A:**  If one of the estates of the aristocrats (kudrak) had a military gang, they had 18 sönkhe of land and they had to send one soldier. There were also military gang attached to monastic estates and they had to send soldiers. The estates that originally belonged to the Namgyal Tratsang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང] and the Gyüdö and Gyüme monasteries didn't need to send soldiers, but for the estates granted later by the Regents or the Dalai Lamas, they might have had the military gang attached and if so, they would have had to send soldiers. Otherwise, Sera, Drepung and Ganden didn't have to send soldiers.   

**Q:**  In 1951, it was mentioned in the 17-Point Agreement that the Tibetan army's soldiers will be merged into People's Liberation Army. How did that happen?   

**A:**  At that time, the Chinese tried their best to merge the Tibetan soldiers into People's Liberation Army. Right at that time, many Tibetan soldiers were discharged [note: the overall number of the Tibetan army was reduced]. But the 3,000 Tibetan soldiers and the 1,000 Gusung bodyguard soldiers of the Dalai Lama and the 6th Regiment, the Chadang regiment, still remained. The Chadang Regiment was the Simchungwa [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་བ] Regiment. This regiment used to be the Gusung Regiment of the Dalai Lamas in the early times. Therefore, they were called the Simchungwa. Simchung was the honorific term for private room/living quarters. All of the other regiments were discharged. Only the Kadang (the Gusung Regiment of the Dalai Lama), the Khadang (the Trapchi Regiment), the Gadang (the Shigatse) regiment, and probably the Ngadang (the Dingri Regiment) and the Chadang, the Simchung regiment, remained. Finally, the Chinese said that they were going to make us wear Chinese uniforms. We told them that we are not going to wear their uniforms. Then they insisted that the soldiers of the Gusung Regiment should wear Chinese uniforms. Probably, they had a reason for that, and they were given the summer and the winter Chinese uniforms. At that time, we were told to wear the Chinese uniform, but we refused to wear it. Finally, they said that they were going to change the uniforms [only] of our military officers and they gave them uniforms with the Chinese insignias to the depön, rupön and the gyagpön. Some of them had four stars as the insignia. When I checked during the Chinese military anniversaries like the 8.1, I found that there were about 80 Chinese military officers wearing the same uniform as our depön. This meant that all the places were filled with soldiers.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama came back from Yadong, many Chinese soldiers arrived at Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Chinese didn't have enough food and the Tibetan Government had to supply them a lot of grain. At that time, I heard that in 1951-52, the People's Association was set up. Do you have any thing to tell me about this?   

**A:**  In the beginning when the Chinese came to Tibet they arrived at Lhasa on the 15th of the 4th Tibetan month of 1949 [note: the PLA arrived in Lhasa in 1951]]. This was not mentioned in the documents of our government. On that day, when all the kalön were enjoying themselves in the Lukhang [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང] [located behind the Potala Palace] and sitting in coracles and there were a lot of shows there. When the people came back from the Lukhang, on that day, 6 Chinese had arrived at the Seshing [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ] located quite near to the Yabshi Taktse [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་སྟག་འཚེར] House. At that time, we didn't know that. On the next days, when I was blowing the trumpet and practicing beating the big drum, the shengo Tashi Kelsang [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྐལ་བཟང] called me to come back to the regimental headquarters. Then the summoning trumpet call was sounded and they also called all the trumpeters. At that time, the shengo Tashi Kelsang told me that I should go with him. I asked him, "Are we going to Lhasa or to a long distance?" He said that we have to go a long distance. Then I told him, "I am not going with you because I don't have the saddle and that stuff prepared." He said, "Please, you have to go with me, I will prepare the saddle and all of those things." Then I accepted to go because it was an order from the shengo. On that day, we were sent down at noon to Seshing, and at that time the Madrong [Tib. དམག་དྲུང] or the secretary of the Tibetan Military Headquarters and the gadrung were there, as were the two Shölpa who were the heads of the Shöl Legung. Then we called the people who make the loads and we let them pack the wireless equipment. There were four loads. I heard that the Chinese had been using the wirelesses and using the generator with the sound, "da da da" on the 15th of the 4th month. After that, we were told to stay there and we were not allowed to go to other places. Then one day, the Madrong and the gadrung received a phone call from the Kashag   

**Q:**  Do you have anything to tell me about the People's Association in Lhasa?   

**A:**  At that time, Ngabö was forced to sign the 17-Point Agreement. So the Water-Dragon Year People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ] was set up and it said that we will not accept the Agreement. At that time, our leaders [of the People's Association] were the manager [Tib. chandzö] of Sera Mey nicknamed "horse head" [Tib. རྟ་མགོ་ལགས]. I don't know his real name. And there was a clerk called Tsawa Trunyi [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག], and Jayan Dawa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ] from Drepung's Guge [Tib. གུ་གེ], and Drepung's Drubthob la [Tib. གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ལགས], and Kamekang Chöndze Phüntso Tashi [Tib. དཀར་མེ་ཁང་ཆོས་མཛད་ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. They were the leaders. At that time, we held the meetings in Jara [Tib. སྦྱར་རག]. I was the only person who attended the meetings from our regiment. There were also about 17 dobdo monks. One of them was Amdo Samdru [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་བསམ་གྲུབ] who is still in Dharamsala. And there was Drepung's Phukhang Wangdü [Tib. ཕུ་ཁང་དབངས་འདུས] and Tsempel Shara [Tib. ཚེ་འཕེལ་ཞ་ར] from Sera Mey and a monk from Sera Ngagpa nicknamed weasel (Tib. ནིཨུལི [Tib. ནེའུ་ལི]). There were many tough and strong monks. At that time, many people gathered together and opposed the Chinese. One day the leaders gathered, I think in Lhogyü [Tib. ལྷོ་རྒྱུད] in the Jokhang, and made a petition. It was said that they could be arrested [when they went to give the petition], so there were 20-30 of our people stationed at the back door of the Jokhang near the Tara [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ] Temple. Similarly, there were 20-30 people stationed at the east back door of the Jokhang called the Sera Tago [Tib. ལྟག་སྒོ], and there were 20-30 people in the small alley called Odöbu [Tib. འོ་དོད་སྦུག] at the south-east of the Jokhang and there were 40-50 people at the front of Jokhang. There were also about 20-30 people stationed at the door through the Shingra [Tib. ཤིང་ར], the firewood storage house in the Jokhang. And all of the members of the People's Association were in the Barkor Street. If they had arrested them on that day, then it would have made a mess, because all of us had made preparations with weapons. Some of them had guns and some of them had daggers or swords. When we gathered in Jarag, we first asked the oracle of the Jarag Tsenkhang [Tib. སྦྱར་རག་བཙན་ཁང] to go into trance and give a prophecy. The second meeting was held in Tsomönling, the fourth meeting was held in Drubthob La's house. At that time, we called them [leaders] to the meeting, but they told us to go back and deliver the messages to the local people. Later, the leaders told us that the Kashag, actually the Chinese, told us that it is definitely not all right for us to set up a People's Association. So from today on, they made us like the proverb, "Leave alone beating drums, they made us so that we can't even touch the drum stick." [Tib. རྔ་བཞག་ནས་རྔ་ཡུ་ལ་ཡང་འཆང་མི་ཆོག་པ]." Therefore [the Kashag said that] for the time being you should scatter and go to do trading and whatever you want to." The Kashag said they won't punish the leaders. That's how all of us were sent out [to do whatever we wanted to]. Among us there was also Chanzdö Ngawang Tempa [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ] who is now in Dharamsala.   

**Q:**  Is he still alive?   

**A:**  Yes, he is in McLeod Ganj. After few days, all of the people like Tsawa Trunyi were arrested. At that time, they couldn't arrest Jayan Dawa because he kind of left for India. Kamekang Phüntso Tashi was also arrested and imprisoned in Tromsikang [Tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང] [the Tibetan Police Station]. At that time, all of our people were kind of scattered and the mother of Tsawa Trunyi died when he was in the jail.   

**Q:**  I heard that they submitted a petition consisting of 6 points, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a booklet with that, but I don't have that. It was written in the book published by the Ütsang Association [Tib. དབུས་གཙང་ཚོགས་པ]. At that time, the main clerk who wrote the document was Tongsum Jola [Tib. སྟོང་གསུམ་ཇོ་ལགས]. Later, the members increased more and more and Gyantse Namgyal Wangchuk [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་ཕྱུག] who is now among the deputies, was also there.   

**Q:**  I also heard that Alo Chöndze was in the People's Association, was he in it when you were there?   

**A:**  That was the later Association when they said that they are going to offer a golden throne to the Dalai Lama. At that time, Alo Chöndze was not the only person. All the people in Lhasa and from the four directions donated a lot of things when they heard that they were building the golden throne. At that time, the Trapchi Regiment also donated 150-200 dotse and Depön Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] donated 10-15 gold coins.   

**Q:**  This was later in 1956-57, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was trouble in Kham and many Khambas came up [to Tibet] and then Chushigandru was set up, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was after that. I shouldn't say this, but actually if we had worked hard together [fought with the Chinese] when the Chinese came at the beginning, although basically it would have be difficult to stop the Chinese, we could have stopped them for 2-3 years because at that time there were no highways and they had to carry their food on their backs. They were just carrying some tsamba in cotton bags and they had sores on their lips. But at that time, there were some mishaps [Tib. གྲ་མ་འགྲིག]. Later, they set up Chushigandru in a kind of desperate situation. But at that time [1950-51], we didn't get along well. Actually, the Tibetan Regiments were established up to the Phadang Regiment, and all of them were there and there were also monk soldiers from Sera, Drepung and Ganden who were sent down there [to Chamdo]. At that time, if our people in Kham had shown solidarity, something might have worked out, but they didn't have solidarity and they didn't fight against the Chinese. They also didn't have an idea of what the communists would be like. They thought that the communists might be kind of good.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Khambas like Panda [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] try to set up some kind of area that was neither under the Tibetan government nor under the Guomindang?   

**A:**  There wasn't anything like this. In the past, the Nyarong [Tib. ཉག་རོང] area belonged to Tibet. This is where Gyari Nyima was from. It was said that the people of Nyarong are tough [Tib. ངན་པ], but actually the people are not that tough, but it was a very safe place where about 10 people could stop several thousands of people right at that place. After the ceasefire with the Chinese [in 1932], the areas beyond the Yangtze River became Chinese territory and they had to pay taxes to the Chinese. Before that, all of those areas belonged to Tibet. Later, the Khambas knew that the Chinese were not good so Chushigandru revolted against the Chinese [in 1957-59]. But by that time, it was kind of too late because the highways and the airport had been built. So how could they handle the Chinese?   

**Q:**  Later, I heard that when Chushigandru was in Lhoka, some of the Tibetan soldiers also went there, right?   

**A:**  In the beginning, when Chushigandru started, they had relations with our regiment. When they held the meetings, our Gyagpön Kelsang Dramdrü [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ] and those people went there frequently. One day [in 1958], when I was patrolling in Lhasa, Gyagpön Kedram la came to me in the early morning. I invited him inside and served him tea. He was looking around many times when my wife came to serve tea implying that he had something to tell me. So I told my wife to go outside and then he told me, "Last night, one Chinese came to our regiment. I couldn’t understand his language, but he carried two rifles and a pistol." This was the Chinese who was later called Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. The Gyagpön told me, "I have tied up his horse there. [unclear sentence] And then he [the gyagpön] told me, "We need a good interpreter. So you go ahead and find one." I told him, "I will bring a person who knows the language perfectly, but there is not a single interpreter who is a good person because they all learned the language from the Chinese. Anyway, I will bring an interpreter and the regiment should pay him 300-400 dotse for doing the interpreting. I will bring him at dawn and take him back after dark. But it is definite that he will tell this to the Chinese, so I will kill him when I reach the Trapchi Linga. [on the way back]" The Gyagpön was kind of afraid and said, "You can't do that." Then we called one of the relatives of the wife of our fourth rupön and she did the interpreting. Probably they paid some money to her. Probably, it was too much for me to say that I will kill him. Later, the Chinese said that he was a medium rank leader in the [PLA's] Artillery Regiment. He used to be stationed in the Linga sarpa [Tib. གླིང་ག་གསར་པ] located on the east side of Lhasa and while there he got together with the daughter of the park's caretaker and they had a child. After that, he was moved to Nortölinga. At that time, he heard from his friends among the soldiers that he would be arrested, so he told his servant [who was a soldier] to saddle the servant's horse because he was going to attend a meeting. He did that because his horse used to get frightened frequently. He took 400-500 loose bullets and two rifles and a pistol. At that time, his servant was suspicious and said he would also come with him. But he told him, "You don't need to come." Then the servant said, "Why are you taking so many guns?" He replied, "If I don't take guns, nowadays there are bandits and if I encounter bandits, I will take out this gun when the other gun runs out of bullets." But his servant was still suspicious. Later, when he was riding behind the Potala Palace, he saw that one jeep was following him and another jeep was coming towards him. Then he went to the place where a stream was flowing and he made his horse lay down in the stream. He held the horse's mouth upwards, since if water got into the horse's nose it would make a sound. Then he attached a letter on the horse's neck saying that he had jumped into the river and committed suicide. He thought of tying the horse near the river bank, but he thought that this won't work out so he send the horse back to the regiment and entered the Trapchi Regiment. He was kept in the regiment. At that time, a soldier called Migmar [Tib. མིག་དམར] and I were told to go to take Chinese [who they had given the Tibetan name] Lobsang Tashi to Phembo Nalendra [Tib. འཕན་པོ་ན་ལེན་དྲ] monastery. Later, our regiment had relations with Chushigandru and they held a meeting and he was sent with Andru Jinda [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་སྦྱིན་བདག] [Gombo Tashi] to Drigutang [Tib. གྲི་གུ་ཐང] wearing a Tibetan chupa. The reason why the Chushigandru gathered in Drigutang was because this place was said to be a lucky place where when the Trapchi soldiers fought with the Chinese in earlier times. After all of the Tibetan soldiers got scattered and some of them were killed, later the Trapchi soldiers regrouped again in Drigutang and then they drove out the Chinese. When Chushigandru was in Drigu, the Dalai Lama went to Ganden Monastery for a pilgrimage [Note: actually for part of his Geshe exam] and I was among the retinue. At that time, there was a jupön called Thuthob [Tib. མཐུ་སྟོབས] who was from Lho Dongkar [Tib. ལྷོ་གདོང་དཀར]. He and another soldier called Tsewang [Tib. ཚེ་དབང] were send as messengers to Chushigandru to make connections. The two of them didn't catch up with the Chushigandru in Drigu, but they met them in Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ]. The posters stuck up in Lhasa were also written by clerks from our regiment like Renda Phüntso [Tib. རེན་མདའ་ཕུན་ཚོགས] who is now in America or Canada and Dewala [Tib. སྡེ་བ་ལགས] and the clerk Tsering Chödrag [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ཆོས་གྲགས]. At that time, when many people of the Chushigandru got scattered [in Sichuan] and came to Lhasa, our regiment and the Chadang [Tib. ཆ་དང] regiment gave them weapons and saw them off to Lhoka. When the Jang Günchö [Tib. འཇང་དགུན་ཆོས], the winter dialectics debate, was held, we let the people of Chushigandru wear monk's robes. Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] was one of them. After that, Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང], Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] and later on, the lay official Dumkhang la [Tib. ལྡུམ་ཁང་ལགས] who is now in Dharamsala, were sent to Lhoka to the Chushigandru. That's how they got to Lhoka. At that time, the Chinese were told that Namseling and the two of them went to talk with the Khambas, but internally who knows what they went for. Later, Dumkhang la was sent to deliver letters and whatever other things they had with them. Many soldiers from the regiments like the Gusung, Trapchi and Chadang also went to Chushigandru. The largest number of soldiers [who went] were from the Gyantse Regiment. There were about 15-16 soldiers [who went] with the Shengo Pema Gyalpo [Tib. པད་མ་རྒྱལ་པོ]. Many better households who had loyalty also went to join Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  Did those soldiers go voluntarily?   

**A:**  They went there surreptitiously and voluntarily.   

**Q:**  The government didn't send them openly, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Actually, the government could have seized them right away after they left, but they didn't do that and they just let them go.   

**Q:**  From where did they [Chushigandru] get weapons? I heard that they got the weapons from a monastery?   

**A:**  These were the weapons in Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. ཤང་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] where the government had stored weapons. These were taken through making relations with the government. Otherwise, how could they know such a monastery had weapons.   

**Q:**  Some people said that they made war against the monastery and robbed the guns.   

**A:**  No. They didn't make war against the monastery. Actually, only the government officials and the Tibetan Military Headquarters [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང] knew that there were guns there. It was difficult to give the weapons from Lhasa, so they talked to each other and took the guns from there. Just before the Dalai Lama left, on the 6th of the 2nd month and the 15th of March, the late Kungö Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས] [note: a the monk official from Taktra Labrang] took out 10 rifles, 2 Bren-guns and 10 trunks of ammunition from Norbulinga. I went to bring them to Nyetang Norbu Gang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང་ནོར་བུ་སྒང] and handed them over to Litang Künga Samden [Tib. ལི་ཐང་ཀུན་དགའ་བསམ་གཏན]. On that night, it was planned to take the Dalai Lama, but we were unable to do that. Therefore, I was sent to bring the guns to Nyetang with 7 soldiers and the dobdo servant of Lobsang Yeshe.   

**Q:**  From where did they take out the weapons?   

**A:**  They took them out from the Potala and brought them to Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  I want to ask you about the work you did when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa.   

**A:**  At the beginning, the Chinese said, "We want to go to India, so we need a road to get there. That's why we came to Tibet. We didn't come to Tibet to make the people suffer." The Chinese forced the Tibetans to sign the 17-Point Agreement. At that time, we didn't have the right to drive our own vehicles. We had get the permission from the Chinese. Actually, the Tibetans didn't have authority. At the beginning, the People's Liberation Army had very good discipline. I never saw them in the bars and the restaurants. Once when I was playing mahjong in Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] there was a Chinese couple. All of a sudden, I heard two gun shots and I heard that a person was killed. At that time, I saw that the Chinese man had fallen down and the woman was standing there. Later both of them fell down. I heard that the two of them were talking and crying for a while and the man also took out a handkerchief and gave it to the woman and then the man shot the woman and then he shot himself on his forehead. I heard that the Chinese were killing people right away when something went wrong. In 1956-57, the Chinese became more and more strict. After that, [there was] Kungö Maya [Tib. རྨ་བྱ], who is in Darjeeling, and Lobsang Yeshe who was the tsidrung of Taktra [Tib. སྟག་བྲག] Labrang. He [Lobsang Yeshe] had been to China going to school to study, but he had tried to hoist the Tibetan flag or something like that and was sent back to Tibet in a tactful manner [not making a big deal of the incident]. After he [Lobsang Yeshe] came back, he told us that the Communist Chinese weren't doing anything good for us and he was saying that we can't stay like this. So he was making kind of plans to oppose the Chinese. They were saying that we need weapons. At that time, we were in the Potala Palace as guards. Just before the war broke out in Lhasa, Maya, Lobsang Yeshe, Jangra Khenjung [Tib. ལྕང་ར], Barshi Jedrung [Tib. བར་གཞིས་རྗེ་དྲུང] who is now in America, Dodrong Gyentsen Yönden [Tib. རྡོ་གྲོང་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཡོན་ཏན], another Lobsang Yeshe and I held a meeting in the Potala. At that time, I was staying in a house called Tagtsang Gong [Tib. སྟག་ཚང་གོང] in the Potala Palace which used to belong to a simgag of the Dalai Lama. The meeting was held in that house. We discussed making connection with the leaders of the Tibetan regiments to be able to take out weapons. I was supposed to be the person making connections with the leaders of my regiment. One day, about 25-26 people attended the meeting. I made a very good butter tea in a big kettle and served them tea. Then the late Lobsang Yeshe came down and whispered to me, "We are going to dismiss the meeting because the Chinese have sent spy to follow Maya la." When I asked him who was the spy? He said, "He was the pockmarked person called Rimpoche and he was from Sera Monastery. He was sent after Maya. So we are going to dismiss the meeting." Then I told him, "Since the meeting was already held, go ahead and hold the meeting. When the meeting was over and when the spy would go on the stairs, I will kill him in the corner of the very wide walls where the Simgag used to pile up his ashes. I will keep his body in the garbage and on the next day, I will buy two boxes. Then I will cut the body into pieces and put it in the trunks and I will bury him in the sandy area [Tib. བྱེ་རགས]." But, Lobsang Yeshe said, "you can't do that. Just leave him today." Probably, he thought that it might stir up some trouble. So on that day, we were unable to hold the meeting. Later, sometimes, they held some meetings, but they were unable to discuss that. After that, one night when it was almost time to take the Dalai Lama out, Barshi Jedrung came to the Potala Palace to our regiment when it was almost dark and said, "Tomorrow, the Dalai Lama is going to be invited to the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལས་ཁུངས] [note: he meant the Military Headquarters] and the Chinese have said that we are not allowed to take bodyguards and the Dalai Lama has to come alone. And even if you are going take gusung, they are not allowed to carry weapons." Then, we held a meeting in the Potala saying that this is not good. After Barshi Jedrung left, we sent two soldiers to Sera and two soldiers to Drepung and we also sent two soldiers to the Chadang Regiment and we called up the Gyantse Regiment which was then in Shöl and we held a meeting. At the meeting, we told them that the Chinese are going to invite the Dalai Lama, so we should stop this through whatever methods that we have to use. On the next day, when we were getting up, the people already had started to going to Norbulinga. After that, when we went to Norbulinga carrying rifles, Bren-guns and the ammunition trunks, the people said, "Our soldiers are coming." They were crying a lot. At that time, we had stationed troops at all the alleys and I stayed on the roof of the house called Langkhang [Tib. གླང་ཁང] which was located near the main gate of Norbulinga where they used to keep camels. Then the Drungja was held. At that time, the people had completely surrounded Norbulinga. Right at that time, Sambo came to attend the meeting with his driver who was a Chinese man. The people acted carelessly and stoned him and broke the windows of his car. At that time, Sambo's son was our depön. After that, when I went down, I saw Kalön Surkhang [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང] and I am not sure if he was with Lhautara [Tib. ལྷ་བུ་རྟ་ར] or Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང]. Anyway there was a bearded tsidrung. They told the people, "Do not act in a disturbed manner like this. We are going to the Chinese to talk with them." At that point, the people yelled to them, "Please do not exchange our Dalai Lama for dayan coins." Then they told the people to keep quite. I heard that the Gusung Depön was there, but I didn't see him. Soon after that, they came back and told the people, "You people can relax. It is decided that the Dalai Lama will not go to the Chinese."   

**Q:**  Did Surkhang say that?   

**A:**  Yes. I am sure that the Gusung Depön was there because he knew the Chinese language and he had to be the interpreter. I was a major [something like a shengo] and I had about 10 soldiers and a Bren-gun. When I was staying in the Langkhang, I saw Phagpalha Khenjung [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ ] coming down riding a bicycle and wearing a Tsalchuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ] [a kind of chupa usually worn by the lay officials] and a yellow woolen cap and a cloth mouth mask. He was supposed to go to Norbulinga. Right at that time, the people were saying, "He is a deceiver." Then he was unable to enter the gate of Norbulinga and he went under the house where I was standing. If he had ran away riding his bicycle, he could have gotten through because people wouldn't have been able to catch up with him. But he was kind of nervous and was hanging around the house where I was standing. He dismounted from his cycle and walked along. Then a person followed him and took out a sword and hit him on his head making the sound, "tak", but he didn't bleed. Probably, he got hit with the back side of the sword, but his woolen cap fell down. After that, he returned back and he might have thought of going inside Norbulinga. There were many people and one of them took out a pistol and shot him in the back and he fell down. I went to have a look and I told the other soldiers to stay there. He had already fallen down near the stone lion and by that time, he was also stoned quite a lot of times. A woman flapped her apron at him. At that time, his shoulder was moving a little bit. He was killed like this.   

