# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0028.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ]; Real name Tashi Wangdü [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་འདུས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ]; Real name Tashi Wangdü [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་འདུས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ], whose real name was Tashi Wangdü [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་འདུས], was a shengo in the Trapchi Regiment of the Tibetan Army. In this interview, he gives a firsthand account of the Dalai Lama's flight from Lhasa to India and his role in that.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0028_02/H_0028_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  They [his superiors] said, "We don't know about that. But we need a better soldier and they gave us your name saying that you are good. We are planning some work, but we don't know whether it will work out or not. You should swear that you won't tell this to any outsiders." I told them, "If this is so important, I will do this work and I swear by the Potala Palace, the Avalokitsevara [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལོ་ཀི་ཤོ་ར] and the three great monasteries not to tell this to any outsiders." Until now, though sometimes my livelihood was good and sometimes it was not -- like the horn of an antelope which is protruded and indented alternately -- I always stood on the side of the Tibetan Government led by the Dalai Lama. I had never done anything two-faced and I was like the proverb, "In the morning, I didn't apply dust on my buttocks and jump on the pastures like a gazelle [which has a white tail]. And in the evening, I didn't attach a stick on my head and climb up the mountain pass like a deer." [Tib. སྔ་དྲོ་དགོ་བ་ཡིན་ཟེར་རྐུབ་ལ་ཐལ་བ་བྱུགས་ནས་སྤང་གཤོང་སྒང་ལ་འཕག་འཚག་རྒྱག་རྒྱུ་མ་བྱུང། དགོང་དྲོ་ཤྭ་བ་ཡིན་ཟེར་མགོ་ལ་རྒྱུག་པ་གཟེར་ནས་ལ་སྒང་འཛེགས་རྒྱུ་མ་བྱུང]. For example, when I was working as a major, I swore by putting the scripture Mani Kambum [Tib. མ་ནི་བཀའ་འབུམ] on my head and I swore that, "From today on, I will go wherever the government tells me to go like the saying, "If I was told to hit my father's head, I will do it. I will go wherever I was told to go. Even if I was told to go to hell, I will go there." [Tib. མཛུབ་མོ་གར་གཏད་ཤར། རྒྱོབས་ཕ་མགོ། རྒྱུ་དམྱལ་བ]. When we would go to make war, we used to make oaths like this. Then they said, "Okay. Do you have a saddle? I said, "Yes, I have one." Then they said, "You used to smoke a lot, so take a packet of cigarettes. You don't need to take food. Just bring your saddle. You should select 9 soldiers from among the soldiers." At that time, there were about 500 soldiers [from his regiment] there in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and there were about 500 soldiers in the Potala. Then I selected 9 soldiers who looked good to me. At that time, the fourth <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> showed anger toward me saying, "If you take away all the best soldiers, what shall we keep here?" But I had received the order from the superiors, so I selected the best soldiers. I was given a horse from Norbulinga which was known to have been offered to the Dalai Lama in Kongpo when he went to China. Then I went to Lhasa to get the saddle. At that time, my wife asked me whether she should bring food or not. This was on the 8th of March [actually the 15th] or the 6th of the 2nd Tibetan month, and it was planned to take the Dalai Lama then. But on that day we were unable to take him out and the Chinese also fired a few cannon shots which didn't explode. At that time, two Chinese came from Nortölinga to surrender to us. There was a bunker in Kyangthang Naga [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་ན་ཁ]. We shot 305-English Carbines at the bunker when we fought a little bit in the morning and then the Chinese left the bunker. On that night, the late Kungö Lobsang Yeshe told me near the main gate of Norbulinga that I should go with the Dalai Lama. When my wife asked whether she should bring me food, I told her to look at people and see whether they are going to Norbulinga. If there are people going to Norbulinga, then bring me food. If not, don't bring the food. She asked me where I was going, but I told her I don't know. I have to go wherever I am told to go because I am like a dog of the government. Anyway, the war will take place and we have a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> at home. If the tsamba would run out, boil the barley and eat it. And there is a well in the house. When we took the Dalai Lama and reached the other side of river, there were about 15-20 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> soldiers in that place. There was Trehor Tempa Targye [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས], Litang Künga Samden, Derge Chudobu [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་ཆུ་ད྄ོ་བུ], the late Kungö Lobsang Yeshe, Gyantse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Wangchuk and Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་འཕྲེང] Tempa Targye. These were the people I knew. All together there were 10-20 riders. Then the Gusung Depön, Tashi Bera, and I with 9 soldiers went in the front of the Dalai Lama. Among the retinue, there was Gyagpön Kedram La and five soldiers such as Jetrug [Tib. གཅེས་ཕྲུག] and Migmar. The Rupön Sonam Dorje [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྡོ་རྗེ] was coming behind the Dalai Lama. The Fourth Rupön Wangden Tashi [Tib. དབང་ལྡན་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was coming with some soldiers when the Dalai Lama was going through Nortölinga. On that night, we traveled the whole night while the wind was blowing the sand towards our faces. At around 2 a.m., when we arrived at a big estate in Thangtö [Tib. ཐང་སྟོད], Kungö Drönyerchemmo told me to boil some clean water. Then the Dalai Lama arrived and they had arranged a small room for him where the windows were covered with paper. The Dalai Lama and the Gusung Depön stayed in that room. Tashi and I were standing on guard. Then the Gusung Depön told us to go to eat alternately and the Dalai Lama is going to leave right now. I saw the Khambas eating dry meat and I also ate meat. Then the Dalai Lama stopped for a meal at the bottom of the sand mountain pass and they offered him milk. We went ahead climbing up the mountain pass. When we got to the middle of the mountain pass, the Dalai Lama was kind of tired and he asked me several times if we are about to cross the mountain pass. After crossing the mountain pass, the Gusung Depön told me to call the ferry. When I went ahead with nine soldiers, I saw that there were people gathered on the other side of the river. Then I sent the soldiers with a shengo to the other side of the river to stop the people from coming. Then the Dalai Lama stayed on the bank for a while. Then Kungö Drönyerchemmo and the Simpön Khembo and another short <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> came over. All together there were 5 government officials. At that time, another soldier and I were the only soldiers in that place. The soldiers with Gyagpön Kedramla hadn't arrived yet. Then we put a carpet on a wooden table in the ferry for the Dalai Lama to sit on. When we got on the other side of the river, there were many people and they didn't go away when I told them. So I just galloped my horse amidst the crowd of people, so they ran away. Then the Dalai Lama arrived at the place called Kyishong Rakhame [Tib. སྐྱིད་གཤོངས་རག་སྨད]. At that time, the soldiers were well stationed and he stayed overnight in that place. Most of the soldiers came on foot carrying rifles and bullets. So they arrived at that place only at around 11 p.m. Some of them had blisters on their feet and some of them rode donkeys. The next day, when the Dalai Lama was about to leave, Rupön Sötre [Tib. བསོད་བཀྲས] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> Kelsang Loyag arrived with 80 Gusung soldiers. They might have known the Dalai Lama had left and then followed him. After that, the Dalai Lama stayed for a while and told Rupön Sötre, "You should leave 25 soldiers with a shengo as a retinue and you should take the other soldiers and go to stop [defend] Dorjedrag [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག]. Then after the Dalai Lama passes Dorjedrag, you should go to Drigutang." At that time, the Dalai Lama asked him many times, "Aren't you disappointed?" Probably, he told him that he is not disappointed. After that, the Dalai Lama stayed overnight at Jedeshöl [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཤོལ] At that time, the inner bodyguards were the 25 Gusung soldiers and the middle bodyguards were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers. The outer bodyguards were 15-20 Chushigandru soldiers. Then the Dalai Lama stopped for a meal at the Dadang Estate [Tib. མདའ་ཐང]. On the next day, we traveled and arrived at a place called Gyango and stayed overnight. On the next day, we crossed the Dzago [Tib. རྫ་སྒ྄ོ] La mountain pass and arrived at Chongye Jenye [Tib. འཕྱོང་རྒྱས་སྤྱན་ཡས]. On the next day, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola came to receive the Dalai Lama just before we arrived at Chongye Riwo Dechen [Tib. རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན]. On that day, the Dalai Lama stayed overnight in Riwo Dechen. After that, since there wasn't any danger from the front but there was some danger from the Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] side, Depön Tashi Bera and I were left behind. The Dalai Lama went ahead and we were following him. The Dalai Lama stayed at Chödewog [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་འོག] and we stayed in a nunnery. Then he stayed overnight in E Chundogyang [Tib. ཨེ་ཆུ་མདོ་ཀྱང]. Then he stayed overnight at Shopo Khadang [Tib.?] Monastery and on the next day, he arrived at Nyen Lhüntse [Tib. gnyan lhun rste]. Lhüntse Dzong was built exactly the same as the Potala Palace. Mainly, it was called Yügye Lhüntse [Tib. གཡུལ་རྒྱལ་ལྷུན་རྩེ]. The Dalai Lama was very glad to stay there and he said this would be the second Lhasa. By that time, many soldiers of Chushigandru had also arrived there and they did some canon target shooting. The Dalai Lama stayed in the Nyan Drile [Tib. gnyan 'bri lhas ?] Monastery. After that, the Dalai Lama crossed the Lagong La mountain pass. At that time, there were only five soldiers led by Gyagpön Kedram as the retinue of the Dalai Lama and all of our soldiers led by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and rupön were sent through Sompü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད] and Thongshö and crossed the Dokhog [Tib. ?] la Mountain pass. We stayed overnight at Somphü and the Dalai Lama stayed in Joratse [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར་རྩེ]. On the next day, we crossed the Dokhog la and the mountain pass in Chayü [Tib. བྱ་ཡུལ]. When we arrived at the upper part of the lake, the Dalai Lama was coming through the lower part of the lake. He stayed overnight at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> Monastery and we stayed overnight at Yamarong. We sent some soldiers ahead and the remaining soldiers stayed in Yamarong. On the next day, all of us had an audience with the Dalai Lama and he told us, "I will go there [India] and work hard for all of you. You should try not to waste too many people because we have a small population." After that, our depön and two rupön saw the Dalai Lama off to the place called Mama. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> Dzasa [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་ཛ་སག] told me, "You have to take possession of Tsöna. If something would happen to Tsöna, that is your responsibility. So I was left in Tsöna with some soldiers. After a few days, our depön and the soldiers came back from Tsöna. We returned back to Lhüntse and stayed in Khadang Monastery. After that, when we were going through the place called Kawajen [Tib. དཀའ་བ་ཅན] just before we arrived at Chundogyang, a person came up and told the Depön something and we were told to stop in that place and a meeting was held. The Depön said, "Now we can't go back because the Chinese have already arrived there in the Yarlung area." At that time, most of the soldiers were saying that we are going back. On the next day, we crossed the Yartö Dragla [Tib. ཡར་སྟོད་བྲག་ལ] pass and went to Chödegön. When we got there, we heard that our former soldiers had fought with the Chinese. We, the soldiers led by the depön, didn't have to fight with the Chinese. Then many people of Chushigandru and other people were also coming. Then the depön told me to go there and tell those people that they are not allowed to go out [of Tibet] because we have to fight. I went there and told them, "Where are you going? He [the depön] said that you are not allowed to go out and you have to go back and fight." They said, "Who is giving this order? I said, "This is the order from our depön." Then they scolded me and said, "Your father and mother's corpse! [Tib. ཕ་རོ་མ་རོ] What the hell are you talking about?" And they took out their guns right away. At that time, I also had a gun. So if they would shoot me, I won't stay still. Then I told them, "If you can behave yourself, you better behave yourself or else it won't be good for you." Right at that time, someone shot 2-3 times and two of the persons who had taken out guns were killed right away and their guns were also splattered away. I thought what is going on? I didn't shoot them. Later, I came to know that when our soldiers saw that they had taken out their guns, they shot them from the window. The remaining people ran away. After that, there were some Khambas who said they were the payroll office [Tib. ཕོགས་ཁང] of Chushigandru and some of them said that they had wounded people with them and they were requesting us to let them go. So we couldn't control them. After I got to India, some people were saying that the Dalai Lama was taken like a beggars and like horse sellers moving out. Actually, the remaining Tibetan regiments were well organized when we took the Dalai Lama out. Some of them went at the front and some of them followed him and some of them were on the right and some of them were on the left. But now, it is like the proverb, "The result of the law suit depends on whether the person is audacious or not and the standard of the dance depends on whether the person is lifting his knees high or not." [Tib. ཁ་མཆུ་ཧམ་པ་ཚ་ལོས་དང་ཞབས་བྲོ་པུས་མོ་མཐོ་ལོས་རེད] When people are talking like this, I don't feel happy. Some of the traders [Khambas] are implying that they took the Dalai Lama out. If some in the foreign countries heard that, they might think that Tibet didn't have any soldiers and Tibet was not a country. It might be just a group of people gathered together.   

