# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0032.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Lodrö Chöndzin [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་ཆོས་འཛིན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Lodrö Chöndzin [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་ཆོས་འཛིན]   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 77  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1916  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lodrö Chöndzin [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་ཆོས་འཛིན] was a Tibetan government official who was one of the two district heads of Shelkar District. In this interview, he discusses working as a staff officer of the Tibetan government's Military Headquarters and explains in detail the history of Tibet's Military Headquarters. He talks about working on the construction of the Dalai Lama's "new palace" and as a Salt tax collector and trader in Purang in far West Tibet. He talks about how the 3,000 Gyajong soldiers were recruited, collecting the English Carbines and giving licenses for private guns, and how monk soldiers were recruited during the 13th Dalai Lama's time. He discusses the arrival of the People's Liberation Army's in Purang and how they were received. He also discusses the arrival of the People's Liberation Army in Shelkar Dzong after 1959. Finally, he talks about the Khambas and his order from Kalön Surkhang about them in 1958.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0032_01/H_0032_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A:**  I am 77 years old.   

**Q:**  Your name is Lodrö Chöndzin, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering [henceforth TT]: You were a monk in Drepung, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  TT. Were you in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>?   

**Q:**  I was a monk from Drepung Loseling. What you want to ask me is about the events since 1950, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, from that time until the revolt took place what happened and what did you do? Please tell all the facts and what you heard from your relatives?   

**A:**  In 1951, Tibet was peacefully liberated and in 1959, the revolt took place.   

**Q:**  Yes, in 1959, the Khambas launched the revolt. If you have anything to tell us about that, please go ahead.   

**A:**  Probably, in 1950, I was a staff officer [Tib. ལེཇ] in the Military Headquarters.   

**Q:**  Who were the Commanders-in Chief [Tib. མགཇི] then?   

**A:**  At this time the Magji were Dzasa Kelsang Tsültrim [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས] and Künsangtse Dzasa [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ].   

**Q:**  TT. You mean the short guy with pockmarks called Manithang [Tib. མ་དི་ཐང], right?   

**A:**  Yes. I had done this for 4-5 years.   

**Q:**  TT. When did you work as the person in charge of the construction in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> of the "New Palace" (of the Dalai Lama)?   

**A:**  From 1953-58, I was in charge of the construction in Norbulinga. In between that, in 1951-52 I was the salt tax collector [Tib. ཙཤོ] in Purang [in Far West Tibet].   

**Q:**  This was in Tö [Tib. སྟོད], right? Were you the district head?   

**A:**  I was not the district head, but just the salt tax collector. From 1958, until the revolt, I was the district head of Shelkar District [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་རྫོང]. I was a fifth rank official, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> [Tib. ལས་ཚན་པ]. This job included also being the governor or jigyab [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] of 7 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> in Tö like Nyakyi Rongsum [Tib. གཉའ་སྐྱིད་རོང་གསུམ], Nyalam [Tib. གཉ་ནང], Kyirong [Tib. སྐྱིད་རོང] and Rongshar [Tib. རོང་ཤར]. After 1959, I went to Shigatse for a short time and then I went with the Work Team [Tib. ལས་དོན་ཚོགས་ཆུང] to put down the revolt and implement the democratic reforms in the Shelkar area. From the 1st month of 1960, I came to Shigatse to become the Section Leader [Ch. ke zhang] of the Financial Department [Ch. cai jin chu] in the Shigatse Prefectural Commissioner's Office [Ch. zhuan shu]. If I would tell you in detail about the work I did, there would be quite difficult. You can ask me the main things that you want to ask that might be useful for you.   

**Q:**  What did the Tibetan Military Headquarters do in the 1950's. What were their duties and how was it organized and how were the positions appointed? In short, tell us about the regulations of the Military Headquarters?   

**A:**  The Magjigang doesn't have a long history. The original name was "the Dorjeling Weapons Storehouse in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>" [Tib. ཞོལ་གོ་མཛོད་རྡོ་རྗེ་གླིང་བཀར་ཁང] and in the beginning, a storehouse was set up. Later, the name was changed to the " General Headquarters of the God's Army of Tibet [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་ལྷ་དམགས་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་བོད་ལྗོངས་དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང]. This was started by 13th Dalai Lama. At first it was just called the "Weapons Storehouse" [Tib. གོ་མཛོད]. After that it was called Dorjeling Weapon's Storehouse. It was the 13th Dalai Lama who converted it into the Military Headquarters and a complete set of regulations was set up. In the past, the Weapons Storehouse came about during the 5th Dalai Lama's time. He united the 3 provinces or cholkha: Tö Ngari, Bar <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> Rushi [Tib. བར་དབུས་གཙང་རུ་བཞི] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨད] The Mey College of Sera Monastery.">Mey</a> Dokham [Tib. སྨད་མདོ་ཁམས] and took the total political power of Tibet setting up the Tibetan Government or Dewashung [Tib. སྡེ་པ་གཞུང]. The Prime Minister, Desi Sangye Gyatso [Tib. སྡེ་སྲིད་སངས་རྒྱས་རྒྱ་མཚོ] created the Bodyguard Regiment which was called the Simchung Korsungmag [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་སྐོར་སྲུང་དམག]. They would surround the Dalai Lama's room and serve whatever order was given. It was increased in size until it became 1,000 troops. There were two battalions: 500 soldiers for the right battalion [Tib. གཡས་རུ་ལྔ་བརྒྱ] and 500 soldiers for the left battalion [Tib. g.yon ru lnga brgya. They had helmets, shields, bows, swords, spears, and chain plate armor.   

**Q:**  TT. All of this armor was made from the nine hole plates [Tib. བྱང་དགུ་དགུ་མིག], right?   

**A:**  Yes. They would wear all this on special days and then put it into storage. The place where they put them was called Weapons Storehouse [Tib. གོ་མཛོད]. There were two people permanently in charge of this. They were called shengo or steward of the Weapons Storehouse [Tib. གོ་མཛོད་གཉེར་པ]. The other soldiers would go home after these ceremonial activities. They were involved in the exorcism [Tib. གཏོར་གྱག] ceremony and at Mönlam and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a>, and deity worshipping in Pelajog [Tib. དཔལ་ལྷ་ལྕོག] [on top of the Jokhang]. If special situations arose, they would be called to come . They would also come on the Dalai Lama's processions going up and down from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and the Potala. They would stand on each side of the procession as guards holding long poles.   

**Q:**  How did they recruit these soldiers? Did the Fifth Dalai Lama set up a new regiment?   

**A:**  At that time, Sangye Gyatso did the work. They were recruited according to the number of [units of land] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> [Tib. རྐང] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a>. The government taxpayers were calculated in gang units. The monastery's estates were calculated in dön units. Two gang was equal to one dön. So when the taxes were levied together, they would levy one person equally from one gang and one dön, so the dön would get a 50 percent exemption because the monastic estates have to serve the monastery. The Simjung soldiers would also have to deliver edicts and messages for the [Dalai Lama's] Secretariat [Tib. འགག]. They also had a house called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Changkhang [Tib. ཞོལ་ཆང་ཁང] and they had to stay there day and night and deliver any messages whenever they were called. During the time of 7th Dalai Lama, Kelsang Gyatso [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ], there was a war with the Nepalese. Also at time of 8th Dalai Lama, Jampey Gyatso [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ], there was a war with the Nepalese. Then later when Tsomönling was Regent, there was also a war. So there were 3 Nepalese wars. So during the time of the 8th Dalai Lama, 3,000 [new] Tibetan soldiers were established. After this time, the Simjung Magmi [of the 5th Dalai Lama] became like an ancient ceremonial soldiers and the time for them to make war was kind of over.   

**Q:**  They were carrying Tibetan guns, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Simjung soldiers had two kinds of guns. One was called Dzamdrag [Tib. འཛམ་གྲགས] and the other was Yangchang [Ch. yang qiang] . The Yangchang had one bullet and was made in Trip [Tib. གྲིབ] and it was called Trib Yangchang [Tib. གྲིབ Ch. yang qiang]. The other one was made in Yamon (in Lhasa) and was called Yangchang.   

**Q:**  You mean this was made in the Yamon Regiment in Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག], right?   

**A:**  Yes. The latter was so big it took two people to carry it. Later, it became useless and the better guns were stored in the weapons storehouse. The bullets and gunpowder were kept in the weapons storehouse located near the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a> called Menchu Dzökhang [Tib. སྨན་ཆུ་མཛོད་ཁང]. There were 25 guards for the Menchu armory. These 3000 were called rgya sbyong ("Chinese trained"). It is commonly said that their salary was sent from China, but this isn't accurate. These 3000 were recruited from Dingri, Gyantse and Shigatse and Ü. For each 1000 soldiers there were 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> (Commanders). Before this 3000, in the wars with the Gorkha [Nepalese], the Tibetan troops were all militia [Tib. ཡུལ་དམག], and the custom was to call up ever male between 18 and 60. At this time, there was no names of magar (Regiments), but the leaders were called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕོགས] 1. Salary (for a job). 2. The salary-like payments in grain, etc., that monk&#x27;s receive from their monastery.">phog</a> mda' rtsis sum (phog dpon, mda' dpon, and rtsis dpon). The phogpön was in charge of salary, the depön was commander and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་པ] 1. A secretary in the Tsikhang Office in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. An accountant.">tsipa</a> was the accountant.   

**Q:**  When did these three start?   

**A:**  From time of the 5th Dalai Lama. At the time of 13th Dalai Lama, he bought many rifles from India and put them in the armory. Underneath was the armory and on top he started the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང] The military headquarters of the Tibetan Army.">magjigang</a> (Military Headquarters). The first Commander-in-Chief were Janjilog, Tsarong and Dakpo Dromba. The Commander-in-Chief at the time when they had the most soldiers was Tempa Jayan. In the past, all the Commanders-in-Chief were lay officials of the Dzasa rank. Then under them was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> [a monk official]. But in Tempa Jayan's time, he became the first monk Commander-in-Chief. Under him were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> and Logela. Under them was a Rimshi named Tsesum Phunkhang. Under him were 2 madrong [Tib. དམག་དྲུང] (Military Secretaries), Sejung Sey and Dingja's magpa. There was also one shengo and 25 troops from the Thadang regiment assigned to Military Headquarters as bodyguards. These troops were recruited from the 12 truna and from the shina. Then also there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment. All told, these totaled 8,000. Then later they recruited more troops so there were 13,000 soldiers.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  1948-49.   

**Q:**  How were they recruited?   

**A:**  Some were 1 person from every 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> [Tib. རྐང]. Some were 1 person from every 4 gang. And the junyi drug na was one person from every 6 gang and from every 12 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> [Tib. འདོན].   

**Q:**  Where were the Bodyguard troops recruited from?   

**A:**  These 3,000 were selected from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and Ü. Five-hundred from each.   

**Q:**  What about the simmag?   

**A:**  The best were selected and put into the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Artillery Regiment (Tib. མེརྒྱོ་མགར [མེ་སྒྱོགས་དམག་སྒར]). In 1949, I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་བྱ] A lower official, a staff official.">leja</a> or staff officer in the Military Headquarters and looked after the weapons. They were given out all over the place, e.g. they had been lent to individual aristocrats. So my job was to bring in all these guns. We made a rule that machine guns that took 100 bullets could not be possessed by people. We took back all these guns and gave each person 20 dotse. We also made a rule prohibiting wearing long swords.   

**Q:**  When were the troops increased?   

**A:**  Before 1949 there were 8,000. After 1949, there were 13,000. The reason for this was that we were afraid of the communists. We recruited more troops to protect the border in Kham.   

**Q:**  At this time how many regiments were there?   

**A:**  Kadang-Gusang, Khadang-Trapchi, Gadang-Gyantse; Cadang Dingri; <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Mergyo Magar, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a>?, Nyadang Simjung Magar, Tadang... Badang rkong po; [15 magar] So in all these were 13,000 troops.   

**Q:**  How many were in the yulmag [Tib. ཡུལ་དམག]) (militia)?   

**A:**  I can't say. There were also in addition to yulmag, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> volunteers (called sermag). And then if there were still not enough soldiers, we did a (conscription of all) 18-60 years of age. In the 13th Dalai Lama's time, they sent sermag (monk fighters) to Kham from Drepung and Sera. The head of the Drepung sermag was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> Dreduu, and the Sera head was shengo digija. This was the time of the Dome Jigyab (Governor-General) Champa Tendar.   

**Q:**  In 1949-50 how many regiments were sent to Kham?   

**A:**  Most were sent. In Lhasa there only the Gusung, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> and some of the Gyantse regiments were left. Also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> commanded 2 regiments.   

**Q:**  Were there any soldiers in Tö?   

**A:**  We collected nomad troops, but it was too hot for them and they were bitten by bed bugs and they couldn't stand it and went home. So nomad troops couldn't cope with the warmer farm areas (rong) climate. In the past, during the Ladakh and Singba war, nomad troops fought. The Commander-in-Chief then was Gyepa Ganden Tsewang. His palace was near Gya nyima.   

**Q:**  In 1949-50 was the Tibetan Government giving the 13,000 soldiers a salary?   

**A:**  Yes. There were two kinds of soldiers. One was called magjaa [Tib. དམག་ཆག]. These were soldiers conscripted as a corvée tax. They received the tax reduction for sending the soldier. After soldiers were called up, each month they received a payment of grain of 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> and 18 tre. For butter, tea and salt, they received money as a substitute in the amount of 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>, 6 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a>, and 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> per person . In times of war, the government gave butter, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, tea, and salt at the battlefield. And the soldiers' uniforms were made by the government. They also received a set of regular clothing from the family who sent the soldier [as a government conscription tax). This was in effect in 1951.   

**Q:**  What is the difference between the Magjigang and the magkhugang?   

**A:**  The Bod magkhugang (Tibet Military Headquarters) was the [Chinese] office in charge of all soldiers. If Tibetan soldiers had been merged into the People's Liberation Army, it would be in charge of them. But until that occurred, they were under the authority of the Magjigang (Tibetan Military Headquarters). At this time the Tibetan soldiers didn't want to become part of the People's Liberation Army. In the 1950's, the Tibetan soldiers retained their own weapons and if Chinese said come to a meeting, only the leaders went not the troops. So until 1959, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང] The military headquarters of the Tibetan Army.">magjigang</a> was functioning. The Chinese said they wanted to fly the Chinese flag on the Magjigang and they put it up, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> took it down and put up prayer flags in its place.   

**Q:**  Did the Tibetan troops change their uniforms?   

**A:**  No. [Note: Actually after 1955, the commanders all wore PLA uniforms at public events and the troops of the Bodyguard Regiment also wore PLA uniforms. But during normal times, they wore their own uniforms]   

**Q:**  When did you go to Purang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> (district)?   

**A:**  In the 5th Tibetan month of 1958 .   

**Q:**  What did you do in 1951, 52, and 53?   

**A:**  I was the Purang Tsasho (salt tax collector). It took 10 days to get to Shigatse, and 7 days to get from Shigatse to Purang [Note: Purang was a district and town on the Nepal-Indian border in the far southwest corner that was famous as a trading place for nomads and traders from India and Nepal).   

**Q:**  When you were Tsasho, did you go yourself, and did the Chinese come?   

**A:**  The first year that I went, the Chinese didn't come. The 2nd year, they came from Xinjiang. One group came from the Northern Plain [Tib. ཆངཏང] and one from Rudok. They all stayed at Purang. The 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གར་དཔོན] The head of the gadrukpa [tib. གར་ཕྲུག་པ] ceremonial dance troop of the Dalai Lama.">garpön</a> were their liaisons. One garpön was Malamba and the other one was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> Sey. Before the Chinese arrived, we made military preparations. Later, after the Agreement was signed, we accepted the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> without fighting.   

**Q:**  Before the Agreement, where did the People's Liberation Army stay.   

**A:**  In Xinjiang.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གར་དཔོན] The head of the gadrukpa [tib. གར་ཕྲུག་པ] ceremonial dance troop of the Dalai Lama.">garpön</a> have?   

**A:**  They had some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> [captains] and shengo [lieutenants], but no real soldiers. But they had militia. Sometimes they inspected their weapons. If there was a war, they were ready to go. Usually they were involved in chasing bandits.   

**Q:**  Did they have weapons?   

**A:**  All had Tibetan matchlock rifles (Tib. pönda [bod mda]).   

**Q:**  Did People's Liberation Army and the militia fight?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How many People's Liberation Army troops were there?   

**A:**  About 10,000. Most were foot soldiers.   

**Q:**  How did they get grain?   

**A:**  They got it from India. Rice. And they bought yaks and sheep from Tibetans. But mostly they hunted wild animals. At this time you could shoot as many as you wanted because there were so many. They were based in Purang, but they had troops all along the border. I returned my second year via India.   

**Q:**  Tell us a little about how the Tsasho tax worked?   

**A:**  It is a tax on our Tibetan products such as tea, wool, cashmere (Tib. ཀུལུ [ཁུ་ལུ]), tails, and tsala garbo (borax). These products were going to India and we taxed them. Trade with the nomads occurred at four times-Söötsong (Spring trade), yartsong (summer trade), töntsong (Fall trade), jetsong [Tib. རྗེས་ཙོང] (a trade after töntsong). It was mostly salt and in the summer it was mainly wool, cashmere, tails and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་པ] 1. A secretary in the Tsikhang Office in the traditional Tibetan government. 2. An accountant.">tsipa</a> (yak hair). They didn't bring dressed meat, but brought live sheep to trade. There was a head tax (Tib. གོཏྲེ [མགོ་ཁྲལ]) on sheep.   

**Q:**  Was this tax just collected in Purang?   

**A:**  No. It was collected in 8 places: Purang, Rutog, Daba, Khargo, Labrang, Tshala, Mugung, Throshö. All of these places had Tsasho officials. There was also a head of the Tsasho. When they went to collect the tax, one person from the district went with the Tsasho.   

**Q:**  How much was the tax?   

**A:**  I don't recall well. Mostly it was paid in Tibetan coins called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> garbo. The foreigners gave English and Indian <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོར་མོ] The basic currency unit (dollar, rupee, pound).">gormo</a> coins. This is because Tibetan paper money wasn't accepted in Purang. And trangga garbo were scarce as some of them went out of the country and some was being stored by the government. The tax on salt was 1 trangga garbo for every 12 sheep loaded [with salt]. The wool tax was 1 trangga garbo for 4 lug rgyab (sheep loads).   

**Q:**  If they didn't have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a>, you didn't let wool go?   

**A:**  No. Later they petitioned the government saying (paying) <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> garbo is too hard, and they got approved.   

**Q:**  Where did these taxes go?   

**A:**  To the Chatsha Legung [Tib. ཇ་ཚ་ལས་ཁུངས] the Tea-Salt Office.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> garbo did you collect in a year?   

**A:**  In Purang alone, 100,000.   

**Q:**  Could people slip by [without paying]?   

**A:**  We sent lots of servants with district (local) people to cover all the trails. But in summer some slipped by. In winter they couldn't. For wool, one mundo [mound] had to pay 12 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> garbo. I have a document that lists them. After we collected the taxes, we sent them to the Tea-Salt office and they kept them in the Namse Storage Room [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་བང་མཛོད] [in Tse].   

**Q:**  In 1952 when you returned to Lhasa, were the Chinese there?   

**A:**  When I first returned to Lhasa, the Dalai Lama had gone to Yadong. I was nervous and not happy. I thought that the old society wouldn't last and would be changed. I didn't think we would be able to stay as we were. Even though the 17-Point Agreement had been signed, I didn't think things would remain. I was apprehensive.   

**Q:**  What did your friends in the Military Headquarters say about what could have been done to fight better in Chamdo?   

**A:**  The most important thing we worried about was what was in the 17-Point Agreement and whether it stated that Tibet is part of China. Some said the Agreement did, and some said it didn't. Then we learned that it said it was. I thought that if it said that, then everything was finished. If it didn't say that, then I wouldn't be sure if it was good or bad. So when we learned it was a part of China, we were unhappy and unable to know what to think of about the future.   

**Q:**  There were still some soldiers left after Chamdo, did they have any enthusiasm for fighting?   

**A:**  When I was crossing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གམ་པ་ལ] The mountain pass that separates Tsang and Central Tibet (Ü). It overlooks the Yarlung Tsangpo River and Chushul.">Gampala</a> Pass to Lhasa, I met a lot of soldiers on the road. They had no enthusiasm at all for fighting. They said we got 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> [from the Chinese] for turning in our rifles. But after I arrived in Lhasa, the Lhasa Regiments said they wanted to fight the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did the Military Headquarters discuss the mistakes of the Chamdo campaign?   

**A:**  There was talk that first the Chinese would send 5, then 10, then 100, then 1000, and that even if we fought they kept coming endlessly so people lost enthusiasm and hope. However many we killed, they kept on coming, so there was no way to handle them.   

**Q:**  When you came the second year, had Zhang Guohua arrived and what did you think of the situation.   

**A:**  It was winter when I arrived [Jan-Feb 1952]. The Dalai Lama had arrived and Zhang and Tan Guansan were there. Lhasa was somewhat in flux and chaotic. I wasn't happy with the situation and thought something bad was going to happen. And the Chinese were building fortifications at Yuthok and other places where they were living. I was listening alertly for information on what was going on and at night I wouldn't stay late at friend's houses.   

**Q:**  Did you know people in the People's Association then?   

**A:**  No. But at that time I heard that at parks there were meetings of 100 or 200 people. These I heard were going on.   

**Q:**  Did you go a third time [to collect taxes]?   

**A:**  No. . If they paid a tax it was 1 Indian rupee per sheep.   

**Q:**  Did you know Lhatsun Labrang Chandzö?   

**A:**  I think he was Lodünla. But I'm not sure.   

**Q:**  He said that the People's Liberation Army did all kinds of bad things in Tö about excess transport animals, etc? Did you see these things?   

**A:**  The People's Liberation Army who came to Purang had horses and camels and if they needed extra transport animals (Tib. ཁེམ [ཁལ་མ]) they hired them privately. These had no connection with the district. Jayan Dawa was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> College monk. On the 10 Tib month, the 25th day, the holiday called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལྔ་མཆོད] The holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ganden Ngamjö</a> began, he and one monk were caught. He was a People's Organization leader.   

**Q:**  In 1956 there was a disturbance. What happened?   

**A:**  The People's Association made a disturbances. And from outside in Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> the Khambas were fleeing through northern Tibet. The Khambas were gathering, but I thought at this time they wouldn't be useful because they were not thoughtful and don't plan. So I didn't think anything good would come of their gathering. I worried that if the Khambas caused a disturbance it would make things difficult for the Dalai Lama. I was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> doing construction accounting in 1956. It went well and I was promoted to letsenpa. My prize for this good job was getting the position as head of Shelkar district. So when the uprising arose, I didn't know of it.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have a radio?   

**A:**  I did, but it didn't say anything. I thought that there would be a disturbance, so I had summoned 300 soldiers at Shelkar. At this time, [Kalön] Surkhang had come to Shigatse. At this time the Khambas had raided Ganden Chöngor so I got an order from Surkhang. It said that I have sent 200 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> soldiers to you from Shigatse. Collect 200 more from Dingri. And you are not allowed to give anything to the Khambas. . At this time there was Chödegön Monastery and in it was stored arms for 500 troops. At this time, the heads of Gamba district were a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> official and Mengyeling's shabdöba. At this time traders [Khambas] killed them both. So I already had some doubts so I had summoned 25 soldiers. At this time we had another problem. There was a person called Amji Panden who was stirring up the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> against the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, so several headmen (gembo) took him and whipped him in a park and he died.   

**Q:**  Was he really stirring up trouble between the district and serfs?   

**A:**  It was used as an excuse. It was really because he was connected with the district . My colleague said that we have to have some troops here to protect the armory and the district since the district heads were killed in Gamba district. So first we called up 25 troops. So then Surkhang's order came and the 200 soldiers came, and then 200 more came from Dingri. Then we sent an order to the 7 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> under us saying, each dzong should notify us at once if there are any <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> problems or stealing and we will send solders to expel them. At this time I was very distraught and couldn't sleep at night or even play mahjong when my colleague asked me. I was wondering what would happen. That night when I didn't play mahjong and was looking out the window. Then many cars arrived at the district and soldiers got out and surrounded the district and the Chödegön monastery. They said the district head should come so we went. There was a Chinese officer and someone from the Shigatse Governor named Thubden Sampela. The translator was Shamar. They told us that the uprising in Lhasa has been quelled and consequently the old Tibetan government is no more--it has been eliminated. The authority of the Tibetan government is now in hands of the Central Committee [Ch. Zhongyang]. So your authority has to be handed to us.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  The 7 or 8th day of the 3rd Tibetan month. The abbot of Chödegön was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> and said to the Chinese we will give you the guns but later if the Tibetan government makes trouble you need to say we were not responsible. The Chinese said, there is no more Tibetan government, it is finished. Then the Chinese said to me, what kind of attitude do you have about turning over the guns. Will you do it peacefully or do we have to shed blood. I said there is no question about whether to give you the guns. You have arrived here and there is no other way to do things other than give them to you. Since there is no government anymore, there is no one to ask about giving you the guns, so I will give them up.   

**Q:**  Didn't you know about the uprising?   

**A:**  Not a word. I knew nothing.   

**Q:**  The Chinese say that Surkhang and Kashag were secretly helping the Khambas, did you receive any advice or orders from them about this?   

**A:**  No. Nothing like this at all. Neither a letter or a messenger. I had no connection with the Khambas. When Surkhang and Tan Guansan were in Shigatse, Surkhang sent a letter to me saying I am sending 200 gadang regiment troops from Shigatse and you should call 200 back from Dingri. You two [district heads] act as Commanders. The Khambas have stolen guns from Shang Ganden Chöngor, so you should not let your guns fall into Khambas hands.   

**Q:**  Did any Khambas arrive in your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>?   

**A:**  After the troops [Surkhang sent] arrived, one night 28 Khambas came. They had come from Ngamring. The next morning, before sunrise, they left. They went via Tsögo to Dingkyi. At that time the district head in Dingkyi was Thubden Norbu. I didn't know about this until after they had left. That next morning my colleague came and said, oh my, last night we almost had trouble. Khambas came at night and left today. The soldiers didn't know the Khambas had arrived. TT. The Khambas must have known that the soldiers were there.   

**A:**  Later I checked into their actions and they went from our site to Tsögo's estate and took a good black horse. And then they stole from here and there up to Dingkyi district. Then we sent two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> with a letter to Dingkyi telling them to go day and night to deliver the message.   

