# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0214.03 : Tape 3  
##  : Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན] was a well-known Drepung Loseling monk who at one time held the powerful position of Chagdampa. In this interview, he discusses the famous incident that involved the imprisonment and banishment of the Loseling Chabu and the monks of Loseling coming en-mass as a mob to Norbulinga to shout at the Dalai Lama. This led to the army being sent to Drepung. He also discusses the period after the death of the Thirteenth Dalai Lama and then how Trimön came to Drepung to seek protection during the Lungshar incident. Then he starts to discuss the bitter dispute between the Shatra main family and Tsag Serkhang and Shatra's daughter.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0214_03/H_0214_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  [section missing] The name of the Tsaja was Khyenrab Tenkyong [Tib. མཁྱེན་རབ་བསྟན་སྐྱོང] and the name of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> was Ada [Tib. ཨ་ཐར].   

**A:**  His real name was Lobsang Tsering [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་རིང], but he was widely known as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> Ada.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  I don't have any details to tell you because I was a child then.   

**Q:**  Then all 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> were summoned by the Drönyerchemmo, right?   

**A:**  At that time, three of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> were going down and there was also the kongja. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] One of the colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Deyang</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚན་ཞབས] The religious debating assistants of the Dalai Lama.">Tsenshab</a> probably sent his servant [Tib. söpön] to the front of Luding [Tib. ཀླུ་ལྡིང] and told him, "Three of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> chabu are coming down [from Drepung monastery], so wait near the road and tell them, "If you are going to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> today, you should not go [Tib. ཕེབས་རྒུ་མི་འདུག]. You should go back to the monastery. If you come today it will not be good [Tib. ཡག་པོ་ཡོང་བ་མི་འདུག] for you to visit the Drönyerchemmo in Norbulinga. I heard that when the servant was waiting there, the 3 chabu came and he told them that he was sent by Tsenshab Rimpoche and that Tsenshab Rimpoche said you should not go to Norbulinga. So they stopped their horses and discussed what to do. Then the Tsaja said, "Now, we have already come to this place, so whatever good or bad is going to happen, let's go on." So the three of them agreed and went to the Drönyerchemmo's house. However, he was not there and the person in the Drönyerchemmo's house said that he had gone to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་པ] 1. The Tibetan government office responsible for law and order in Shöl (tib. ཞོལ), the walled town beneath the Potala, as well as for 18 districts (tib. རྫོང) around Lhasa. It handled mainly criminal cases including murder. 2. The head of the Shölpa leygung.">Shölpa</a> [office] and delivered the message that Chemmo (Drönyerchemmo) said that you [chabu] should come to Shölpa. Then they went to the Shölpa, but Chemmo was waiting there for the monks and they were arrested right away without saying a single word to them. They were imprisoned in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung and soldiers were dispersed around there.   

**Q:**  Where did they spread out the soldiers?   

**A:**  They placed the soldiers on the right and the left side of the prison thinking that the monks will rush down [Tib. ལུག་ཡོང་བསམ] [to free the chabu]. After they were arrested, they didn't tell them anything, and then on the next day, probably they issued the verdict and told them, "You know what you have done." [Tib. ག་རེ་བྱས་མིན་ཁྱེད་རང་ཚོའི་བློ་མངའ་རེད]. Probably they did it like was done in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s case. They banished the Tsaja to Chayü [Tib. བྱ་ཡུལ] and the Phuja to Lhobrag Tho Dzong [Tib. ལྷོ་བྲག་དོ་རྫོང] and the Kongja was returned to the monastery saying that he was innocent.   

**Q:**  What was the root (Tib. ཙཝ [རྩ་བ]) cause of that incident?   

**A:**  It was said that it was caused by Ada.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for having the law case?   

**A:**  Probably, the cause was Böde Janglojen [Tib. སྦུད་བདེ་ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན].   

**Q:**  You mean it was about that estate?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  I don't know how that happened. Anyway, the famous <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> Lhaula [Tib. ལྷ་བུ་ལགས] held the estate of Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] and then Ada took it over from Lhaula. In the beginning, the Tsaja gave the estate to Ada and then he took it back from Ada and gave it to Lhaula. Then the Tsaja and Lhaula joined together [Tib. ཁ་སྒྲིལ] and they might have hated Ada. Ada's backer was the Drönyerchemmo. When this matter was reported to the Drönyerchemmo, it became kind of widespread and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> might have said a lot of things [Tib. ལོ་རྒྱུས་མང་པོ་བཤད་ཡོད་ཀྱི་རེད་པ] [words unclear] and [the drönyerchemmo] used this as an excuse (Tib. ཉེཏག [བསྙད་བཏགས]) and in two days the Tsaja was banished. They were waiting for the Tsaja and Phuja to come back [to Loseling] but found out that they had been banished when the Kongja came back. Then they knew what had happened so they sent the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> clothing and stuff. The Tsaja was whipped and dressed in a white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and banished. He had to go through Jowo Ragyga [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རག་རྒྱབ] [the east side of Lhasa] because he was to go to Lhoka. The Phuja went through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> ferry site because he was to go to Lhobrag. As soon as he crossed the ferry, probably there was a corvée horse waiting there for him. I am not sure whether he was wearing a white chupa. Before he mounted the horse, he said, "I am not going to ride the horse. First I am going to make three prostrations." He prostrated 3 times towards the monastery and three times towards the Potala. Just before he mounted his horse he lifted one of his legs and then said wait a minute and then he fell down and died right there. So he didn't have go into banishment after crossing Ramagang. I am not sure whether it was because he had attained freedom from the karmic law of cause and effect [Tib. ལས་ལ་རང་དབང་ཐོབ་པ]. The Kongja returned to the monastery, but he and the other monastic officials (Tib. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་སྣེ] The general name for all monastic officials.">lene</a> [las sne] didn't have any power [over the monks who were angry]. Many monks gathered and took the keys and met in Kadrug [a house?]. They spoke bombastically and bragged a lot. They said we must do this and that and we should kill and chop them [for doing that] [Tib. གཏོང་དགོས་རེད། བྱུག་དགོས་རེད་གསོད་དགོས་རེད་གཏུབ་དགོས་རེད]. This was said by the monks nicknamed Jönga Gyawu [Tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་རྒྱའུ], Nyagre Gyawu [Tib. ཉག་རེ་རྒྱའུ] and Anjam Nale [Tib. ཨ་འཇམ་སྣ་ལེབ]. [unclear section] After that, many ordinary monks [Tib. ཏྲམང] made a commotion [Tib. འུར] and left to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> monks went to stop them at the base of the mountain that was called Nyena Risur, but they didn't listen. They even urinated on the flowers [in Norbulinga]. When the monks reached Norbulinga, the Lönchen Shölkang came out and said to the monks, "What are you here for? Tell me and I will report it." But the monks said, "Old man, you don't know anything. We want to meet the Dalai Lama and make a report to him. Please let us meet him a for a very short time. We have three words to report." [Tib. སྤོ་ལགས་ཁྱེད་རང་གིས་གའི་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མ་རེད། ང་ཚོ་རྒྱལ་བ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་མཇལ་དགོས་ཡོད། ཁྱུག་ཙམ་ཞལ་མཇལ་གནང་རོགས་གནང། ཚིག་གསུམ་ཞུ་རྒྱུ་ཡོད]   

**Q:**  How many monks rushed out [from the monastery to Norbulinga]?   

**A:**  Probably, there were about 100 monks.   

**Q:**  No, there were more than that. About 1,000.   

**A:**  I don't think there were 1,000. Then the Lönchen made the report and he [the Dalai Lama] was agitated (Tib. གོངཆོག་ཏྲུག [དགོངས་ཕྱོགས་འཁྲུགས] and wouldn't meet them, right? [unclear] Anyway, Tsögo [a depön] took his troops and went through Damba [Tib. དན་འབག] [the village below Drepung] and སལུངང [Tib. ས་ལུང་བ] [a depön] [with his troops] went through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> [next to Drepung monastery]. I remember them [the soldiers] blowing bugles. The monks put stones on the rooftops [in preparation for stoning them from there (Tib. dzogdo lö [རྫོག་རྡོ་གློད])] and they attached cleavers to sticks/poles. They were to be used to hit people. Then I remember that there was a hailstorm and heavy rain which made the gorge much bigger.   

**Q:**  Didn't they say that they went to ask the deity Tema [Tib. བསྟན་མ] for a prophecy?   

**A:**  I didn't know whether they went to ask Tema for a prophecy right at that time. However, I heard later that Tema said that she turned a vase of water upside down which caused very severe hailstorm that even killed dogs. I don't know if that was true or not.   

**Q:**  I heard that many soldiers were driven away by the water, right?   

**A:**  The soldiers were probably not driven away by the water, but the war stopped [Tib. དམག་ཐག་ཆོད]. The monks couldn't come down and the soldiers also couldn't charge up because of the hailstorm. After the sky cleared, the Dalai Lama send an edict (Tib. kayig [bka' yig] saying do not fire on Drepung. Even if they attack you, you are not allowed to counter-attack [Tib. མར་དགྲ་བྱས་ཀྱང། ཡར་རྒྱག་མི་ཆོག], so nobody fired guns. After that, all of the ringleaders were arrested.   

**Q:**  How did they arrest them?   

**A:**  I heard Anjam Nale was playing dice in a cave somewhere in Gemphel [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ] [the mountain top above Drepung]. After that, the monk prisoners were handed over to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> families like Serkhang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>, Shölkang, Tsarong, Ditru Labrang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>, Reting and the Tsomönling Labrang [they had to kept in detention in their houses]. There were`about 60 prisoners who were marched through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street in a line wearing leg shackles. Later, I think the government followed this example at the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> incident (in 1947). After that, I don't know what the Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> did. Almost all the incumbent abbots were demoted. At that time, Basog [Tib. བྲག་གསེབ] Lama must have been the incumbent abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> College. The Gomang monks have names starting with Ngawang which was half of the abbot's name. Basog was also demoted.   

**Q:**  Did they arrest the abbots?   

**A:**  Probably not. Basog stayed in Tsomönling until the death of the [13th] Dalai Lama and then he died. The Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> might have supported the monks, so he [the Dalai Lama] might have said this was a serious violation. Later, I heard that they requested that the selection of the Tsaja and Phuja return to the previous custom of them being appointed from among the monks from nearby [i.e., not from Kham and Amdo, etc.]. Since that time, the Tsaja and Phuja were appointed by the government. The late Tsaja would quote that order as follows, "According to the order from the Dalai Lama's secretariat and mainly in order not to have Buddhism shaken and to listen to the government, we are giving this [the position of Tsaja and Phuja] to the monks from nearby areas."[Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་འགག་གི་བཀའ་སྒྱུར་དགོངས་དོན། གཙོ་ཆེན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་པ་ཡོ་འཁྱོམ་མི་འབྱུང་བའི་ཆེད་དང་གཞུང་ས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང་ལ་སྤྱི་བཀུར་ཞུ་ཆེད་ཉེ་སྐོར་གྲྭ་རྒྱུན་ལ་གསོལ་རས་བསྩལ་བ་ཡིན]. The Tsaja also said, "However, when the Dalai Lama was no more [died], they did it according to the situation (Tib. nedütsi [gnas dus brtsis]".   

**Q:**  Are you referring to the Tsaja who died last year?   

**A:**  No, before him, there had been three Tsaja. The Tsaja who died a few years ago in India was the person who was appointed at the time that I was the number one candidate. When I referred to the late Tsaja, I meant the Tsaja called [Utö] Yeshe Champa [Tib. དབུས་སྟོད་ཡེ་ཤེས་བྱམས་པ]. He was a short man. Later he became the ex-chabu and we petitioned Reting and told him that we did not request that the 13th Dalai Lama give the Tsaja position only to monks from nearby areas [Central Tibet] [Tib. phöba]. We didn't offer the 13th Dalai Lama a scarf and a Mendredensum to get the Tsaja appointment only for persons who were born near Lhasa. This rule was given by the 13th Dalai Lama on his own.   

**Q:**  Why did it become necessary for you to make this petition?   

**A:**  Because the Khambas were insisting that they would like to get the Tsaja position. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Tempa Jayan was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> at that time, so we went and saw Tempa Jayan. From his attitude, I thought he was very much against us, but now, when I think of it, it was not because he was against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, but earlier he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and then he became a Tseja. From that position, he was demoted and his property was sealed. So he didn't like Kujar [Künphel la]. That was why.   

**Q:**  Who didn't he like Kujar?   

**A:**  Tempa Jayan, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama, didn't like Kujar. Because of that, he told us, "There is no use for you to come here. For what purpose are you coming here? This is my personal house. This is not the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> office of the government [where he worked]. Whatever you have to say, you should go to the Yigtsang and say it there. This is my personal house. Moreover, the work of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> is work for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> College and not a matter of Buddhism [Tib. བསྟན་དོན], so there is no need to deal with it in the office. Whoever becomes the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a>, whether it is a khamba or a phöba (central Tibetan), what difference does that make?" We thought that probably the Khambas should now [again] be candidates for the Tsaja position so we made this appeal. At that time I was grown up and I was one of the representatives who went to make the appeal. The late Tsaja who died was also there. I mean we all got together even though we had been fighting in the past. We got together and talked and we waited together [for an answer]. Whenever they called, we went and gave an explanation by ourselves. Sometimes we would go and see the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> personally in their houses and offer them gifts. This was during the time of the four drunyichemmo: <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> Lobsang Wangyal [Tib. བཞི་སྡེ་བློ་བཟང་དབང་རྒྱལ], Tempa Kelsang [Tib. བསྟན་པ་སྐལ་བཟང] who was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>, and the last one was Tempa Jayan.   

**Q:**  Were these the four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> in office when the 13th Dalai Lama died?   

**A:**  No. Tempa Jayan was appointed by Reting after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama. Out of these four <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a>, Tempa Kelsang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> Lobsang Wangyal were appointed by the Dalai Lama. Tempa Jayan was appointed by Reting Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  When Reting became the regent, one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> was not there. Who was that? Was that the Ta Lama?   

**A:**  At that time there was no Ta Lama. After the death of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> [Tib. རྨེ་རུ] Ta Lama, there was no Ta Lama for a long period. No Ta Lama at all.   

**Q:**  Did the 13th Dalai Lama appoint a Ta Lama after the death of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Ta Lama?   

**A:**  Probably for ten years there was no Ta Lama. However, later Dingkhang [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁང] Drunyichemmo become a Ta Lama.  

**Q:**  Was he appointed by the 13th?   

**A:**  Yes. The 13th appointed Dingkhang as drunyichemmo. Then Dingkhang died and again for 5 or 6 years there was no Ta Lama at all.   

**Q:**  When the 13th Dalai Lama died was Dingkhang a Drunyichemmo, a Ta Lama?   

**A:**  Yes. After that Reting didn't appoint any Ta Lama.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  I don't know, but he didn't appoint anyone. Later <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> became Ta Lama. I think Ramba was the first Ta Lama after that.   

**Q:**  Who appointed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>?   

**A:**  Reting appointed him.   

**Q:**  When Dingkhang Ta Lama died, did Reting appoint <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. And after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>, it was Jawdang.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> was the most eligible and was also the most senior. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> was junior. But Reting did not appoint Dombor as Ta Lama because he didn't like him. So he appointed Ramba. According to seniority, Dombor should have been appointed, but Dombor was not given the chance to become Ta Lama because [Reting] probably didn't like Dombor. Among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, they had to perform various rituals, i.e., being the Shabden Dodampa [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་དོ་དམ་པ] by turns for the benefit of the government. So they needed to have some money for the expenditures. So it was the turn of Dombor to become the Shabden Dodampa and Ramba was the second in line. Ramba said, "Dombor is the senior official so he should become the Shabden Dodampa." However, Dombor replied, "Yes, I am the senior-most and it is my turn, but I am not a Ta Lama and Ramba Künkhyen is the Ta Lama, therefore Ramba should do it." [unclear] This is the way they were supposed to have talked.   

**Q:**  When the 13th Dalai Lama died, where were you?   

**A:**  I had been sent to India to do trading by my late maternal aunt.   

**Q:**  Had you reached the age for doing trading?   

**A:**  Yes. I was already 14 years old. At that time, there was a servant of Tsarong called Tempa Chödrag [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ཆོས་གྲགས].   

**Q:**  You say your maternal aunt. She was my grandmother, right?   

**A:**  Yes. She has died.   

**Q:**  I remember there was an old man there [with my grandmother].   

**A:**  He was the older brother of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> Dzasa.   

**Q:**  Some say I am related to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> Dzasa and some say not.   

**A:**  You are not related to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> Dzasa because they [their family] were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་ཚ་ར] A person of mixed Tibetan and Nepalese heritage.">katsara</a> [half Tibetan-Nepalese].   

**A:**  However, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> Dzasa himself was not a katsara. He was the brother of Lhading's [Tib. ལྷ་ལྡིང] servant Lungta [Tib. རླུང་རྟ] who was the father of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> Temba Söpa [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ]. When I was coming back from India, we spent the night in Ralung. The next day we were going to Dzara [Tib. རྫ་ར] and Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ]. When we were taking a break in Dzara, we saw a few of those Muslim businessmen. We had the small bells on the necks of our mules. We knew those Muslim people, and when we were about to leave they told us, "I don't think you should use the bells on the horses and mules. I think you have to take them off." Then we told them, "Everybody is using them, why not?" He told us, "We heard that the Dalai Lama has died." This was the first time I heard about the death of the Dalai Lama. Then we took off those bells and we cried. When we reached Nangkartse, we saw that the Nangkartse monastery had removed all their decorations and even their banner on the rooftop was removed. All the people around had removed their earrings. By the time we were about to reach Lhasa, nobody was even wearing the long earring [Tib. སོག་བྱིལ]. All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> were wearing white chupa.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by "white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>"?   

**A:**  Those were white [satin] brocade chupas. All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> did not wear their earrings. This was only for about two weeks or fifteen days. Then they again put the banners up. That was called, the "Good news banner" [Tib. གཏམ་སྙན་དར་ལྕོག]. It was the good news that Reting was going to be the regent. Again they started to put up flags, etc. They were called "good news flags."   

**Q:**  There was a long time between these two events. The Dalai lama died on the 30th of the 10 month and Reting became Regent the 11th of the 1st month. Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was in the 1st month.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama died and you reached Lhasa, what was Kujar doing?   

**A:**  Kujar was yet to be arrested.   

**Q:**  How long did it take you to get [unfinished remark]   

**A:**  Kujar was yet to be arrested. At that time there was no talk about Kujar's arrest. Then one day they said that Kujar had been arrested. Then several Lhasa people <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> a song with the words, "In the British car, the person who controls the three realms/ Kujar the son of gods/ tell us where did he go?"] [Tib. སྦི་ལར་མོ་ཏྲའི་ནང་གི། མི་ཕོ་ཁམས་གསུམ་དབང་འདུས། སྐུ་བཅར་ལྷ་ཡི་སྲས་ཕོ། གར་སོང་ཤོད་རོགས་གནང་དང].   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**Q:**  We heard that Kujar was put in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> [prison] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> and that his father was arrested and jailed in Nangtsesha. That is what I heard, but I didn't see them being locked up. At that time, there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> nicknamed "small fatty" (Gyagchungla [Tib. རྒྱགས་ཆུང་ལགས]). He was also locked up for about a month. They said that he was related to Kujar.   

**Q:**  Was he exiled later?   

**A:**  No. He was returned to the monastery. Maybe he was not involved. Kujar and his father were sent [to regions] up and down at the same time and they were supposed to be both seen at Sabogang [Tib. ས་སྦོག་སྒང] at the front of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> [as they left for exile], but they could not talk to each other. One was taken this way, and the other that way. Another song about Kujar said, "The car backed up and arrived at Sharchenjog." [Tib. མོ་ཏྲས་རྐུབ་འཚག་བརྒྱབས་ནས། ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོག་ལ་སླེབས་སོང]. At that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was the senior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> and had become the official in charge of building the golden stupa for keeping the remains of the Dalai Lama [Tib. གསེར་སྡོང་ཆེན་མོ].   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> in charge of building the golden stupa was Dingkhang, right?   

**A:**  Dingkhang was dead then. It was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> who was in charge of building the golden stupa. Among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, it was only Dingkhang who was the best kind of person. Drunyichemmo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> Lobsang Wangyal was very bad. The moment we visited him about the Tsaja's case   

**Q:**  Was that about the case when the Tsaja was banished?   

**A:**  No, it was for the appointment of the new Tsaja. At that time, Lobsang Wangyal was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>. The Tsaja changes every two or three years, so we talked about the new appointment of a Tsaja. We had to go to see the drunyichemmo. It was he who had kept the flower pots behind him in the room. He had closed the curtains on the windows and made the room dark. He was sitting on one side and on the table on the other side he was keeping all the flower pots. We were scared to look up at him. We went straight up to the table where he normally would have been staying. I put my scarf there and started to talk to him. Actually I put my scarf near the flower pots and started talking. There was no reply for a long time. Then after some time, the man started replying from my back side. When I looked he was sitting on the other side. This is an example. The drunyichemmo was sitting at the back and I was showing my back to him while putting the scarf down and talking.   

**Q:**  This is enough about the Kujar incident. Do you remember anything about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s eyes were gouged out, but I didn't see it. There were a lot of problems. It was during Reting's period.   

**Q:**  Before they arrested <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> came to Drepung. He came to Drepung Tsetang, right?   

**A:**  He came there because Thubden Chömpel [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] was there.   

**Q:**  Normally, when a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> came to Drepung, the abbots and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> had to go to greet him, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> was Lhopa Khembo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was Lhopa Khembo. It was the beginning of Lhopa Khembo's period   

**Q:**  I forgot to ask you an important question. At the time of Kujar's fall, the Drönyerchemmo Kogpo died. At the same time, one abbot of Drepung was supposed to have died. Do you know about that?   

**A:**  No, I don't.   

**Q:**  I have heard it was the Dülwa Abbot who died, is that true?  

**A:**  I don't think the Dülwa Abbot died. There were two Dülwa Abbots. The Dülwa abbot who was the tutor to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> [Lama], the one with the white beard, probably he died. He is supposed to have died about that time.   

**Q:**  Was it the same night that Kogpo died?   

**A:**  I do not know whether it was the same night or not, but he is supposed to have died about that time. He was from Gomang. His voice had a thick northern, "Hor," accent and he used to tell the monks, "I don't have anything to say to make the clear clearer like the proverb, "You don't need to make the pea round again." [Tib. གསལ་པོ་དག་ལ་གསལ་སྐྱོར་རྒྱག་ཡག་མི་འདུག།ནག་ཆུང་སྲན་མར་དབྲིལ་སྐྱོར]. All the shengo and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</a> had to do good so that meritorious people would be appreciative [Tib. སྐལ་ལྡན་དང་བ་འདྲེན་པ]."   

**Q:**  Was he really the Dülwa Khembo?   

**A:**  Probably he was.   

**Q:**  Do you remember that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> came to Drepung during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> troubles?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> came. I do remember something. I was at the stone floor [courtyard] of Drepung [just in front of Drepung] when Trimön came. At that time they were calling him "Trimön Shape." Anyway he was with many servants, many people. I was in a large group of people. When Trimön actually left his house he had kept it a secret [where he was going]. He had said that he was going to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>. However, when he was about to reach Norbulinga he told the men to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a>. When he was about to reach Nechung, he said, "I am going to Drepung." So he stayed in his own house in Drepung and people came to see him there and he asked the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> monks to save his life.   

**Q:**  At that time, from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> went to visit the Regent Reting and the Silön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> [Tib. གླང་མདུན], right?   

**A:**  No, I never heard this.   

**Q:**  When did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> trouble arise?   

**A:**  I heard <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was arrested.   

**Q:**  Was this the same day?   

**A:**  No, it was not the same day. It was not the same day, it was much later.   

**Q:**  Is that true?  

**A:**  Yes, it was definitely after that.   

**Q:**  Is that true?  

**A:**  Yes.  

**Q:**  What is the reason that you think it was much later?   

**A:**  After a few days when I went to Lhasa I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was arrested. It was at least ten days later.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> stay in Drepung for about four days? Did he stay in Drepung itself or did he go up to the Gemphel Ritrö [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ་རི་ཁྲོད] hermitage [above Drepung]?   

**A:**  He stayed in Drepung and then he went up to Gemphel Ritrö. After that, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] who was the older brother of Bumtang Drunyichemmo, Tsidrung Kongtrugla [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྲུག་ལགས], the lay official Gyenkhar Nangpa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་ནང་པ] and Gajang Tempa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ] were arrested, but they were not whipped. They were banished, being sent out from the main gate of Shingra near the Tsuglagang. They had`already their hair knots untied and the horse corvée had been brought there. At that time, I was just young so I didn't pay very much attention to that.  

**Q:**  There were no oxen, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And they didn't have to wear cangues. That much I can say.   

**Q:**  I heard that there was a song at that time with the words, "The bad result of the 29th was repaid on the 29th." [Tib. ཉི་ཤུ་དགུའི་ལག་གཡོག། ཉི་ཤུ་དགུ་ལ་བརྒྱབས་སོང]. This means the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་བཅར] 1. A favorite. Someone who works/stays in the close presence of another important figure. 2. The name commonly used for Kumbela (tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས), the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">kujar</a> was banished on the 29th and the verdict for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was also on the 29th, right?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this song.   

**Q:**  After that, Janglojen Gung was also banished to Kongpo Tselagang [Tib. རྩེ་ལ་སྒང] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> was banished in Chamnag [Tib. ཆབ་ནག], right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was said that Chapa Rusur [Tib. ཆ་པ་རུ་ཟུར], who was the son of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and used to be the Gusung Regiment's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a>, became the husband of Lady <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>, right?   

**Q:**  No. He was the boyfriend of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>'s daughter Lhayön [Tib. ལྷ་ཡོན]. They had a very serious law case, right?   

**A:**  No. He was demoted for being <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s offspring. The law case of Tsag Serkhang [Tib. རྩག་སེར་ཁང] was long after.   

**Q:**  Lhayön La's law case was with the main <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> family and it was before that. At that time, Shatra Ganden Paljor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར] was a child. After Tsag Serkhang and Chapa merged together, then there was the law case. This was settled during <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s reign.   

**A:**  At that time I was the Chagdampa. [unclear] If I tell you the root of it, it will take a long time.   

**Q:**  Please go ahead.   

**A:**  It was the time when one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> was named Ütö Yeshe Gyentsen [Tib. དབུས་སྟོད་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྒྱལ་མཚན] and the other was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Shengo Khechok [Tib. མཁས་མཆོག]. When the Mönlam was held, the seating arrangement [of the monks] was done on the 4th, and on the 5th or 6th the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤིང་གཉེར] The monk in charge of firewood at the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shingnyer</a> Chönzin [Tib. ཤིང་གཉེར་ཆོས་འཛིན] was at the back door [of the Jokhang] near the kitchen. When he came to check the tea at the time of the afternoon prayer ceremony [Tib. གོངཇ], I met him there. Liushar [Tib. སྣེའའུ་ཤར] [who] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> [was also there]. Chönzin told me, "There is a lot of talk so you should be very careful and stay quiet or it will not be good. They are doing lot of dealings. I said what's the matter? He said, "When I went to the firewood yard, on the way I went to Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Labrang and I heard them saying that the Ganden monks who were sitting on the left and right side of the Rigsum Gombo chapel [Tib. རིགས་གསུམ་མགོན་པོ], were holding a meeting and they were saying there is a law case between the main and the branch families of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> and that tomorrow or the day after tomorrow, Tsag Serkhang is going to get married [to Shatra's daughter and try to take over the family]. If they get married, then Shatra's servants will stand behind the main Shatra family and the Ganden monks will also stand behind the main family [against Tsag Serkhang]. I heard that the two "sirs" (Tib. གུཤོ་ཉི [སྐུ་ཞབས་གཉིས]) [i.e., the 2 shengo] were already in cahoots [Tib. ཁ་རུལ] with Tsag Serkhang." When I asked how they came to be in cahoots, he said, "Tsag Serkhang had already gone to see the Gomang Shengo and they were in cahoots before the New Year [started]." Then [I recalled that] the Nangma of the junior Shengo was the son of Tsag Serkhang's steward who was named Paljor. And there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> steward named Tseden [Tib. རྩེ་བརྟན་ལ] who was a young guy from Tsang. The senior Shengo was the maternal uncle of his wife Jayan [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས] who had a shop under <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>'s House. So both of the Shengo had a close internal relationship with Tsag Serkhang. Before that, I saw Tsag Serkhang's steward and Trendong's steward coming to the junior Shengo. They were talking a lot, but I was not paying that much attention. Chönzin also told me, "If you don't be alert, the Nangma might cause you trouble" [Tib. ཁྱེད་རང་སྦི་གསང་མ་གནང་ན། ནང་མས་མགོ་ལོག་བཟོས་ཡོང་ང]. Before that, I saw Tsag Serkhang's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> (steward) and Trendong's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> (steward) coming to the junior Shengo, but I was not paying that much attention. After the evening tea when we were going on patrol, my relative, who was a clerk [Tib. shödrung in the Shöl Legung, was waiting for me in my office, the Shengo's office. He also told me, "You must be careful. The Ganden monks are holding a meeting and Tsag Serkhang is getting married." After hearing this, I was kind of alert and that evening when it was almost dark, I went out to urinate from the Shengo's office and I saw a few people standing and ཏལྐིང, like whispering, in front of the ladder [on my way to the toilet]. There were some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐབ་གཡོག] Monks or laymen who work as servants/manual laborers in kitchens (normally monastic kitchens).">thabyog</a>, but they wouldn't say anything, right? When I went out from the Shengo's office to urinate, I saw that Tsag Serkhang's chandzö, Trendong Nyerpa and the junior Shengo were whispering to each other so I went back and took off my inner lower garment [Ch. zhan chun] and tied up my belts and went to listen to what they were talking about. I went to the back side of the ladder while they were talking in front of the ladder. However, at that time their main talk was over.   

