# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0214.06 : Tape 6  
##  : Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན] was a well-known Drepung Loseling monk who at one time held the powerful position of Chagdampa. In this interview, he discusses a number of positions and offices in Drepung Monastery such as the Riji.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0214_06/H_0214_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In earlier times, the two Chagdampa were appointed by the two Shengo. However, at the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, they started to be appointed by the government. During the Reting regency, they were again appointed according to the traditional system by the Shengo and then it was confirmed by the government. After it was confirmed, they would tell the Yigtsang and the Yigtsang would tell the Shengo and the Shengo would deliver the message. The Chagdampa had two geyog as their servants. The shingnyer were also similar and the chagdampa and shingnyer had to pay the Shengo a little over 100 dotse as a donation for the tonggo and as a gift, right?   

**A:**  The shingnyer had to pay 29 dotse and 35 sang, and the chagdampa had to pay 30 dotse.   

**Q:**  The Shengo would bring two nangma from the monks who were part of the same dobdo club (tobtsang) and if they didn't have such monks, then they would hire people. The 2 tsogchen Jama came from the Jiso and in Drepung there were 16 thabyog. The two tratsang each had 8 thabyog. However, during the Mönlam, there were 64 thabyog. They they would hire the extra ones from Damba village. The Lama Migtsema came from Gomang. He would recite the Migtsema prayer on the roof top of tsogchen assembly hall and also ask for the Sojong Sutra [Tib. གསོ་སྦྱོང་གི་མདོ]. The Chatsül Depa came from Deyang and he looked after the tea. The east Chökang Depa came from Deyang and the west Chökang Depa came from Ngagpa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What privileges [Tib. ཐོབ་ཐང] did the Chökang Depa have?   

**A:**  They had the title/rank of an ordinary tsidrung.   

**Q:**  The Phodrang Depa normally came from Gomang Khamtsen in rotation. However, there was a system of leasing it [Tib. བོགས་མ་བོགས་འཛིན], so how much lease fee would they charge?   

**A:**  They would consult and settle this internally.   

**Q:**  They would send a candidate and an alternative candidate (Tib. wöndra [འོས་འདྲ]), but the candidate will be approved. They are a 1st and a 2nd candidate but the 1st will be approved, right? The Jiso's candidates came from those who were Nyertsang or were ex-Nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང་ཐོན་ཟུར] in the two big tratsang and it depended on their luck as to who got it. The Jiso had a very large place to administer and they had 8 chandzö under them: the 2 tsangja [Tib. གཙང་ཕྱག], the 2 phenja [Tib. འཕན་ཕྱག], the 2 lhoja [Tib. ལྷོ་ཕྱག] and the 2 jija [Tib. སྤྱི་ཕྱག]. They stayed in the monastery permanently and did the work there. There were others who were in charge of their various other places. The two Tsogchen Jama were appointed by the Jiso, but who appointed the clerk called Lhengye Trunyi [Tib. ལྷན་རྒྱས་དྲུང་ཡིག]?   

**A:**  They were hired by the Shengo who chose reliable people for this position.   

**Q:**  The assembly hall (Tib. དུཁང [འདུ་ཁང]) was taken care of by the Chökang Depa. Where did the monks come from who yelled the chuke to inform [all the monks] that there was gye that time?   

**A:**  They came in rotation from the east and the west Chökang [Depa].   

**Q:**  Were there any other staff of the Jiso in the tsogchen?   

**A:**  No. That's all.   

**Q:**  Now, maternal uncle, I am going ask you about the Riji. From where did the members of the Riji come and what did they do?   

**A:**  The abbots of Ngagpa, Gomang, Shagor [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར], and Deyang Colleges were in the Riji.   

**Q:**  From where did the Riji get their estates?   

**A:**  They didn't have that many estates. They only had a big estate called Rama which was in Phenpo [Tib. འཕན་པོ]. It had many miser. As for the daily tonggo that they had to do, they got that from a small shiga in the Shün [Tib. ཤུན] area in Dongkar. [unclear] They would also collect about 30-40 khe of grain.   

**Q:**  Who would go to collect it?   

**A:**  [unclear]   

**Q:**  The Riji would perform the tonggo with whatever income they collected, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [unclear] It would rotate every 6 years. The general income they got for the Riji was kept by the Lhengye [Tib. ལྷན་རྒྱས] but some income went to the [abbot's] labrang. They would give the tonggo from that. [unclear] Under the Riji there were many gembo like in Nyen [Tib. གཉན], Chongye [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས], Drigung, Wölga [Tib. འོལ་དགའ], Dakpo, Kongpo, Phembo, and Nam [Tib. སྣམ].   

**Q:**  Who appointed these gembo?   

**A:**  They were appointed by the Lhengye. Their term coincided with the abbot's term. When the abbot's term was over, the gembo's term was also over. [unclear] In the Mönlam, I would collect the money given when people requested dedications [Tib. ངོཏེན] for prayers. I would write the receipts for this money. I also went to the abbot's shag and handed over the ngoten money like 3 sho and 5 sho, etc. and I got the receipts and put a red seal on them. [unclear] The late Ngagpa Khembo would not even look at the receipts and just say they are okay. [unclear]   

**Q:**  How did they appoint you?   

**A:**  In the beginning, the Loseling Khembo appointed me. Probably the Ngagpa Khembo introduced me. Sometimes when I was in Lhasa, they sent a message and called me and I had to go carrying my own food. Sometimes, they would give me about 3-4 khe of butter when they received butter. And they also gave me 1-2 bakhag [Tib. སྦག་ཁག] of tea leaves. Usually, I didn't get anything. When they gave tsampa to the Riji, they would give me 1 khe of tsampa.   

