# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0214.01 : Tape 1  
##  : Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Narkyid Ngawang Thöndrub  
**Name:** Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན] was a well-known Drepung Loseling monk who at one time held the powerful position of Chagdampa. In this interview, he discusses his experiences doing trading in India in Kalimpong and Kolkata. Then he talks about being the Gyetön estate steward in northern Tibet and being responsible for collecting taxes for the Laja office. He also discusses in detail how he came to be appointed as a Chagdampa.   

---  
### Tape   

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0214_01/H_0214_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell me starting from the time you can remember about your home, your parents and your birthplace, etc.   

**A:**  I was born in the household called Bera Khangsar [Tib. དཔལ་རབ་ཁང་གསར] which was located in front of the Jokhang in Lhasa. On the south side, there was the house called Paljor Rabten [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་རབ་བརྟན] and on the north side, there was Gomang Khangsar [Tib. སྒོ་མང་ཁང་གསར].   

**Q:**  Was that the house where they sold paper when we were small?   

**A:**  That was Gomang Khangsar.   

**Q:**  How many stories did the house have?   

**A:**  It had three stories.   

**Q:**  How did you get the name Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]?   

**A:**  I was born when my parents were holding the tsog offering on the 10th (Tib. ཙེཇུ [ཚེས་བཅུ]), so they said that I was given to them by Padmasambhava, Lobpön Rimpoche [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ], so they named me Urgyen [after him].   

**Q:**  In what year were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in the Fire-Sheep Year.   

**Q:**  What month?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  What was your father's name?   

**A:**  His name was Jambey Khyenrab [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་མཁྱེན་རབ]. He was a Chanang in the Tseja office. Three or four generations before him, there was a Chanang who was the grandfather of Nyagre Khentrü [Tib. ཉག་རེ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]. [mentions in detail 5-6 names of the senior chanang who served before his father and their relatives]   

**Q:**  Were you related to those Chanang?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How were you related to Nyagre Khentrü?   

**A:**  Nyagre Khentrü's grandmother was the sister of my mother so I am his maternal uncle.   

**Q:**  Where is your mother's family from?   

**A:**  Our lineage (Tib. migyü [Tib. མི་རྒྱུད]) was called Khalkhatsang [Tib. ཁལ་ཁ་ཚང].   

**Q:**  Was it related to the lama called Khalkha Jetsün Damba [Tib. ཁལ་ཁ་རྗེ་བཙུན་དམ་པ]?   

**A:**  It was said that we are the descendants (Tib. gyüdzar [Tib. རྒྱུད་འཛར]) of Khalkha Jetsün Damba.   

**Q:**  It is very strange that the reason why I am called Narkyi [Tib. སྣར་སྐྱིད] was because Narkyi's original lineage also had some relations with Khalkha Jetsün Damba at the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.   

**A:**  Kungö's (your) late father told me in India, "When I think about it, aren't you related to the late Nying Norbula [Tib. སྙིང་ནོར་བུ་ལགས]? Nying Norbu la was the grandmother of Nyagre Khentrü who lived in the house called Tawang Chang [Tib. རྟ་དབང་བྱང]. Later, this house was bought by Reting Labrang. After that, Gyamtso Tashi [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] moved into that house and later they sold the house because it was not lucky for them (Tib. matröpa [མ་འཕྲོད་པ]). It was the house of the Drunyichemmo Gyamtso Tashi. Actually, Gyamtso Tashi was the name of the house and not the name of the person, but some people even said Gyamtso Tashi la. Drunyichemmo Gyamtso Tashi was from Drepung Loseling and we were in the same class. Before that, he became the salt tax collector (Tib. Wuyug Tsasho [Tib. འོད་ཡུག་ཚྭ་ཤོ]) and then he was the head of Wön [Tib. འོན] Dzong and then he was a shöndrön and then he became the governor of Lhoka [Tib. ལྷོ་སྤྱི] and then he became the Changji [governor of Northern Tibet].   

**Q:**  Where did you move after the selling to Gyamtso Tashi?   

**A:**  I stayed with a tsidrung relative called Tseden Lhundrup [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟན་ལྷུང་གྲུབ] who later died.   

**Q:**  The house where you were born was called Bera Khangsar, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And your father was a Chanang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that my mother was shot dead during the Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] Chinese War. At that time, my brother, who later became a clerk in Shöl legung [Tib. shöldrung] and the person in-charge of sending corvée horses (Tib. ཏཏོངང [Tib. རྟ་གཏོང་བ]), was a baby still being breast-fed. My mother was shot in the shoulder and died. This was when they fired rifles and cannons towards the Tsuglagang. I don't recall my mother. Then when I grew up a little bit, I went to the school at the Yükhagang [Tib. གཡུལ་ཁ་སྒང] in Lhasa. After that, my father remained single and kept the two children. Then I was taken by Nyagre Khentrü's grandmother who was my maternal aunt.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was about 12 years old. Then I stayed 5-6 years in Gyantse.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay in Gyantse?   

**A:**  I stayed in the Gyantse Shogdrupa [Tib. ཤོག་སྒྲུབ་པ].   

**Q:**  Where was it located?   

**A:**  It was located up there in the fields on the south side of Gyantse, on the side of the road going towards Kila [?].   

**Q:**  Was it located on the mountain side?   

**A:**  It was located near the river.   

**Q:**  Was it near to Rabgang [Tib. རབ་སྒང]?   

**A:**  Rabgang and Phala were located on the other side of the Nyangchu [Tib. ཉང་ཆུ] River.   

**Q:**  I have been to Gyantse.   

**A:**  I heard from Kungö Thubden Sangye [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་སངས་སྒྱས] that you were on his staff [Tib. ལེཇ].   

**Q:**  Yes. So you were located on the south side of the Nyangchu, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What were you doing in Gyantse then?   

**A:**  I was writing some Tibetan and just stayed there without any work.   

**Q:**  You were just studying, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but sometimes when there was a shortage of workers, I was sent to collect taxes in areas like Phari and Upper and Lower Nyero [Tib. ཉེ་རོ་སྟོད་སྨད], etc.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were like 17-18 years old, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then I came back and stayed in Lhasa. Before that, I had become a monk.   

**Q:**  When did you become monk?   

**A:**  I became a monk before the Loseling revolt.   

**Q:**  How long had it been?   

**A:**  Probably it was one year before the revolt. I remember they sealed the Tshaja's house. Drunyichemmo Dingkhang [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁང], who then was a tsendrön, came and the Chemmo was the bearded one (Tib. ཁབསོ [ཁ་སོག]). I saw them close the door and take them all away. Probably they sealed the house.   

**Q:**  Were you like 7 years old then?   

**A:**  Probably I was about 9.   

**Q:**  Did you go to school after becoming a monk?   

**A:**  Yes. I stayed in Gyamtso Tashi and then I was sent to India to trade when I was 18-19 years old. I was sent with Tempa Khyenrab [Tib. བསྟན་པ་མཁྱེན་རབ] and Tashi Norbu [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ནོར་བུ] as trade partners.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you staying with your father or with your maternal aunt?   

**A:**  I was with my maternal aunt because my father had passed away. At that time, Shakabpa Tsipön was yet to become a lay official and he was staying in Kolkata and was called Shakabpa Chöndze la. He was handsome then. At that time I was sick and he bought me medicine which cost 3 Rs and I was surprised at that. At that time, the rupee exchange rate was 8 sho and then it increased to 7 tranka and then 8 tranka and then 9 tranka and 11 tranka and finally it reached 4 sang.   

**Q:**  How old were you there?   

**A:**  I was grown up. At that time when I bought prayers flags they cost 4 sho. Once I was with two Muslims in the place called Dzara [Tib. རྫ་ར]. When we were coming back, the Muslims said, "Tomorrow morning, we are not allowed to have bells on our animals and the men are not allowed to have round earrings [Tib. ཨ་ལོང] and long earrings [Tib. སོགཇིལ]. We have to mourn and all the monasteries have taken down their gilded banners and the yak hair banners [Tib. ཐུག་རྒྱལ་མཚན] from the roof tops." When I asked why, they said, "We heard that the Dalai Lama has died." [Tib. སྐྱབས་མགོན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་གཤེགས་པ་རེད་ཟེར་གྱིས]. I saw in Nangkartse that they had taken down the banners. In Lhasa, the Shape were wearing white satin chupa and a different kind of round cap. All the lay officials weren't wearing their earrings and tassels on their horses and the women were not allowed to put on head dresses [Tib. པཏྲུག], earrings, amulets [Tib. གའུ་ཨེ་སྒོར] and aprons. Then one day, it was said that there was auspicious good news (Tib. ཏཤི་ཏམསང [བཀྲ་ཤིས་གཏམ་བཟང] and they put the banners back up and drew white lines with limestone (Tib. ཀརཐིག་ཐེན [དཀར་ཐིག་འཐེན]) saying that Reting Regent is having his inauguration ceremony. They played the gyaling [Tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] instruments and blew the big horns. Before a month passed in the winter, Reting took power and an additional Mönlam was held for 3 days for the deceased Dalai Lama (Tib. གོངཙོག [དགོངས་ཚོགས]).   

**Q:**  What were you doing during these times?   

**A:**  There was an elder sister of the Nyagre Khentrü's mother.   

**Q:**  She was your maternal aunt, right?   

**A:**  No, she was my eldest sister. We were the children of the elder daughter and Nyagre Khentrü and those others were the children of the younger daughter. She went as a bride to the household called Nangnub [Tib. ནང་ནུབ] whose father was a Laja Chagdrung and his son was also a chanang and obtained the position of head of Gyetön [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྟོན྄] Dzong in Kham. I went together with him to Kham and I stayed as the nyerpa (steward). I was in my thirties.   

**Q:**  How many years did you go to India for trade?   

**A:**  I went to Kolkata 8 times.   

**Q:**  How many times did you go in a year?   

**A:**  I went twice.   

**Q:**  What kind of trade did you do?   

**A:**  I bought the things for peddlers like porcelain cups, aluminum, varieties of cloth, conch shell bracelets, the big felt hats and the army boots called Gora Jurta which cost 4 sang for a pair. These was grabbed by the soldiers of the Drongdrag Regiment. I paid 5 anna for a pair of boots in India. I paid 5 anna or a rupee and 4 anna for a felt hat and I got 25 sang for them in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were you getting about 3-4 times in profit?   

**A:**  Yes. From Kalimpong to Phari, the transportation fee was 7 Rs for two loads. From Phari to Nangkartse it was 11 sang for two loads. From Nangkartse to Lhasa, it was 6 sang and 5 sho for two loads.   

**Q:**  What would you take to India?   

**A:**  I take yak tails, skins and musk.   

**Q:**  What kind of skins did you take?   

**A:**  I took fox, lynx, leopard and marmot skins.   

**Q:**  Where did you exchange your money?   

**A:**  At that time, Pandatsang had a bank in Phari and we exchanged the money by giving them Tibetan currency in Lhasa and taking Indian Rupees in Phari. At that time, there was a Nepalese in Kalimpong called Shri Ram who exchanged money and we got money from there. We gave them Tibetan currency in Lhasa and took Indian Rupees in Kalimpong. At that time, they used coins not paper currency. At that time India was under British rule. In Kalimpong, we stayed for a couple of days and left a person with our 5-6 horses and mules while we went to Kolkata. We used the horses and the mules to do the round trip transportation between Kalimpong and Phari, which was called mönkor gyag [Tib. མོན་སྐོར་རྒྱག]. It took about 14-15 days to go back and forth from Kalimpong to Phari. The transportation fee we received was used to pay the expenses of going to Kolkata. During this time, we waited in Kalimpong. At that time it was really a good era. We departed from Kalimpong at around 11 a.m. We carried the saddle bags and walked up to the Teesta Bridge because there were no vehicles then. When we descended the hill, we carried pots and boiled water and put dry ground fermented barley (Tib. བངནུམ [སྦང་གླུམ]) and tsampa in that and ate pag and also drank it. In Teesta [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བྲག], there was a small train which made the sound "koto koto." Then we drank tea in Teesta and bought big breads which cost 2 paisa. A cup of tea cost 1 paisa. Then we came to Siliguri where we ate food in restaurants. That night we bought railway tickets and went to Kolkata. When we reached the Ganges River it was night and we could see the places with many lights from the bridge. When we reached Kolkata it was just after sunrise. There the Number Eight [Hin. at number] inn keeper came to receive us and we could take taxis or rickshaws or horse carts and went to the inn where they charged 2 and half Rs for a day and they served tea in the morning, and lunch and dinner. At that time, Shakabpa Chöndze la was also there. After the Water-Bird Year when the 13th Dalai Lama died, I didn't go to India.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know the language when you went to India?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. But my partner knew the language and there were many people like Bayetsang Bula [Tib. སྦ་ཡེ་ཚང་བུ་ལགས] who knew the language. Usually there would be about 4-5 traders in the Number Eight Inn and we went everywhere together and bought things together. We did the packing at night and went to buy the things in the day time. Sometimes we went to buy the things at night and did the packing during the day.   

**Q:**  How did you transport the things to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  We brought the things to the railway station and they would put them in the godown. Probably, they then took them on the train. After buying all the stuff in Kolkata, we stayed relaxing for a day and went to watch things like magic shows. We went to the railway station and on the next morning we reached Siliguri and then we went back to Kalimpong in vehicles and we reached there around 8-9 p.m. When we first came to Kalimpong, we felt surprised thinking India is such a happy place, but when we came from Kolkata to Kalimpong, we saw it as the quiet countryside.   

**Q:**  At that time, there weren't many houses like nowadays, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, I had a relative called Anan La and there was another guy related to the [Dalai Lama's] favorite Namdrol la [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་རྣམ་གྲོལ་ལགས] who were in Kalimpong. They served us food.   

**Q:**  I heard that you knew Nepalese language. Where did you learn it?   

**A:**  I didn't study Nepali, but there were many Pahari (Nepalese) in Kalimpong who spoke Nepali, so I could understand what they said although I couldn't speak much. But now I have forgotten it. When I arrested the thief Gangtsug, I understood what the Nepalese were saying.   

**Q:**  At that time, you did well in your trade, right?   

**A:**  Probably, I was lucky then. After that, I was sent to Tsöna twice.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  That was after that and I also went to the fair in Champaling [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གླིང] where I also probably did well, so after that, I went to Kham Gyetön for three years where I was also lucky. After that I came back and served the late oracle of Nechung.   

**Q:**  What did you have to do when you were in Gyetön?   

**A:**  I was the nyerpa and had to go to collect taxes.   

**Q:**  What kind of taxes did you have to collect?   

**A:**  It was taxes in butter for the Mönlam and Tsongjö. These would be delivered to the Laja office. We would unload half of the butter in Ganden and unload the other half in Lhasa. We also had to deliver leather ropes to the stable in Shöl and leather cushions and yak hair curtains [Tib. སྦྲ་ཡོལ] to the Shöl Legung. We also delivered musk deer hair to the Laja.   

**Q:**  You didn't need to deliver musk, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What else would you have to deliver?   

**A:**  That's all.   

**Q:**  Was it from nomads that you collected the taxes?   

**A:**  They were Khambas from agro-pastoral areas. We had to go 5-6 days distant from the dzong to collect the taxes.   

**Q:**  What was their main source of livelihood? Was it from animal husbandry or farming?   

**A:**  They were both nomads and farmers. They milked the animals in summer and we would make them take an oath in front of the protective deity Shri Devi [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་དམག་ཟོར་རྒྱལ་མོ] to be honest in delivering the taxes and we collected 5 nyaga [of butter] from the animals that had given birth in that year (Tib. ཀྱེམ [སྐྱེས་མ]. Altogether, there were 9 groups called dingkhag. There were 3 dingkhag in the upper area called tönding [Tib. སྟོད་ལྡིང]. These were called Gyashö Benkar, བུམཏང and Gushi. In the middle area there were also three dingkhag called barding [Tib. བར་ལྡིང]. They were called Samda, ཥོགདྲུག and Tsogchu. And there were 3 dinkhag in the lower area called mending [Tib. སྨད་ལྡིང]. They were Maru, Gungru and Jagru. From the dzong we had to go for 5-6 days to reach there. When we collected butter, each day we collected about 40-50-60 skin bags (loads) of butter. Altogether, we get almost 500 skin bags of butter from Mending. From Barding we get not less than we got from the 3 mending. We got a little less from the 3 tönding. Altogether, there would be a little less than 1,000 bags, like 800-900 skin bags of butter when we delivered them to Lhasa. We called this ünbü [Tib. དབུས་འབུལ]) (gift for Central Tibet).   

**Q:**  Were all the pack animals corvée horses?   

**A:**  They were all yaks.   

**Q:**  Did their yaks transport it from there to Lhasa?   

**A:**  It was transported from one transportation station to the next. We departed from there around the 15th of the 12th lunar month and reached Lhasa around the 3rd month. It took a very long time on the way. We went through the middle northern route (Tib. changlam barma [བྱང་མ་བར་མ]) and came out in Drigung Thil [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་མཐིལ] passing the Drigung Gatse La mountain pass.   

**Q:**  How many loads did you have of things like skins and musk deer hair, etc.?   

**A:**  We had a lot. We even took inferior nambu and the herb sugpa [Tib. སུག་པ] that was called [Tib. ཀནདག] for washing by packing them in skin bags.   

**Q:**  Where did you deliver it? Was it delivered to the Nyertsang Legung?   

**A:**  Yes. And we also had to deliver yak hair curtains both to the Nyertsang Legung and the Shöl Legung. We asked the Laja and unloaded half of the butter and then we also had to go to Ganden where one Laja kungö and two chanang would come and we would hand over the butter to them. During that time, Shartse [Tib. ཤར་རྩེ] Labrang would serve food for all of us.   

**Q:**  It would take several days, right?   

**A:**  It took about 3-4 days.   

**Q:**  All of the other loads had reached Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, because we asked the Laja and then went to Ganden after 10 days.   

**Q:**  Were these land taxes or animal taxes?   

**A:**  These were collected according to the record book [Tib. དེབ་གསལ]. Probably, it was a land tax. We had a big black book and we just took it and read the book and collected the taxes. I was the main person who read the book and looked at the scales. In the daytime, I collected the taxes and in the evening I would do private trading for the dzong in items like cloth, aluminum and iron pots, etc. and they would come to my private place and we made a bonfire and sat around.   

**Q:**  Did you have to carry out legal punishments there?   

**A:**  Yes, because it was the dzongpön where they would file law cases and make appeals.   

**Q:**  In the northern area, wasn't there was a custom wherein the government collected one tenth of things when families split and divided their possessions [Tib. göphö jusur]?   

**A:**  Yes, there was this custom. However, most of the law cases concerned ownership of the pastures in the mountains and there were disputes over things like saying that a person hunted in my area, etc. After the summer retreat [Tib. ཡརྣེ] was over, they made traps and the sons and the magpa of the family would load 5-6 yaks with traps and would go to the mountain and they would stay in the mountains for 4-5 days. They said that they had set up 300-400 traps and then came back. After 4-5 days, they would go to check the traps by turns and some musk deers would get trapped. They would skin the musk deers and bring the skin and the musk back and hang the meat on trees during the winter and bring back the frozen dried meat just before the New Year. They would set the traps by looking at the footprints of the animals.   

**Q:**  What other animals were there besides the musk deer?   

**A:**  There were blue sheep and jackals.   

**Q:**  Were there deer?   

**A:**  Yes, but there were no gazelles because the place was forested with no meadows. There were also a lot of wolves and jackals.   

**Q:**  Were there leopards?   

**A:**  Yes. There was also a type of snow leopard (Tib. སམསིག [གསའ་མ་གཟིག]) and many lynxes.   

**Q:**  Were there tigers?   

**A:**  Probably not, but there were bears.   

**Q:**  How about the brown bear (Tib. ཏྲེམོང [དྲེད་མོང])?   

**A:**  Yes, there were many.   

**Q:**  Did they (the Khambas) have to pay a tax in bear skins?   

**A:**  No. At that time, one khe of butter cost 3 sang over there. In Lhasa, it was 11 sang and then later it was 21 sang.   

**Q:**  You made 2x in profit excluding the transportation fee, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Over there [in Gyetön], how many miser households were there?   

**A:**  There were a lot, about 1,000 households. It was a large dzong. It took about three days from the dzong to the border.   

**Q:**  When you came up, where was the Gyetön border?   

**A:**  In the west it was at Biru [Tib. འབྲི་རུ]. In the north, it was at Sog Tsendan Monastery [Tib. སོག་ཙན་དན་དགོན]. When we went south, we reached Jara Pembar [Tib. ལྕགས་ར་དཔལ་འབར] and we reached our border in three days.   

**Q:**  If you went east, you probably reached Riwoche [Tib. རིབ་བོ་ཆེ], right?   

**A:**  Probably. We reached our border in the east in 7 days.   

**Q:**  How many days would it take to go to Chamdo from your dzong?   

**A:**  It is said that it would take 11 days. It was like half way to Lhasa, though it might be a little bit nearer from Lhasa to Chamdo. We were under Chamdo, and Chamdo send edicts to us. We received two kind of edicts: one from the government in Lhasa and one from Chamdo. They would address it as "to the Gyetön Shidü" [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྟོན་གཞིས་སྡོད་ལ]   

**Q:**  Did that shiga belong to the Tseja?   

**A:**  It belonged to the Laja.   

**Q:**  But in the locality it functioned as a dzong, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many years did you serve as the steward of the Gyetön estate?   

**A:**  I worked for 3 years, although the term of the Gyetön estate steward was 5 years.   

**Q:**  What did you do after that? How old were you then?   

**A:**  Probably, I was 28 years old.   

**Q:**  Then you came to Nechung, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then I worked for the oracle [sort of like a servant].   

**Q:**  Was the oracle named Damba Simkhang Namgyal La [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ལགས]?   

**A:**  Yes. He asked me whether I was going back [to Kham] and he told me to buy several pairs of cushions some of which should be made from musk deer hair. He gave me some trangga garpo coins. At that time one trangga garpo was worth 3 trangga or 4 sho and 5 karma. Later, I brought it, which was very useful. Then I said I am going to the monastery to propitiate the deities and then the oracle told me to come on the day after tomorrow. When I went to Nechung, it was midday and hot, in about the 4th lunar month. The oracle told me to stay there over night and leave the next morning when it would be cool. He asked me, "Are you really going back [to Kham]? You are an unlucky person." [Tib. བསོད་བདེ་སྐམ་པོ་རེད]. In the future, you will lose your celibacy, have short western-style hair and wear a blue or yellow cotton chupa and at the most wear a brass earring [be poor]. You will not have a gold earring." Then I went to the chandzö of the oracle who was called Yeshe Tsündrü [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་བརྩོན་འགྲུས]. He was related to the oracle. We were close when we were small and probably he had talked with the oracle. He also told me, "It is right what kungö said. You are an unlucky person. Are you still going there [Kham]?" Then when we were talking to each other, the chandzö told me, " [unclear] Are you going to be a geyog? I said no. Then he said, "Are you going to be a chagdampa? " I said, "Wow! How could I be capable of being a chagdampa?" He said, "You are an unlucky person. It is like the saying, '[Even] If you have no hair on your body, the local area is full of hair.' [Tib. རང་སྤུ་མེད་ལུང་པ་སྤུ་ཡོད] [means even if you are unlucky, the place around you is full of chances to get rich]." Then he asked me again, "Are you going to be a chagdampa?" and I said, if I am told to, I will do it. Then the two of us ate rice and I washed the dishes. After that, the oracle called me in and told me to rub his feet and said to me, "Mister (Tib. gusho [sku zhabs] Chagdampa has come." I think they had already talked about that and then he said, "You told the chandzö that you want to become a Chagdampa. Are you sure that you really want to become a Chagdampa?" I said, "I didn't tell the chandzö that I want to be the Chagdampa, but the chandzö told me to do that, so I said I will." Then the oracle said, "It will be good to become a Chagdampa because it is a good starting point and you will gain experience and gradually rise higher and there are lot of things to do in Loseling like the Tshaja and Chabril, Gegö and you can become Shengo if you are capable." If you don't do that, one day, you will lose your celibacy and have long hair and you will get sunk in the mud of samsara [Tib. འཁོར་བའི་འདམ] and you will get nothing." Then I said I agree with you and it was decided. I also had a relative who was a chanang. He was the brother of my mother.   

**Q:**  What was his name?   

**A:**  He was called Tsering Dorje [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་རྡོ་རྗེ].   

**Q:**  Was he in the Laja?   

**A:**  He was in the Tseja and was appointed to be the tax collector for gold (Tib. Drichu Serkha [Tib. འབྲི་ཆུ་གསེར་ཁ]). He called me to come saying that he told my relative who was the head of Gyetön Dzong that he wanted me. One day, my relative who was the Gyetön Dzong head told me, "Although I need you in Gyetön, Chime [Tib. འཆི་མེད] wants you to go to do the Drichu Serkha. I couldn't refuse because both of the couples will get agitated, so you have to go Drichu Serkha. I said, "It doesn't make any difference to me," so it was decided that I would go to Drichu Serkha. However, Kungö Ta Lama [the oracle] told me to refuse and let it be (Tib. ཀོཐལö [ཀོ་ཐག་གློད]). Tell them that the khamtsen needs a ngünyer. So I told them this lie and the chanang had a long face. The Ta Lama told me that he had to go to Reting Labrang regarding the confiscation of Kujar Künphela's [Tib. སྐི་བཅར་ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལ] property [unclear speech]. He [the oracle] told me that I have to offer a gyabden and the Mendredensum to Sumdo Gyentsen Yönden [Tib. སུམ་མདོ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཡོན་ཏན] when I asked for the Chagdampa position [unclear words]. He was a letsenpa on the staff of the Yigtsang. On the next day when I went to see Shasur, he said, "That position has already been given to another person and now it is like the proverb, "neither got the cow dung on other side of the river, nor got the basket on this side of the river." [Tib. ཕ་རིའི་ལྕི་བ་མེད། ཚུར་རིའི་སླེལ་པོ་མེད] [didn't get the Drichu Serkha job or the Chagdampa post]. [Note: the Nechung oracle and Sumdo Gyentsen Yönden were both from the Damba Simkhang family, so that's why Sumdo became his backer in getting the Chagdampa post.] After that, he [the oracle] told me, "Gyentsen Yönden and I are doing wool trade jointly and he will send a person, so you must go with him to India on my behalf to do the wool trade." I agreed and came back home [talking like whispering]. Actually, the oracle was kidding me and said, "Didn't your heart turn upside down?" [when you heard that you have to go to India] Then I went to the Shengo with an envelope [with money] and a khata scarf to ask for Chagdampa position and the Shengo said, "I heard that in our khamtsen in Loseling there is a person who has a very strong backer, the Nechung oracle." Actually, it was me [he was talking about], but I said I don't know about that. [unclear] Then the oracle told me that he had spoken to Sumdo Gyentsen Yönden so I had to go to see him so I went. On the way there, there was a hail storm and I met a donkey herder who had loaded his donkeys with wheat saying that he is going to deliver it to Möndrong [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོང] and then I heard the sound of a gong beating when I reached near Shide and a conch shell blowing on the way. These were all auspicious signs. [unclear whispering] When I went to Sumdo, he asked my name and my khamtsen and asked whether I am the one the oracle had given an introduction, and then and he told me, "The matter has been settled, so you should go to see the senior Shengo and the junior Shengo." Then he send a person to buy a small basket of cookies to take to the Shengo. Don't say anything, but he will tell you something. So I went to the two Shengo with the basket of cookies. The senior Shengo said, "Oh, Urgyen la! Congratulation to you for being approved as the Chagdampa. The order said that Tsha Khamtsen Urgyen is approved as Chagdampa. Now we have to work together."   

**Q:**  Your real name was not Urgyen, right?   

**A:**  My name is Thubden Legshe [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་བཤད]. Urgyen is my layman's name (Tib. kya ming [skya ming].   

**Q:**  So you got approved as the Chagdampa without any other candidates, right?   

**A:**  They might have been other candidates submitted, but I am not sure. The Nendrön had already given the order. Then the Shengo told me, "Now go and shave your head and come over and we will prepare for the horse and you can go down. [section unclear] When I went there, he served me noodles and then I went to Nechung. [whispering] The oracle said, "I have been anxious and didn't even eat food. But now it has been done well." On the next day at dawn they sent me food and the khata Ashe scarf and money and I went to the Shengo's office.   

**Q:**  When they sent you the food in the early morning, was it the 1st of the 7th lunar month?   

**A:**  It was on the 29th and the Drepung Shotön opera performance was on the 30th. The Shengo would do his inauguration ceremony then. On the 1st, after the opera performers came from Norbulinga to Nechung, they performed the opera in Nechung from midday to midnight. They sent a sweeper to cell me to work because many guests had come to Nechung. Then the Shengo saw me and called me there [section unclear]. When I went to Nechung, the opera performers had started and all the guests had arrived. The oracle told me to bring a kettle of tea and a basket of snacks to the two Shengo.   

**Q:**  Did the Shengo know that you were appointed as Chagdampa?   

**A:**  Reting Labrang had given the order to the Shengo that I was appointed as Chagdampa.   

**Q:**  When did they give the order?   

**A:**  They gave the order at the end of the 6th lunar month. I received the order of appointment as Chagdampa on the 5th of the 7th month. I had to look for an auspicious date and serve tea and droma dresi in the Shengo's shag.   

**Q:**  Did you do this in his shag?   

**A:**  Yes. I sat there with the Shengo and he said, "I received the order that you are appointed as the Chagdampa, so you have to work well with me. We will talk later."   

**Q:**  Were you among the candidates?   

**A:**  In the beginning, I was not among the candidates because I was going to travel to a distant place. However, in the end the oracle wrote a letter to the abbot because otherwise they would not have put me in as a candidate.   

**Q:**  You were late to ask, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was your seniority okay to become a Chagdampa?   

**A:**  Yes. But the late oracle didn't tell me that he wrote a letter to the abbot. While I was in Lhasa with the chanang, I received a message through a shöndre saying that I have to come to the monastery on the next day in the early morning. So I went anxiously to the abbot's labrang in the early morning. I arrived at the monastery at sunrise. The abbot asked me, "What are you here for?" This was because he didn't know me. Then I told him that I received the message to come to you," and he said, "I see! Are you the one who is called Urgyen?" I said, "yes." Then he said, "Nechung oracle wrote me a letter to put you in as a Chagdampa candidate. Are you going to do that?" I said, "Yes." So he said, "I will put you in as a candidate and you are not allowed to go [travel] anywhere."   

**Q:**  Usually, the Chagdampa candidate was put forward by the abbot, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and the abbot gives it to the Mitsen and the Mitsen would give it to the Shengo. Since everything was fixed at the upper levels, I was appointed though I was only the 3rd or the 4th candidate.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was 28 years old. It was the Earth-Tiger [Tib. ས་སྟག] Year [1938] when I came from Gyetön and came to the Mönlam in the Earth-Hare Year [Tib. ས་ཡོས].   

**Q:**  What did you do after you received the order?   

**A:**  I didn't have any work for the time being. Actually, some verbal work [Tib. ཁའི་ལས་ཀ] would start from the time of the Ganden Ngamjö and I had to go with the Shengo. There was no work during the winter. The real work started from the Mönlam and Tsongjö. It was during the Reting regency and there was no [regent's] ceremony [Tib. མཛད་སྒོ] in the Mönlam except the regular ceremony. The next year, the Dalai Lama's reincarnation was coming. In the Earth-Hare Year in the 8th lunar month, the Dalai Lama arrived at the plain on the east side of Lhasa that was called Döguthang [Tib. འདོད་རྒུ་ཐང].   

**Q:**  Do you know the date of this?   

**A:**  He came on the 9th and arrived in Lhasa on the 14th. On that day all the Drepung Laji went there.   

**Q:**  You were the Chagdampa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but I didn't need to have my shoulders padded (Tib. ཨོབོག [ཨོ་བོག]) [shoulders padding to make it seem larger]. I just wore my monk's robes and went with the Shengo. We sought an audience with the Dalai Lama and we were given cookies. I first met the Dalai Lama in Döguthang when he was 5 years old and could barely sit on the throne. Then on the 14th, he came to Lhasa and went for a pilgrimage to the Tsuglagang and the Ramoche [Temples] and then went directly to Norbulinga where they held a ceremony. After attending the ceremony, we went back to Drepung and then the Dalai Lama's enthronement ceremony [Tib. གསེར་ཁྲི་མངའ་གསོལ] was held where all the dancers and singers called troma shema [Tib. བྲོ་མ་གཞས་མ] and the opera performing groups like Gyangkhara [Tib. རྒྱང་མཁར་བ྄] and Kyormo lungnga [Tib. སྐྱོར་མོ་ལུང་པ] also came.   

**Q:**  What month was that?   

**A:**  It was during the Mönlam when the great procession of the Dalai Lama was coming to Lhasa [Tib. ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་ཆེན་མོ].   

**Q:**  At that time, where did the Dalai Lama stay?   

**A:**  He stayed in the Tsuglagang. At the ceremony (Tib. tönchen [Tib. སྟོན་ཆེན]) there was a heaped up pile of meat and cookies that was set out by the Tibetan government and the people were allowed to rush and grab as much as they could. They also hoisted the good news prayer flag [Tib. གཏམ་སྙན་དར་ལྕོག]. Then in the Iron-Snake Year, Chamatsang [Tib. བྱ་མ་ཚང] invited the Dalai Lama to the Mönlam where he gave each monk a brick of tea [as alms]. The next year, which was the Water-Horse Year, the Dalai Lama took his novice vow [Tib. རབ་བྱུང་མཚན་བཞེས]. At the time of the Reting Regency, we went there to push away the crowds. I did the Chagdampa continuously for 5 years.   

**Q:**  Normally, the chagdampa's term was one year, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It was unprecedented to be Chagdampa continuously for 5 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were some who had done it for 2 years. At the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, he appointed two Chagdampa, but both of them died and there was also one called Shingnyer Göche [Tib. དགོས་ཆད]. In the Wood-Bird year I went to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  What work did you do in Lingtsang [Tib. གླིང་ཚང] in Lhoka?   

**A:**  I was working as the Nyertsang in the monastery. I was the main Nyertsang. This was a job that should be done by a monk from Loseling. They sent the candidate's names to the Gadong Deity and Gadong approved it.   

**Q:**  Ling Labrang sent your name to Gadong, and Gadong approved it, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They didn't tell me that they had sent my name to Gadong. However, after it was approved, Ling Labrang informed the tratsang and the tratsang told me to go there. I stayed in Lhoka for 4 years. When I came back it was the time between the Mönlam and the tsongjö, so I went to the tsog and I sat at the head row. On the seating arrangement day (Tib. ཏྲེནཛིན [གྲལ་འཛིན]) all the monks of Sera Me had come, but on the second day they told us, "Goodbye! [Tib. རྣམ་པ་ཚོ་བཞུགས་གདན་འཇགས་ཨ]. Now we are going back to the monastery because we received a message saying that all the monks [of Me] should come back." We were wondering what was going to happen. So after the mid-day tsog, the seats were empty and then the war took place.   

**Q:**  This wasn't the Reting war, right?   

**A:**  It was the Reting war.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it the trouble involving Chömpel Thubden [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་ཐུབ་བསྟན]? [the Lhundrup Dzong incident]   

**A:**  Probably, it was. Oh yes, it was the Reting war. Then after that, Kapshöba did something and many things happened, though I didn't see these things. At that time, they were shooting from under the gilded roof of the Tsuglagang. People were looking through binoculars saying, "Oh! That is too bad! [Tib. ད་བྱས་མ་སོང]. Many monks were squeezed in under the Sera shar rocks [mountain located at the east side of Sera]. We were at the Tsongjö and went to watch the fun from under the gilded roof of the Tsuglagang. In that year there was no religious possession (Tib. Tsongjö Sebang [Tib. སེར་སྦྲེང]). The [Dalai Lama's] ceremony was to be held on the 8-9th of the 3rd lunar month, but it was delayed. In the 8th month, the Dalai Lama came to the Tsuglagang and held the ceremony and on the 6th of the 9th month, he came to Drepung and on his way he came to Nechung. Since the new Shengo was confirmed in the 7th month, I didn't have anything to do. I didn't plan to ask for the Chagdampa position and people didn't tell me to do it. But at the time, the Shengo had to go to see the officials of the Kashag and the Yigtsang and they would take me with them. At that time, Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] was a tsendrön. [section unclear] After the ceremony in Drepung was over, on the 9th, when the Yigtsang went to Sera, it gave the order [to Loseling] that said, "The representatives of the abbots in the Laji who acted rashly and the abbot of the two tratsang and the Chagdampa and Shingnyer must come to the Yigtsang." [Tib. བླ་སྤྱིའི་མཁན་འཐུས་དོན་མ་གོ་དང། གྲྭ་ཚང་གཉིས་ཀྱི་མཁན་པོ་དང་ཕྱག་དམ་པ་དང་ཤིང་གཉེར་ཡིག་ཚང་དུ་བཅར་དགོས]. The Loseling Khembo asked me, "That is strange. I wonder what it could be about? Was there any trouble in the past? [Tib. ཨ་ཡ་མཚན། གང་ཡིན་ན། སྔོན་མའི་རྙོག་དྲ་འདྲ་ཡོད་རེད་པས] I said, "The trouble in the past was settled. The Loseling Khembo asked me whether I had a horse and I said yes. I had a red horse that was saddled. Chönzin la [Tib. ཆོས་འཛིན་ལགས] also had a horse. When we went through Parikhug [Tib. བྲག་རི་ཁུག], the three abbots were also going there. [section unclear] And then we were called to the Yigtsang. Ramba, Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] and Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] were there and the other one might have been Ngagpa la [Tib. སྔགས་པ་ལགས] [they were the drunyichemmo]. Then Ramba and Bumtang were telling each other, "You give the order." Jawdang then told Bumtang to give the order and Bumtang gave the order. It said, "The two Shengo, the abbots of the Laji, the khembo of two tratsang, the Chagdampa Urgyen and the Gomang Shingnyer Chönzin must listen carefully." That year was the Water-Horse year in which the Dalai Lama was to hold his first ceremony and it was in the 7th lunar month.   

**Q:**  Did they call you to come in all together?   

**A:**  No. We were called separately. Ramba and Bumtang were telling each other, "You give the order." Then Jawdang told Bumtang to give the order and Bumtang gave the order which said, "The new year is the Water Horse-Year the year when the Dalai Lama will hold his first ceremony. It is a very auspicious day and there will be a big crowd at the Mönlam, so the discipline must be controlled well. If not, there will be trouble internally. Therefore, in order to the have the discipline controlled well, the Chagdampa Urgyen and the Shingnyer Chönzin are appointed to be the Chagdampa and the Shingnyer as before. The two Shengo must not think that you are above them and you must not use your power on them. You have to consult with them. It is like the saying, "If you are not auspicious inside, you cannot accomplish your work outside." [Tib. ནང་བཀྲ་མ་ཤིས་ན། ཕྱི་དོན་མི་འགྲུབ]. The Chagdampa must also do your best. If you do that, it will be good and the higher-ups will not need to hear any troubles [Tib. སྙན་འཇམ་པོ] and you will also have tranquility [Tib. འཇམ་པོ]. The Chagdampa must hand over all the gifts (Tib. büthob [Tib. འབུལ་ཐོབ]) to the Shengo because the Shengo has to give many tonggo to the big tratsang using this. And you are not allowed to hand over and receive newly created extra things [Tib. སྔར་མེད་གསར་སྤྲོས]. The two of you have to do your work not worse than before, even you can't do it better than before. Do not forget my words after you go out the door." This was the order.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the Shengo and the khembo there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they tell you that the reason for your being appointed again. Was it because of the case of the thief called Ngagtsug?   

**A:**  No. They didn't say it was well done and also they didn't say that you [I] did a shameful thing [Tib. སྔོ་ལོ་འཕྱར]. When we went back to the Laji it was mid-day. We ate noodles and then we went to Sera Jey for pilgrimage. In the Harya Girwa [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན] temple, they served tea and I then went to Sera Me where I knew many people like Trijang Labrang's chandzö, etc. and they also served me noodles. Then I went to Ngagpa where they also served me noodles, but I couldn't eat. Then I went to Shedrubling [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲུབ་གླིང] where they served me rice mixed with melted butter and yogurt (Tib. ཤོམདྲེ [ཞོ་འབྲས]). After that, I went to the Laji where many people from the Sera Me tobtsang came to congratulate me. There were more people coming to congratulate me than the abbot and the Shengo. We reached the monastery [Drepung] when it was almost dark.   

**Q:**  When you came back to the monastery what did they talk about? Were they surprised?   

**A:**  Yes. They were all saying that this is really good news. The Loseling Khembo said, "I thought you and Shingnyer Chönzin La probably might not be appointed again, especially because you have something pending from the past [Tib. ཤུལ]. We hoped that you would become the Chagdampa again, but we heard that you went to Lhoka to be a nyertsang. Now it is very good." From the next day, everyone knew about that. After that, Tsarong and Tsomönling invited the Dalai Lama to the tsog and I was there during all these ceremonies. After that, from the Mouse-Year to the Hare-Year, I became the Chagdampa again for 4 years during the time of the Taktra Regent. During these 4 years, when the Yigtsang appointed the new Shengo, they said that I and the Shingnyer had to be the Chagdampa and the Shingnyer again, although we didn't ask for it. Since then, nobody tried to get the positions of Chagdampa and Shingnyer, probably, they thought that they would not get it, so there was no choice for us but to do it again. After 2 years, I asked for the Gegö position and I got it. I was the Gegö for one year. After that, there was a trülku called Nyen Seru [Tib. གཉན་སེར྄ུ] Trülku who belonged to our khamtsen. He and his chandzö didn't get along with Detrug Labrang [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག་བླ་བྲང] and the labrang made the chandzö suffer a lot. So they had a law case and the chandzö Patrug [Tib. དཔལ་གྲུབ྄] appealed face-to-face to the Dalai Lama in Norbulinga when the Dalai Lama was coming along (Tib. dongshu gyab [Tib. གདོང་ཞུ་བརྒྱབ].   

**Q:**  Did he make the appeal when the Dalai Lama was coming in a palanquin?   

**A:**  Probably he did that when the Dalai Lama was walking and coming from the gaa to the drungja. He threw the khata and the petition and prostrated to the Dalai Lama. The Simgag beat him up and he was locked up in the Bodyguard Regiment [headquarters]. He was probably 64 years old then, the same age as the regent. Probably he was locked up there for about a month and then he was called to the Shö gaa and was interrogated. His opponent labrang also had to go to the gaa. The final verdict was issued by the Shö gaa and the officials of the Detrug Labrang. The verdict was about three domba [a length measure defined as the span of the person's outstretched hands from fingertip to fingertip] [unclear meaning]. As the punishment for making the direct appeal, the chandzö was whipped 50 times near the door of Norbulinga. The Nendrön came. However, they whipped him with his trousers on. He was not whipped severely.   

**Q:**  Who was the nendrön then?   

**A:**  Probably it was Gyambumgang. The senior Tseja also came. In the verdict, they didn't hand over the chandzö to the labrang. It was Gyamtso Tashi who investigated the case and he was the witness for handing over the Nechung Depa. The incumbent governor of Lhoka, the Lhoji, was also there. And probably, they gave the order to the Lhoji for demoting people like the Umdze in Nyan and some of them had to be whipped 100-150 times and some of them had to get beaten with the flat leather whip [Ch. jiu bazi] on their cheeks. Since the Lhoji was in Lhasa, probably they told him to send a capable representative [Tib. ངོ་ཚབ་དོ་ཆོད] to Lhoka. At that time, it was also said that a capable representative of the Laji, the Loseling Tratsang, the Tsha Khamtsen and the Nyalpa Mitsen must be sent to Lhoka. Actually, the chandzö won the case. After several days, the Laji said that they were going to send me as their representative and they agreed although they didn't inform me. Loseling Tratsang also thought of sending me as their representative. Then the Tratsang's Chabu discussed this and told the Laji and they have decided to send me as their representative. The Laji still insisted that they want me to be their representative and finally they agreed that I can be the representative of both the Laji and the tratsang. Then the Khamtsen said that if it please you allow us not to send a representative. Finally, they asked the Lhoji and Lhoji said, "Is Urgyen la in the monastery? The Lhoji and I used to be in the same grade and were schoolmates when we were small. The Lhoji said, "I don't have a person to send there and I also have to send somebody to take over the changji position because I am already appointed as changji. Probably, the Laji and the Tratsang can send one representative and the Khamtsen can be included in that. However, would Urgyenla agree to be the representative of both? Tomorrow I will go to Norbulinga and ask them whether Urgyen la can be the representative of both the Laji and the Tratsang. I trust him, so I am going to ask whether it would be okay for me to send him as my representative also. If this is approved, we will have to spend less." When I was the Lingtsang Nyertsang, he was the Lhoji. He told them to come the day after tomorrow and when they went there, the Lhoji said the Yigtsang agreed to send Urgyen la for all of us because it will be less bother for the shidü. However, he must do it well and you the Lhoji have to give good instructions." Then he [lhoji] told them to send me down to Nechung and the Lhoji told me, "I didn't know that you are here. Now it is very good and you have to be the representative of the Laji, Tratsang, Khamtsen, Mitsen and the Lhoji also." The Laji arranged two horses and two servants (for me). Later the Lhoji asked me how many servants I am going to take and I said that the Laji told me to take two. He said, "You are representing the Laji, Tratsang and also me, so at least you have to take 3 servants, if not four. How about your clothes?" I said, "I have the chupa called tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ] with the opening on two sides and a vest to wear on that." He said. "You have to be well dressed because you are representing the Laji also. Otherwise people will look down on you." He told me about the horses and I told him the Laji have arranged for two horses and he said, "I am sending my horses and mules to Lhoka, so you can use them for riding and transporting things. I am only keeping 2-3 here because the fodder is scarce. Then I propitiated Nechung, Tema and Gadong [deities] and then the Lhoji told me to come to him with all the servants. He served us pag and he stayed the whole day relaxed and handed me a document that was wrapped in a square cloth. There were different punishments and fines like whipping, a fine to give a mangja, to prostrate and some should be demoted. Before leaving, the Lhoji told me, "You have to do it well because you are taking the name of the Lhoji, Laji and the Tratsang." He also lend me some clothing and a saddle case [Tib. སྒ་ཤུབ]. On the day we left, the Lhoji gave us khata scarf and money and we arrived at Nedong [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང] where I had to stay about ten days because I was also told to do some offerings to the monastery, so I went to see the lake vision and when I arrived at the Nyan Shobu, there were many people receiving me carrying khata scarves. Then when I went down, the two nyerpa of the dzong came to receive me. The head of the dzong was Karchungwa [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང་བ] and another one, but they didn't come in person. And when we arrived there, they blew the horn and the gyaling instruments and they also held the religious possession called sebang [Tib. སེར་སྦྲེང]. After I arrived there, I read the verdicts and whipped and fined the people. I stayed there a little over two months. At that time, the Lhoji got good income and I also got quite a good amount and then I came back to the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did you become the Chagdampa again?   

**A:**  Then my Gegö position was terminated and I didn't become the Chagdampa. After that, I was sent to Tawang Monastery which belonged to the Tibetan government. The person in charge (Tib. ལནཛིན [བླ་འཛིན] ) was sent from Loseling. I also went to Tsöna and in the 9th month, I came to Nyan and then I came back to the monastery. The next year, I was sent to Dakpo [Tib. དྭགས་པོ].   

**Q:**  Was that after terminating the gegö post?   

**A:**  Yes. And then I went to Nyan and to Tsöna.   

**Q:**  For what purpose were you sent?   

**A:**  Mainly to investigate the miser's situation [Tib. མི་ཞིབ] and there were also some troubles to be settled and I also went to Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ]. After that, the Drepung Riji send me to Chang [Northern Tibet].   

**Q:**  Where in Chang?   

**A:**  To collect the butter lease fee in the Sangshung [Tib. གསང་གཞུང] area. It was collected once every three years when they counted the number of animals which was called gotsi [Tib. མགོ་རྩིས]. When we got there, they had pitched a very big yak hair tent the size of 40-50 pillars. They made partitions in that tent. Around the big tent, there were yak hair tents. We had to bring grain to them to make chang and also bring rice and prayer flags, brown sugar and the things they didn't have, and we also collected the taxes from them. They made chang in separate places and we also gave them a party for three days where they would wear the hat called jangda [Tib. ལྕགས་མདའ] and long earrings and they also did horse races. We also give them droma dresi and chang for three days. The place was called Sangshung which is located many days journey from Dam [Tib. འདམ]. After the party was over, we started to collect the taxes. I sat there and the person weighing on the scale stood on some sod and attached the scale there. The person would say things like, "1 khe and 4 nyaga." The dzongpön and the jubön could not see the scale. They weighed things on the scale in that way 2-3 times. Then I said, "Don't weigh it. How could it be that we cannot see the scale. You are looking at the scale like looking at the sky. How could you see it?" Then they said, "They have done it that way from early times." Then I told the Laji, "Probably, they are doing something against the law of cause and effect when they were using the scale in a way that made the Laji and the ordinary monks to not get [all] the income." The Laji also noticed that the people who were going there didn't look at the scale. Then we stopped weighing the butter and talked with them until evening and we couldn't work on that day.   

**Q:**  What did they [miser] say?   

**A:**  They were very glad to see that we were checking the scale. We made the rule that the gembo and the dingpön must look at the scale and make notes.   

