# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0214.05 : Tape 5  
##  : Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1907  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Urgyen [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན] was a well-known Drepung Loseling monk who at one time held the powerful position of Chagdampa. In this interview, he discusses how Kapshöba was involved in the Khyungram incident and about the Pandatsang incident. He also discusses in detail about the Laji office and the tratsang and khamtsen structure in Drepung and how all the monastic officials like the Shengo, Chagdampa and Geyog were appointed.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0214_05/H_0214_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I heard that Kapshöba instigated the Khyungram trouble. Kapshöba made the Horpa [the nomads from the north] submit a petition which was endorsed by Reting. This was just a pretext. The main reason why Reting didn't like Khyungram was because Khyungram said that some are, "Not full even after eating the mountain" [Tib. རི་བོ་ཟོས་ནས་མ་འགྲངས].   

**Q:**  Who was Töpa Khembo [Tib. སྟོད་པ་མཁན་པོ]?   

**A:**  He was the pockmarked one who was from Sera Jey College.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a lot of trouble when Reting Rimpoche was about to appoint the Töpa Khembo something and the Sera monks didn't accept that?   

**A:**  Yes. He was about to appoint a Töpa Khembo to a position in the Sera Me College or something [as abbot]. I am sure about that.   

**Q:**  Did you say that on the day when the Pandatsang issue was settled, the drungtsi entered his house?   

**A:**  Yes. It was certainly the drungtsi, because I saw that they were wearing their red robes [Tib. ཁ་གོན].   

**Q:**  You said that Pandatsang gave khata scarves to the soldiers and then the soldiers went back through the Barkor Street, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was said that the matter was settled and then the soldiers went back.   

**Q:**  It was Chöyang [Tib. ཆོས་དབྱངས] of Ling [Tib. གླིང] who first requested that the Tratsang act as the guarantor. He said that he will bring along the Tratsang, right?   

**A:**  It was not Chöyang, but the Gegen of Chöyang who was the chandzö of the Ling Labrang. At that time, Chöyang was a child.   

**Q:**  What is the name of Chöyang's Gegen?   

**A:**  He was called Simgag Gyatso [Tib. གཟིམ་འགག་རྒྱ་མཚོ] when he later became the Simgag of the Dalai Lama after he asked for leave from Ling Labrang. I don't have any idea whether he got along well with Ling Labrang. He was the brother of the tsidrung nicknamed, "Yes, you are right" Therepo [Tib. དེ་རེད་སྤོ་བོ]. The chandzö also had a sister from the same parents called Wamo Thöndrub Drolma [Tib. ཝ་མོ་དོན་གྲུབ་སྒྲོལ་མ] who lived near the meat market. He probably served as Simgag for about 5-6 years. Then he resigned.   

**Q:**  Was this during Reting or Taktra's time?   

**A:**  He was Simgag at the time of Taktra also. After he resigned from being Simgag, he stayed in the monastery where he had the title of Letsenpa and he would come to the Laji meetings on the rooftop of the assembly hall. Chöyang's gegen was called Thöndrub La [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་ལགས]. He used be the Söpön of the former Ling Rimpoche and also served the present incarnation. Then when he became old and became the senior chandzö, Lungrig La [Tib. ལུང་རིག་ལགས] became the junior chandzö. There were two chandzö. Thöndrub La didn't have power because Lungrig La took the responsibilities. Later, at the time of the revolt, he was left in Tibet.   

**Q:**  You mean the chandzö with the white hair?   

**A:**  He was not that white-haired. It was more greyish hair.   

**Q:**  When you came to Drepung, who was the abbot?   

**A:**  It was at the beginning of the term of the abbot named Gowo [Tib. གོ་བོ].   

**Q:**  How did you get into Tsha Khamtsen?   

**A:**  In the past, my maternal aunt's husband who was called Tashi Tsering was from Tsha Khamtsen. He was close to the late Tsaja who was banished. My grandparents were living in Talungchang [Tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྱང] in Lhasa. Later our late tsidrung joined Tsha Khamtsen and became a Chöndze and then I also joined Tsha Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  So actually, you did not belong to [to the region eligible for] Tsha, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Which Khamtsen should you have belonged to?   

**A:**  Actually we were the miser of Yabshi Langdön, so we should have belonged to Kongpo Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Didn't they complain because you switched from Kongpo to Tsha?   

**A:**  I am just an ordinary person so they did not argue. If I was rich, then they would have argued. Even for young and poor incarnate lamas, nobody would argue. But when you have wealth and reputation, then everybody will fight for you. This was the normal system.   

**Q:**  How many khamtsen were there in Loseling?   

**A:**  There were 23, and then later 24. Out of these, three were the bigger ones known as Chegasum [Tib. ཆེ་ཁག་གསུམ]. They were called the three Nachen.   

**Q:**  What were the privileges of the Chegasum?   

**A:**  I do not know.   

**Q:**  How many medium ones were there?   

**A:**  There were seven medium ones.   

**Q:**  Which were the seven medium ones? Wasn't Nyagre [Tib. ཉག་རེ] one?   

**A:**  Yes. Then there was Bombora and also probably Triu [Tib. ཏྲེཧོར], Lhopa [Tib. ལྷོ་པ] and probably Phara [Tib. ཕ་ར] were also ones. I forget the other ones. And then there were thirteen small ones.   

**A:**  What was the basis of this division into big, medium and small?   

**A:**  It was differentiated when they made the monks to do the shöndre (young monk's work). When some meetings were held, they would say that the big ones wee obliged to send so many [monks to work] and the smaller ones were obliged to send so much.   

**Q:**  Who would do this?   

**A:**  This was mainly done by the Chabril.   

**Q:**  How many Khamtsen were there in Gomang?   

**A:**  There were sixteen and among them there were two big ones, Hamdong and Samlo [Tib. བསམ་ལྷོ]. The next ones were Gungru [Tib. གུང་རུ] and Bati [Tib. སྦྲ་སྡི]. These were the four chabu of Gomang. Hamdong, Samlo and Gungru were called "seniors" (Tib. དྲེཔ [Tib. བགྲེས་པ]) not because they had seniority on the monk's enrollment list, but because they were the Chabu of Gomang.   

**Q:**  Did they enjoy a government rank like the Shengo?   

**A:**  No. The drepa were all Chabu. The Khamtsen gegen of Hamdong and Samlo enjoyed a rank and had a funny dress and they wore some kind of padding (Tib. ཐོཔོག [Tib. མཐོ་བོག]) on their shoulders. On top of that, they wore a satin garment [Tib. གོས་སྟོད] like the tsidrung did. The Laji belonged to the bigger and medium khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Among the Laji, there were big, medium and the small ones, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many Khamtsen did Gomang have?   

**A:**  They had 16, and Deyang had no khamtsen at all and had maybe only 500 or less monks. The fourth [college] was Ngagpa College and they had fewer monks than Deyang.   

**Q:**  Gyepa [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] and Shagor [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར] didn't have many monks, right?   

**A:**  Gyepa and Shagor were part of Loseling. Nyalingtsulsum [Tib. ཉག་གླིང་ཚུལ་གསུམ] -- Nyango [Tib. ཉག་འགོ], Ling [Tib. གླིང] and Tsümey [Tib. ཚུལ་སྨད] belonged to Shagor.   

**Q:**  Which were the ones that belonged to Gyepa?   

**A:**  Gyepa was a separate one.   

**Q:**  What about Dingga [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁ]?   

**A:**  Dingga belongs to Shagor.   

**Q:**  How many monks did they have in Tsükhang?   

**A:**  The three, Nyalingtsulsum, together may not have had more than 500 monks. As a part of Gomang, there was Dülwa.   

**Q:**  How many monks did Dülwa have?   

**Q:**  They had only Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] Mitsen. They had Hamdong and Samlo also.   

**Q:**  Which was the highest decision making body? Was it the Drepung Laji?   

**A:**  Yes. Regarding the laws of the monks and punishments, the Laji had no business at all. That responsibility rested with the Shengo only.   

**Q:**  Who were the Laji members?   

**A:**  The senior most abbot, the Khembo Tripa, [Tib. མཁན་པོ་ཁྲི་པ] was the chairman, and he was the most important of the Laji members. Then all the abbots and ex-abbots of Drepung were there. They were the most powerful ones. It was different [in Drepung] than in Sera and Ganden where only the actual abbots were involved, not the ex-abbots. Then there were the two Shengo and the Tsogchen Chemmo [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན་ཆེན་མོ་བ] [the umdze]. The two Jiso and the Phodrang Depa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་སྡེ་པ] were also there. This was the big Laji (Tib. ལཇི་ཆེག [ཆེ་ཁག]). They were the senior members of the Laji. The middle level, between the senior and the juniors, were the Khamtsen gegen of Hamdong and Samlo khamtsen. Then there was a man called the Yarne Depa [Tib. དབྱར་གནས་སྡེ་པ] who would wear a satin jacket [Tib. གོས་སྟོད]. He was the person in charge of the summer retreats. One Parkhang Depa [Tib. པར་ཁང་སྡེ་པ] from Loseling and one from Gomang were the ones in charge of printing. There was a Tsomchen Depa [Tib. ཚོམ་ཆེན་སྡེ་པ] and then there was the Chatsü Depa [Tib. བྱ་ཚུལ་སྡེ་པ]. These were middle level Laji. The junior Laji, the chungga [Tib. ཆུང་ཁག], were the Nangma [Tib. ནང་མ], the Chabril, the Lama Migtsema [Tib. བླ་མ་དམིགས་རྩེ་མ] and the two Jama (tea makers) (Tib. ཇ་མ) of the assembly.   

**Q:**  Who would attend the meetings?   

**A:**  Only the big ones would attend the meetings. The junior and middle Laji had no business to attend the meetings except when a Tsogchen Trülku was joining the monastery or passing their exams during the tonggo, etc. They gave gifts and at that time the Laji could collect income. So they had the titles, but they had no work. When you took the Geshe exam, you gave gifts to the senior, junior and the middle Laji, but you may not have known it.   

**Q:**  All the respective abbots and candidates are selected by the monasteries themselves and then approved by the government, right? And their term is 6 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the chairman of the abbots?   

**A:**  The chairman of abbot, the Khembo Tripa [Tib. མཁན་པོ་ཁྲི་པ] was not appointed by the government. It went to the senior-most abbot and it had no time limit. The abbots served for six years and then they were changed. The Khembo Tripa has no time limit. I remember that when Jungnela [Tib. འབྱུང་གནས] was the Khembo Tripa, there was an old one sitting above him. He said his name was Khembo Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and he had a goiter. He was the chairman, but due to his ill health he could not carry out the work so he resigned and they excused him and the next one was Jungnela.   

**Q:**  To whom did he have to ask about the resignation?   

**A:**  He had to ask the Laji to resign, not the government.   

**Q:**  The Khembo Tripa was appointed by the Laji, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The next was Gyepa Khembo and then the Shagor Khembo [Tib. ཤག་སྒོར་མཁན་པོ] who looked like a nun. When his turn came, he could not manage, so he resigned.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Because he could not handle the responsibilities of a Laji. He could not do it.   

**Q:**  What is the power of the Laji?   

**A:**  Any disputes between the Tratsang or among the Khamtsen, etc. anything within the jurisdiction of Drepung could be settled by the Laji.   

**Q:**  What power did the Laji have and what income did they have?   

**A:**  The Laji was the head of all the Tratsang and they would settle matters regarding the Tratsang.   

**Q:**  The disputes between the Tratsang were also settled by the Laji, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They just advised them. They didn't have any punishments they could give. The Laji would also settle matters regarding which Khamtsen a person should belong to. The Drepung Laji would get the "general gifts" [Tib. སྤྱི་འབུལ] during the Mönlam Prayer Festival. Every person who gave alms at the Mönlam gave a rice load [rice packed in dried skin] that was about 40 kg [to the Laji]. This rice load was given by the Laja Treasury Office. During the Mönlam Festival, at each prayer assembly, there could be 50 to 60 alms-givers and every day there were two assemblies, so hundreds of rice loads would come to the Laji. Along with the rice loads, one long khata scarf called nangdzö and one tranka was also given to the Laji. The list was made by a person called the Labrang Chandzö and one of the Chagdrung of the Laja would also note these down and later they collected them together and brought them to the monastery. Also, there was a request list for prayers [Tib. གྱབཐོ] at Drepung accompanied by a scarf and some money. This khata went to the senior Shengo and normally the money went to the Shengo, but during the Mönlam and Tsongjö, if there was seven and half karma for the prayer request, the Shengo had to pay double that to the Laji. Every night the Labrang Chandzö came to the Shengo's office to collect this. Every time if it was written 15 sho in the prayer request list, then the Shengo had to pay 30 sho, i.e., double the amount. If there was any extra money that was not written in the prayer request, earlier this money went to the senior Shengo, but later they changed this and divided the money. During Jungne La's time, it was very good. He kept all the rice and sold it and kept the money separately. He would announce suddenly that tomorrow there will be a distribution of money and he distributed it to the monks. He gave extra money if the incarnate lamas came personally, and otherwise he gave very little even to the Shengo. When people give endowments to the general prayer assembly, this money went to the Laji. If the Laji couldn't handle the money because there was too much money, it would be given it to the Jiso.   

**Q:**  Was this a practice even before Jungnela?   

**A:**  They were supposed to do this, but they did it only once in a while and then that was it. The Laji used to loan money to the Khamtsen and the Mitsen in the monastery and collect the interest. They would fix the date to collect the interest and give notice at least a month before the interest collection was due. That day would start early in the morning and they would read the list and then you just say I am here and give the interest. If you do not pay the interest, then they will scold you. The interest was collected without fail and on time during Jungne la's period, but before that, it was not done so well. Besides this, the Laji had no income.   

**Q:**  Where did the Laji meet?   

**A:**  They always met on the top of the assembly hall where there was a big room.   

**Q:**  How was the seating arrangement made? I have not seen it. How did they sit?   

**A:**  The abbot and the ex-abbots had the cushions called markyong [Tib. དམར་རྐྱོང] which were thick with red cushions made from woolen material.   

**Q:**  What sort of seat did the Khembo Tripa have?   

**A:**  He had an extra seat (cushion) and it was higher, like 4 inches higher than the rest of them. There was a thick stuffed cushion [Tib. འབོལ་གདན] covered with cotton cushion material called Sangkha [Tib. བཟང་ཁ] for the Khembo Tripa. Sangkha was made from cotton, but the design was like the multicolored brocade cushion called gökha [Tib. གོས་ཁ].   

**Q:**  What kind of tables did they have?   

**Q:**  They used the table called bujog [Tib. བུ་ལྕོགས] which had legs but it was a standing table. Below the abbot there were the Shengo, then the Tshogchen Chemmo, then the Phodrang Depa and then the two Jiso and then the last was the Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་གསར].   

**Q:**  They all had equal sized cushions, right?   

**A:**  They had equal seats. If they could not fit in one place then they will start sitting on the other side.   

**Q:**  Would they serve tea when they assembled there?   

**A:**  They served tea.   

**Q:**  Would they serve pag?   

**A:**  No. First they started talking, and then after awhile, they served pag.   

**Q:**  The expenses for this were paid by the Laji, right?   

**A:**  The Khembo Tripa took the main responsibility for the Laji, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. What was the responsibility of the Labrang Chandzö?   

**A:**  He was the one who did the miscellaneous work going hither and thither [Tib. བཏང་ཐུང་རྒྱུགས] and asking the Khembo Tripa what should be done. And he would also deliver messages.   

**Q:**  Where would the Labrang Chandzö stay?   

**A:**  He would stay in his own apartment.   

**Q:**  Where would this person come from? Did he come from the Tratsang by turns?   

**A:**  He came from Gomang and also from Loseling.   

**Q:**  Would they serve by turns?   

**A:**  No. This was decided by the Khembo Tripa.   

**Q:**  So he was appointed, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was he appointed once every year? Was there any term for that?   

**A:**  No. It depended on whether he got along well with the Khembo Tripa.   

**Q:**  When the Khembo Tripa was changed, would the Labrang Chandzö also change.   

**A:**  If he did well, he would still remain there. There was no term. When he didn't get along well, he would resign when he thought it was not going to be good.   

**Q:**  This was not the Lama Migtsema, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was not. The Lama Migtsema came from Gomang.   

**Q:**  What was the job of the Lama Migtsema?   

**A:**  His job was to lead the prayer called Migtsema.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  On top of the assembly hall. In the morning, when they shouted the chuke [Tib. ཆུ་སྐད], the Lama Migtsema would come and he would recite the Migtsema for one round of the prayer beads. He would have to visualize it.   

**Q:**  What kind of visualization?   

**A:**  I am not sure what visualization. He would do the visualization and when he finished reciting it, he would cough three or four times [Tib. གློ་བསངས་རྒྱག] to give a signal.   

**Q:**  Would he cough aloud?   

**A:**  He would cough so loud that the whole monastery could hear. Then he would hit the victory banner [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན] with his rosary several times which would make the sound, "hreng hreng" which was also heard in the monastery. This was to alert the monks who were in their prayer session [Tib. ཐུན] to tell them that the person shouting chuke is coming.   

**Q:**  When they shouted the chuke, would they first face the east?   

**A:**  Yes. Then they shouted it in all directions saying "ah ah ha " for a long time.   

**Q:**  The Lama Migtsema's job was to recite the Migtsema, right?   

**A:**  He also had to deliver messages for the assembly. The Lama Migtsema should be a geshe from Gomang.   

**Q:**  All the Khamtsen gegen in Gomang were allowed to become the Lama Migtsema, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They had to report to the abbot. The Lama Migtsema and the Lama Dunggar Butri [Tib. དུང་དཀར་བུ་ཁྲིད] were appointed by the abbot.   

**Q:**  Would the Lama Migtsema have to stand when they serve the tea at the prayer assembly?   

**A:**  He would stand in the kitchen and when they finished serving tea to the monks in the front line, he would shout, "the front line is served" [Tib. གདོང་གྲལ་ཁེབས་སོང].   

**Q:**  The Lama Migtsema was appointed when each new abbot started his term, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What kind of privileges did the Lama Migtsema have? Did he get extra shares of alms?   

**A:**  Yes, he got three extra shares at the Mönlam. The Lama Migtsema had it difficult at the Mönlam because he had to stay the whole night in the Shengo's office [Tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] and then had to get up before anybody got up. In the morning, two people who were on turn to fetch water [Tib. ཆུ་རེས] and two other people would come and the Lama Migtsema also have to go to the prayer assembly. [from here there is a section where the recording is unclear] And then he had to look at his watch and wake up the two Shengo. When the Shengo went down to the stone steps, the Geyog had already gotten up. Then the Thabyog would open the door of the kitchen.   

**Q:**  All the abbots were appointed by the government, but the candidate names came from the Tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did the Shengo get appointed?   

**A:**  The Shengo was done by turns: Two years from Loseling and one from Phöbashung in the third year. The Shengo's partner sometimes came from Deyang and sometimes from Gomang and sometimes from Ngagpa. [there were two Shengo at a time]   

**A:**  In Loseling, which were the Khamtsen from which candidates for the Shengo position came?   

**A:**  They were Phöbashung, Nyango [Tib. ཉག་འགོ], Ling, Tsümey [Tib. ཚུལ་སྨད] and Gyepa [Tib. རྒྱས་པ].   

**Q:**  Nyango, Ling, Tsümey and Gyepa did not belong to Phöbashung, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The monks in Phöbashung were all phöba [Tib. བོད་པ] [central Tibetans].   

**Q:**  Whoever wanted to could join Phöbashung, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Except for Khambas.   

**Q:**  [unclear recording] Was Phöbashung a mitsen or a Khamtsen?   

**A:**  It was a mitsen.   

**Q:**  Phöbashung was not included in the 23 Khamtsen of Loseling, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It belonged to Tsha Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Would Tsümey and Dinga [Tib. ལྡིང་ཁ] let people from anywhere join their Khamtsen?   

**A:**  They only let people who belonged to their catchment area join the Khamtsen. Nyango and Ling would let other people join their Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  How did the candidates for the Shengo come from these Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Nyango and Ling would give one person's name in one year and Gyepa and Phöbashung also gave one person in a year. So once every four years, there will be one Shengo from these Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  At one time, Gomang's Phöbashung and Loseling's Phöbashung served together, and Gomang's Gadong Misten and Loseling go together at one time. and Gomang's Phöbashung and Deyang go together. [unclear recording]   

**Q:**  Was there a Gyepa Khamtsen?   

**A:**  Yes, there was.   

**Q:**  This did not belong to the Gyepa Labrang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Gyepa Labrang was a separate entity which was the labrang of the abbot.   

**Q:**  Dülwa Tratsang did not send candidates for the Shengo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Dülwa's Shengo candidate went from Gadong Misten and Gadong Mitsen was led by Dülwa. Gomang's candidate was led by the abbot. Loseling's Phöbashung's candidate was led by the abbot. Nyaling Tsüsum's candidate was led by Gyepa. The abbot would make the decision whether the candidate was okay or not and if not they would kick them out.   

**Q:**  What would the shengo have to do when he was selected, e.g., like doing an audience to show their physical appearance [Tib. མི་བབ་སྤྱན་ཞུ]?   

**A:**  At first they would go to the Yigtsang, probably that was for showing their physical appearance, and then they would go in line on the stage of Norbulinga. And then the four drunyichemmo would come and they would go into a room where the Dalai Lama would come and the Dalai Lama would look at the candidates. Then the candidates had to give a kind of speech, [Tib. ཚོགས་གཏམ].   

**Q:**  What kind of speech did you give?   

**A:**  You can give one on any kind of subject, like on some prayer or on the discipline of the monastery, etc. I gave a speech on the discipline and on the summer retreat. In that year, I was the first candidate, so I had to give the speech first. [unclear recording] Then they [candidates] go to the Dalai Lama's gaa and when the drungja was in session they would serve tea and tsampa in wooden containers implying that you can have pag, but no one would eat pag and they would give us 5 layers of the fried cookies [Tib. ཁ་ཟས་ལྔ་སྡེར]. Then they would go to seek an audience with the Dalai Lama and tea would be served there and we sat in a line. Then the Drönyerchemmo came from the Dalai Lama's throne. Then all of us would stand up. Then all the drunyichemmo would come carrying letters for the exam in their hands. And then we read the letters for the exam which contained different sizes of letters. There were three lines of cursive script and two lines of a little bigger letters.   

**Q:**  Was the Dalai Lama still there?   

**A:**  Yes. Then the second tea would be served. Then the drungja was about to be finished and the Drönyerchemmo would come and the Simgag would say, "stand up." And the Drönyerchemmo would stand in the midddle and the two Simgag would stand on the two sides, and the abbots would hold a khata called nangdzö. The Drönyerchemmo would be holding the Dalai Lama's approval order wrapped in a square piece of satin. Then the abbots would prostrate three times to the Drönyerchemmo and he would give the order to the abbots, and the two abbots would come back later on. The abbots carried the order on their backs. In the monastery, the Laji would assemble in the big hall and they would serve tea and droma dresi and they would also burn incense on the roof of the Jiso's house and the assembly would blow the horns. The two abbots would bring the order wrapped in the square satin and put it on a container filled with wheat. Then they would serve tea and recite the tea offering prayer [Tib. ཇ་མཆོད]. Before opening the order, nobody knew who was the new Shengo. Then the Phodrang Depa would stand up and take the approval order from the wheat and he would show it to all the people and then give it to the Khembo Tripa and he would announce the names. Many people would come to offer khata scarves to the new Shengo, but they were not allowed to come inside. Then they would draw lots as to who would be the senior Shengo. If the Shengo from Loseling was a Gegö and the Shengo from Deyang was a Chöndze, the Loseling one would be the senior and if they both were ex-nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང་ཟུར་པ] the senior one would be the senior Shengo. If both were ordinary monks, the senior gelong would become the senior shengo. Finally, the abbot would decide who would be the senior and the other would be the junior. Then the two Shengo would be seated on cushions and the people would congratulate them. Then the old and new Shengo will be seated and they would put the approval order on a plate filled with wheat. Then they would serve tea and droma dresi and they would offer khata scarves to the new Shengo. [unclear recording] Then the shengo would go around the assembly hall holding incense [Tib. སྤོས་སྐོར] and then go to their own shag and celebrate and people would come to offer khata scarves and they would also go for a pilgrimage in the monastery. And then they would take off their dress and go wherever they wanted to.   

**Q:**  Tell me in detail about how the Shengo candidates serve by turns from Phöbashung and Tsümey? Only one shengo serves from Loseling, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If the Phöbashung candidate got selected this year, who would get selected next year?   

**A:**  The candidate from Nyaling Tsüsum would be.   

**Q:**  Then who was selected the next year?   

**A:**  Dingka would do it and then it would be Gyepa's turn. Gomang and Ngagpa will be the two Shengo together.   

**Q:**  When Gomang and Ngagpa served together, there was no Shengo from Loseling, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After how many years [of serving] would there be no Shengo from Loseling?   

**A:**  Once every four years there was no Shengo from Loseling. Similarly, there was no Shengo from Gomang once every four years.   

**Q:**  So there are Shengo coming from Deyang and Ngagpa only once every four years, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Gomang and Ngagpa would serve together as Shengo partners and sometimes Ngagpa and Loseling would also serve together.   

**Q:**  Gyepa and Deyang would serve together as Shengo partners, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Dingka and Gadong Mitsen served together as Shengo partners and Deyang and Loseling would serve together.   

**Q:**  Except for the ones you mentioned above, the other Khamtsen were not allowed to be Shengo candidates, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama was not allowed to approve a person who was not among the candidates, right?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama wouldn't do that.   

**Q:**  It happened like that. For example, the abbot of Sera Jey was approved although he was not among the candidates.   

**A:**  This must be a different case. The Shengo candidates have to take the writing exam and also give a speech.   

**Q:**  The abbot also had to give a dharma teaching, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but the abbots didn't need to take the writing exam.   

**Q:**  Where did the Chagdampa come from?   

**A:**  He was appointed by Jey and Ngagpa. [unclear].   

**Q:**  Deyang and Gomang did not send them, right?   

**A:**  There was no example of a Chagdampa coming from Deyang.   

**Q:**  Why? What would happen if the Shengo of Deyang appointed a Chagdampa from Deyang and the Shengo of Ngagpa appointed a Chagdampa from Ngagpa?   

**A:**  Probably, it was okay. It didn't say that they were not allowed, but they didn't appoint them like that.   

**Q:**  The Shengo could appoint the Chagdampa based on his own choice. He didn't need to appoint it from Phöbashung, right?   

**A:**  I heard that they had to ask permission from the Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  When did it become a rule that they had to ask permission from the Yigtsang?   

**A:**  In the first year of the Reting regency, the Shengo themselves had this authorization. From the second year, this authorization was taken up [by the Yigtsang].   

**Q:**  So since then they appointed the Chagdampa from above, right?   

**A:**  The Yigtsang would tell them internally that so and so will be the Chagdampa.   

**Q:**  How about during the 13th Dalai Lama's time?   

**A:**  At that time, he was appointed by the Shengo, but during the regency it was changed.   

**Q:**  Under the Chagdampa, there were Shingnyer, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was there under the Shingnyer?   

**A:**  There were 19 Geyog.   

**Q:**  From where did the Geyog come?   

**A:**  Ngagpa sent two and Deyang sent two. If the senior Shengo was from Loseling, they had 8 Geyog and the junior Shengo had 7 Geyog. And for Gomang it was the same. Deyang and Ngagpa always sent two Geyog.   

**Q:**  Did they calculate the seniority of the Shengo according to the monk's seniority?   

**A:**  No. They regarded the level or position they had as a monastic official [Tib. thön].   

**Q:**  If both were Chatsül, what would they do?   

**A:**  Then it went according to the monk's seniority. If both were ordinary monks, it went according to the who took the gelong vow first. If the one from Loseling was a Getsül and the one from Gomang was a Nyertsang, then Loseling one became the senior.   

**Q:**  Who was under the Geyog? Who appointed the Geyog?   

**A:**  The Geyog was appointed by the Shengo themselves.   

**Q:**  The two Shingnyer were appointed by the government, right?   

**A:**  The Shingnyer had to pay 29 dotse and 35 sang to the Chagdampa and 100 dotse to the Shengo as a "donation" for getting appointed. [Note: below this the recording was too bad to translate]   

