# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0004.14 : Tape 14  
##  : with Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and J.T. Surkhang  
**Name:** Alo Chöndze  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Alo Chöndze was a major leader of the People’s Association in Tibet and India in the 1950s. In this interview, he discusses submitting the report to the Kashag regarding Tibetan independence and the issues with how Shakabpa worded the report. He talks about attempting to respond to the lies said by Zhou Enlai and how eventually, a report was published in the London Times responding to the lies. Additionally, looking back, he discusses what went wrong and how they should have done things, as well as what Tibet needs to do today to gain independence.   

---  
### Tape 14  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0004_14/H_0004_14.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You already told me about that.   

**A:**  Let alone submitting a petition to the UN and the World Buddhist Association, we were also unable to submit a report to the Kashag. A report was written to the Kashag and they wrote a bad thing in the report which made me strongly oppose it. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Khenjung were in the inner room, and the monk officials and all of us were sitting in the outer room. The report was drafted by Shakabpa and it was copied by Thubden Nyinji, who later became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> [in exile]. They read the report and asked us what remarks we had. At that time, the Khambas and the Amdos didn't understand the meaning very well. All the people said that it was good because it was drafted by Shakabpa. Actually, the point of the report was to request the Dalai Lama to stay in India until we gained independence in Tibet and not to go back to Tibet. And there were many other wordings and it was said, "In the past, the 13th Dalai Lama strove for the independence of Tibet, and he kept doing this. So this time, the Dalai Lama has arrived here. Please go back only after actualizing [achieving] the independence." The other representatives didn't understand much and neither did I. But I could understand what was good and what was bad. Then I told them to show me the report and took it from Thubden Nyinji. The upper part of the report was just the old way of wording things. Under that, it was written, "In the past, at the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, he had been and he was continuously striving [Tib. འབད་བརྩོན] for the independence of Tibet." I asked them, "What do you mean striving?" They said, "It means to take measures. It means that he was taking measures to achieve independence." Then I said, "If so, this wording is not alright. At the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, we existed completely independent. This was the fact, so who could imagine that it [Tibet] was not independent. You have written that he was striving for independence and it implies that the present Dalai Lama should also do this. So this wording is written for saying that Tibet is not independent." This was my main principle for proving that Shakabpa and those people were liars. The monk officials like Wangdü were also shaking their heads. Thubden Nyinji, who wrote the report, also said, "I wonder how [this wording] could be [Tib. འདི་ག་འདྲ་ཡིན་ནམ]?" He went inside and later they deleted this wording. After that, we went to Mumbai, Calcutta, Bodhgaya and Sanjin. We were unable to submit the report for about twenty days. One day, when we submitted the report, Zhou Enlai had already arrived. Gyadotsang Uncle was with us. When we went to the Kashag, Surkhang and Ngabö were there. We submitted the report that requested them to support us. Gyadostang Uncle told the Kashag, "Are you going to do this? If you are going to do this, say that you are going to do it right now. If you are not going to do it, just say no. We have been hanging around for such a long time. You should make the decision right now whether the Dalai Lama can stay here or not." It was well done. And we, the other people, just said, "Don't say that." As I told you before, it was decided that the Dalai Lama would go back. When Zhou Enlai arrived, in the beginning he said, "There isn't any disturbance in Tibet. The [situation] is calm [Tib. བདེ་པོ]." Then I went to tell this to the Kashag and the Tibetan government, but they said, "Keep quiet and still! Let him say whatever he is saying. We should not say even a single word." Like this, they didn't make any response.   

**Q:**  Who told you that?   

**A:**  The Kashag, Drönyerchemmo and the Trunyichemmo. Altogether there were 16 officials. I told them, "If we don't respond to this, there was the Chinese plane that bombed Litang Monastery, wasn't that [an act of] war or what? He was lying that there weren't any disturbances. This time, the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan government, and the Panchen Lama are all here. If we imply that Zhou Enlai was right, in the future, we won't get any chance to talk in the UN. So we have to respond to that." But, they refused to do that. At that time, I was grateful to Phünkang Lhajam, because she said, "If we can't respond to this newspaper, then it is finished." Then I told her, "Please help us. I don't know the English language. I will tell you the history. Please respond to Zhou Enlai." There were some big Indian newspapers. There was an Indian in Kalimpong called Lakshmi Babu who spoke Tibetan very well, and he was a clerk of Panda. He, Phünkang Lhajam and I went to the Indian newspapers. At that time, the Indian government was also very suspicious of us. We drove a car and went there. The driver said, "Do you have any other partners?" I said no. Right at that time, the spies chased us. After that, we stopped at the cinema hall and we paid the driver an extra fee. Later, the Indian newspapers refused to publish the report. Then we connected with the London Times and we went to the press of the London Times. The spies chased us again. So we just went to a cinema and came back to the hotel. Then we called the press to the hotel and the press came to the hotel. At that time, I hid in the Almara. After that, we made the report to the London Times. This was the first time we responded to Zhou Enlai's lie in the newspaper in 1956.   

**Q:**  Would you now, having experienced the losing of Tibet's freedom, would you have done things differently in terms of your political activities in Tibet during that period? Have you looked back and said that we should have done this, we could have done better or this would have been a better strategy?   

**A:**  When I look back from 1947 until now and think what was done well and what was not, if someone had just said that I am doing this and that, it wouldn't have been alright if one didn't put it into action. It is impossible for all the actions to work out. At the beginning, when we were in Tibet, the people really had good solidarity. But in the middle, when there wasn't solidarity, there were fights between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and in the Tibetan government. Gyalo Thondup's family, or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a>, managed the government. During that period, they made discord among the people and they destroyed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and the People's Association.   

**Q:**  These are about the other people, the question was about what do you think you should have done at that time.   

**A:**  Until now, the Tibetan issue was not settled. At that time, I thought this and even now I think we should have solidarity and democracy according to the instructions of the 13th Dalai Lama. We should contact the UN. If this doesn't work out, we will have to talk with Communist China on the principle that Tibet is an independent country according to its history and tell them to grant [its] independence. The people in Tibet have solidarity. One of the Mongolias is independent and the other is not.   

**Q:**  How did Outer Mongolia become independent?   

**A:**  We heard that in the past, Outer Mongolia occupied mainland China during the Chinese emperors.   

**Q:**  What measures did they take for gaining independence?   

**A:**  In the past, Outer Mongolia and the Chinese emperor confronted each other on the Great Wall and things, and they granted independence to Outer Mongolia. I am not knowledgeable from reading the history. In the past, the people of Tibet couldn't see the history books of Tibet. Those were called Thempangma [Tib. ཐེམ་སྤང་མ] and [were] prohibited to be taken outside of the threshold. Even the scriptures of the 13th Dalai Lama were lost. We just heard those through [other] people.   

**Q:**  Outer Mongolia was communist, right?   

**A:**  Even if they were communist, they were independent. Now we are talking about independence. If we gain independence I don't care if the Tibetans become communist. It will be better. Maybe Alo Chöndze will become the Chairman [laughing]. Until now, the main reason was we didn't get along well. The 13th Dalai Lama told us to get along, but we didn't. Therefore, the Communists invaded. Even now we don't have solidarity. We should have solidarity under the leadership of the Dalai Lama and become a good democracy. There are many knowledgeable people, they should talk to the UN according to our history. If the UN says, "You are not independent, you are part of China," then it is finished and we should talk with the Chinese according to history. It is the same whether we gain independence from the UN or from China. Finally, if this is impossible, then we should have a genuine autonomy under the leadership of the Dalai Lama. Nowadays, the Khambas and the Amdos are disappointed and they are not putting their strength in independence because Dharamsala was only thinking about getting independence in areas above the Yangtze River [Tib. འབྲི་ཆུ] [in political Tibet]. They are not hoping to get independence below the Yangtse River. They are just verbally using them and left some deputies from Kham and Amdo. I was born in Lhasa, but I am originally from the area under the Chinese. In case they gained independence, the Khambas and Amdos would not be included in that. It would become an Inner Tibet and Outer Tibet like the Mongolians. Even if we got autonomy, we could only get a Tibet autonomy without the Khambas and the Amdos. And the Sichuan Autonomous Prefecture and Qinghai Autonomous Prefecture [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ཁུལ] would remain the same under the Chinese. If we try our best and work on it, we won't feel regret even if it doesn't work out. It is like working hard to plant a field and getting a hailstorm and not getting any yield. But we will not feel regret because we worked hard.   

