# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0004.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and J.T. Surkhang  
**Name:** Alo Chöndze  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Alo Chöndze was a major leader of the People’s Association in Tibet and India in the 1950s. In this interview, he discusses his attempt to publish his first book. He describes what he talked about in his book, as well as some of the difficulties he faced trying to get it published and trying to get it translated into English.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0004_04/H_0004_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  So we separated from Jenkhentsisum.   

**Q:**  The rest of the people were all from the People's Association?   

**A:**  Yes, they were all with us. With <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> were Gyetong and a few people standing on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> side, like Lotse and Athar, who were taken away from the Litang people. But most people were with the People's Association. The Kashag returned and didn't do anything. They told us to stay in India, but we in Kalimpong weren't able to do anything. In between that, I wrote my first book. I was the one who wrote the things, although I didn't know the spellings and my cursive handwriting was not good. I only wrote about the situation in Tibet, and I didn't write anything about how we didn't get along well internally [in India] and there were a lot of false things. I just wrote some implications on those matters. I had a good private relationship with Thubden Nyinji from Tibet, as well as with Champa Wangdü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུས]. There was another <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>. At this time, I lived in the upper part of Darjeeling and Gyalo Thondup lived in the lower part of Darjeeling. At that time, my son was not born. The tsidrung came to me and said to me, "Please do not act like that to Gyalo Thondup. You have children and you have some difficulties with your livelihood." One day, Thubden Nyinji and Champa Wangdü were insisting a lot on this matter. Champa Wangdü was an honest man who died this year. He used to be a bodyguard to the Dalai Lama and he was the one who didn't let Gyado Thöndrub have the audience with the Dalai Lama. He said to me, "From the book you are writing, Thubden Nyinji has stolen some pages." Shakabpa and those people gave me a bad name and they were probably saying that I was writing a book supporting the Communists. And I said, "Even if he took some pages, it doesn't matter. He can take as much as he wanted. My writing is nothing." Finally, when I wrote it, I didn't have any materials. I couldn't even get dictionaries like nowadays. So I took some examples from Gadrung Nornang's [Tib. བཀའ་དྲུང་ནོར་ནང] book and from Tharchin [Tib. མཐར་ཕྱིན] Babu's newspaper. Tharchin Babu had a Mongolian clerk and he prepared the clean copy in printing script. It was expensive to print in Kalimpong. There was Yaba Tobgye [Tib. ཡ་པ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས]. So I thought of translating it into English and I talked with him about this.   

**Q:**  Where is he now?   

**A:**  He is somewhere around here now. I heard that he is teaching dharma in America.   

**A:**  I think he has a Dharma Center.   

**A:**  I went to meet the Sikkim Political Officer [Tib. འབྲས་སྤྱི་བློན་ཆེན] Aba Pant. He was a very enthusiastic and nice person. I met with him several times on the Tibetan issue and he gave me good advice. Yaba Tobgye was the secretary in the office of the Political Officer. So once I went to see him and said, "I am writing my first book and in that, I have written that the Indian government didn't treat us well. I think because the Chinese are on top of the Himalayas the Indians are afraid. In the past, the (Indian) government was really good." So I showed him the book and he said it was very good. He said, "It would be good to translate it into English and other languages." When I told them that I had written about the Indian government, he said, "It doesn't matter." Yaba Tobgye said, "I would translate it, but I have work and I am busy. But I'll see if I can do it in my spare time." Then I went to Darjeeling. There were no Tibetans who knew English there. Then I asked Lama Nyima Norbu [Tib. བླ་མ་ཉི་མ་ནོར་བུ], who was a teacher at St. Joseph's College, to do it. There were two old Sikkimese teachers in Darjeeling and one of them lived in Ghum. When I contacted one of them, he came along with an old Tibetan dictionary and they did something for 8-9 days, but then he never came and when I sent a message, he said he was too busy. Then I asked a Tibetan college teacher living in Kurseong and he agreed, but then never came. Then I went to him and he explained and said, "There are Indian CID following you everywhere. If I do this, they will suspect me. So I wasn't able to translate this into English." So I couldn't make a book even in Tibetan, and until now I couldn't translate it into English. After the Dalai Lama came to India, I sent the Kashag a request to publish it and make it public, and said that I had written a Tibetan history about how the Chinese came and how they destroyed the religion. At that time, Surkhang was there and I sent them the first book. After that, I went to Calcutta with my children and I had difficulties with my livelihood. Gyalo Thondup was always telling me to come get a salary. The Sikkim Political Officer was also saying that he would help me with whatever I needed. Yaba Tobgye told me, "You should ask for help with getting the pass [permit] from the Sikkim Political Officer for sending things, like the round tea bricks to Tibet. Gyalo Thondup and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> did this a lot with trade with the help of the Sikkim Political Officer. So you should do the same." But I was only interested in publishing my book, so I didn't ask for the pass to trade. Later, I petitioned the Kashag for publishing my book and I received the answer by letter saying the book was very good, but they still didn't publish it. They just kept my first book there. So I started on the second book. At that time, the Kashag had the seal and they sealed my book and reported it to the Dalai Lama.   

