# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0004.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and J.T. Surkhang  
**Name:** Alo Chöndze  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Alo Chöndze was a major leader of the People’s Association in Tibet and India in the 1950s. In this interview, he discusses the banning of the People’s Association and how its members sought to create a new organization. He talks about how some people considered him to be bad, but also how he continued to receive letters from individuals enclosing money and khata scarves for the People’s Association. He discusses his views on the Chinese and what they did upon their arrival, and also his hope for a democratic government. Additionally, he speaks about a united, independent Tibet and what that would mean for the various parts of the country, such as Kham and Amdo, and also about taxes. Finally, he discusses the naming of Chushigandru and the Chinese sending people to the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0004_07/H_0004_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  The Dalai Lama issued the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> edict, so we were saying that we should disperse the Association. I have brought the bugdam edict with me here. I think the Dalai Lama had not issued the bugdam saying that the People's Association was not good, but because when we went to give the petition, the Chinese were unable to answer, so they didn't give an answer. Therefore, they incited the Tibetan government. In the past, we were not respecting and listening to the Kashag, even if they arrested us or expelled us. So the Chinese themselves incited the [words unclear] and told the Dalai Lama, "Unless you give an order, these people cannot be handled." When the Chinese told the Kashag, the Kashag could not handle us, but the Dalai Lama could handle us. So the Chinese told the Kashag and the Kashag incited and told the Dalai Lama to issue the bugdam. At the meeting, I said, "Our members who live in Lhasa should stay in Lhasa because we don't have any place to go. Our members who aren't from Lhasa, like from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, Phari, Tö, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, should return to their homes." We discussed ways for returning. We said that this time, we would disperse the Association. The Kashag told me that they had settled the matters when there was a disturbance between the countries and that now they would settle the matters [again internally]. Our absolute main goal was to prevent the establishment of the Tibet Autonomous Region. So I told the Kashag that if they did it, then we weren't needed, but if they couldn't, then we would do it. I told them, "If it is done by the [hero] Denma [Tib. ལྡན་མ], it is done by a person who belongs to Ling [Tib. གླིང]. If it is done by Gyatsha [Tib. རྒྱ་ཚ], it is also done by a person who belongs to Ling [Tib. ལྡན་མས་བཏང་ཡང་གླིང་པ་རེད། རྒྱ་ཚས་བཏང་ཡང་གླིང་པ་རེད]. [These are 2 heroes in Ling Gesar, so whoever does it, it is okay since they belong to Ling]. It is like three generals going to make war, and whoever wins the war, [it] is [all] the same. Likewise, after the People's Association is dispersed, if the Tibetan government would do as they have committed, it would be the same." At the meeting, I swore by the Three Jewels that if the government couldn't do this, our People's Association would persist and do it, and we would hold the Association even if they told us not to do it. At the members' meeting, I said, "For the time being, [for] about 2-3 months, we should watch and see what the Kashag does with respect to the Autonomous Region. If during these months the Kashag continues to have relations with the Chinese and is moving toward the Tibet Autonomous Region, then it is impossible to do it under the name of the Tibetan People's Association because it would violate the Dalai Lama's order." After holding the meeting for many days, it was decided that we should reformulate under a different name. Finally, we decided to restart under the name Dokham [Tib. མདོ་ཁམས] Chushigandru. It took many meetings for this to pick up. As for the word Dokham, Do means <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and kham means Khambas. Later, there was the name Volunteer Army to Defend the Religion [Tib. bstan srung dangs blang dmag]. This was used from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>'s side. What we did was eliminate the name People's Association and see how we should set up an association again, which would take several months. At first, we decided to hold a meeting of the groups, such as Markham, Litang, et cetera, and seek an audience with the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Why did you do that?   

**A:**  It was because it was not good to disperse it right away, and it was also not right to set up an organization with a big name like Chushigandru. So at that time, the Litang people were asking for an audience with the Dalai Lama and were burning incense, taking baths, drinking alcohol, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a>, and enjoying picnics. People of Chamdo and Ganzi also did the same. All of the 30 some groups did the same in their groups. Internally, the important people in the groups met together and discussed setting up the Chushigandru. If it were to be dispersed right away, it would have been hard to get together again.   

**Q:**  What was the effect of doing that? Each group could get together, how could the whole thing get together?   

**A:**  At this time, it [the People's Association] was finished, but in the future, there would be the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> including Dokham [Tib. མདོ་ཁམས]. And internally, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> would also be included and we would name it Dokham. This would be done after several months. Before that, we would hold the meeting of each group like Litang, Chamdo, et cetera. [And we said], "We should not disband the individual groups and you should also ask for an audience with the Dalai Lama and get together enjoying picnics."   

**Q:**  It seems to me that after the People's Association was disbanded, they thought of setting up the Eastern Tibet Association, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> edict, it was said that the Tibetan People's Association was not allowed to meet. So this name was not there [used] anymore. Internally, we set up an association of eastern Tibets-- Kham and Amdo-- as this wouldn't contravene the bugdam of the Dalai Lama because we gave it a separate name called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. It was mainly eastern Tibetans, but internally there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people in it. For example, Bisu was in the Chushigandru group and he went to Lhoka. At that time, we were to watch what the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were doing for those several months. If the Tibetan government did well, we wouldn't need the association. If they didn't do well, we would meet again and the name would be Chushigandru. The name Chushigandru was decided on during the meetings held after many days.   

**Q:**  In the meantime, you didn't have a name, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we didn't name it on the first day. The plan was that the people from Chamdo would return, but the Chamdo people who lived in Lhasa should stay in Lhasa and they had their leaders. They should have an audience with the Dalai Lama, have picnics and burn incense. Actually, burning incense means to do target shooting. The point we were making was that it was the leader's responsibility not to have their group disperse, and we were not responsible. "When we call you, you should call your people." Finally, on that day, we decided to set up the second association, which later was named <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, and all people agreed.   

**Q:**  Did you think the government would do something, or did you think you should start a new association?   

**A:**  We thought that most people in the government agreed with us because it was in the middle of politics [the middle of political debate] in 1955, after the Chinese arrival and people such as Surkhang and Phala were there. All people didn't like the Chinese and were thinking of doing something to the Chinese. The people in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu gyepa were holding the same viewpoint, although they didn't say it openly. But, we thought that Ngabö alone was a communist. So we thought that there may be some hope, and I had about 50 percent hope. All people agreed to set up the association, but there wasn't the name Chushigandru. We decided that the people who were to return to their homelands should leave soon. The next day, we convened the middle-level association. We discussed the issues on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a>. The meeting took all day long [with people] saying, "I have read the bugdam dzatsig but couldn't understand a lot of it because the wording style was like wrapping stone in felt [Tib. ཕྱིང་པའི་ནང་ལ་རྡོ་སྒྲིལ]." But nowadays I can understand it quite well. Although they have said that Alo Chöndze is an evil person, the instigator, internally, it was well written and it expressed the view that Tibet was independent. We said that the people living in Lhasa would do the work and we talked about the way to make connections and send the information. However, the bugdam was issued everywhere. So there may have been some people saying, "We have been meeting with a liar. Now I am not going to do it any more, so please advise them." We also calculated the money left from the donations and announced how much of it was left.   

**Q:**  How much was left over?   

**A:**  A lot. Maybe 1,000 dotse. At this meeting we discussed the goal of the second association and how to spend the expenditures, and how we would send messages if we were to start a new movement.   

**Q:**  Did you discuss openly at this middle meeting the idea of starting a new organization in the near future if the government didn't do the work?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. If we didn't tell them openly, we wouldn't know whether they would agree or not. The first group had decided on a new association so we told them. The meetings were held at my house and we served <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> and tea, so I had heavy expenses. So it is not good to hold meetings with many people.   

**Q:**  Didn't you use the common money?   

**A:**  No, I didn't spend even a half coin from the Association's money. It was all my own. We told the members not to worry. "The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> didn't have any choice but to say that the People's Association is bad and this and that. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> also says the majority of the people are good, but Alo Chöndze is bad. So you don't have to worry. When you return, you should explain things well in your lands. If you don't explain well, then some people will misunderstand because there would be many people who instigate saying that the Dalai Lama didn't like them." I told them, "As the Tibetan government has promised, it would be good, that's it. If not, as I have taken the oath, we will have to have a second association. Then I will send a message to you." From that day on, the Association dispersed. About a month after everyone left, the ones living in Lhasa didn't disperse and met at my house, and said we had to start the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and what should we call it.   

**Q:**  Did you have any talks with people like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsen la, saying it would be good to start a new association?   

**A:**  No. At that time, we didn't have any connections. After I was released from jail and when we were in a desperate situation, and we couldn't do anything in Tibet and were about to go to India, then I had a small discussion with them on setting up Chushigandru. At this time, we received many letters from the members who had returned home. [He said earlier Songra had been like the organization's secretariat, receiving money and khata, et cetera].   

**Q:**  What kind of letters?   

**A:**  The letters sent from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, Tö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> by the local people.   

**Q:**  How did they send the letters?   

**A:**  They sent them through people and I received them in Songra in our office. I didn't open all the letters because at that time, the Association was disbanded and the second association was unable to be set up. In the previous letters, they also had enclosed money and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves.   

**Q:**  When did you start receiving the letters and money? Was it before you went to Kham for the welcome reception, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a>?   

**A:**  This probably started in 1954. The latest letters were received before the second association was set up. I didn't open them. Later, when you go to inquire about the documents, please tell them that Alo Chöndze said that there were many unopened letters. Actually, I was the leader of the Association and the representative of many people. So please let me open them. If not, you can do the research together.   

**Q:**  Why didn't you open them?   

**A:**  I couldn't do that because we had the thought of starting the second association. After this association was set up, then we could see whether we needed to open them or not. It was good that we kept them among the documents. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Gyetong took all our documents to India. Maybe 35 kilos of things. I did a very clean job in sending the documents. Otherwise, if the documents were left in Tibet, the Communist Chinese would fix up even their descendants. But, the Chinese didn't get a single word of the documents. All the documents of the Tibetan government from ancient times were lost to the Communist Chinese, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> couldn't bring a single document and handed it over to the Chinese. So now the Communist are reading them in an imposing manner and making things of it. We, the Tibetan People's Association, didn't hand over a single document to the Chinese. But Gyalo Thondup and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> kept our petitions to the US and the World Buddhist Association and didn't send them. Ngawang Thöndrub and the lay official Rabgang [Tib. རབ་སྒང], who was the meeting secretary [Tib. ཚོགས་དྲུང], know 100 percent about how I took the documents away from them and how I confronted Shakabpa. Since I was in the jail, we couldn't make a catalog of the documents.   

**Q:**  You received the letters and you left them unopened, right? And then what happened?   

**A:**  Then after 2-3 months, when we looked at the situation, the Chinese talks about starting the Tibet Autonomous Region increased. The preparatory meeting for the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was held in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s new house. So the government was unable to do anything to block the Tibet Autonomous Region. The Chinese were becoming stronger and more powerful and they violated the 17-Point Agreement, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> became weaker and powerless. In the past, the kudrak actually supported us and we were saying the things that the kudrak didn't dare to say.   

**Q:**  Did the leaders of the People's Association oppose all of the things or did you think the Chinese did some good things after their arrival?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't a single person in our group saying that what the Chinese did was good. I have to tell you the reason for that. Later, in the 1960s and in the 1970s, and when I went to Tibet last year, the situation was different. When the Chinese Communists first came, let alone doing the construction, they didn't even have food to eat, so they used the grain of the Tibetan people and caused very serious inflation. I wrote about all of this in detail in my first book. In Yuthok, they had dances and parties for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and played <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒྲ་སྙན] The traditional Tibetan lute.">dramnyen</a> (lute). They also made the Youth League and the Women's Association. These were like imposing taxes, e.g. Surkhang Lhajam was in Woman's Association, and they told her to find 15 more people to join it. She had to agree to it and say, "Yes, I will do what you say." It was like this. At first, they caught the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> and told them to lead the masses in the Youth League. They were not volunteers but were imposed like taxes.   

**Q:**  What about the schools, hospitals and roads? These are for Chinese ends [gains]. What did you think about this in the Association, on reforms?   

**A:**  The association started in 1950 and the Chinese came in 1949. After 1951, they started setting up small schools. In 1954-1955, they started building roads and bridges, setting [up] banks. At that time, the Tibetan children were sent to the Chinese built schools where they taught Tibetan. In the old society, there were no government schools, but [there were] some private schools where the children of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and traders would go. It was very difficult to send the masses of children to school. I am not saying everything of ours was good. Because there was no school for the masses, they sent their kids to the monastery to study religion. Most people in our group didn't like these changes and they were saying that this was nothing. People in our group didn't approve the land reforms, although there were a lot of talks saying that the rich peoples' wealth would be given to the poor. They thought the rich would remain rich and the poor would remain poor. There may have been some people [who liked the Chinese]. I can't say that all people didn't like the Chinese because each person had different experiences of suffering. The principle is that 90 percent of the representatives, let alone liking the Chinese, they were warning the Chinese saying, "You better watch out [Tib. ལྟད་མོ་ལྟོས]."   

**Q:**  If the Chinese left, did you have any thoughts of not wanting the previous government and doing some reform and starting a new government?   

**A:**  Yes. In the future, after the Communists left, we wanted to install a correct democratic government. On this, we talked a lot and also [felt] very strongly. After the Chinese were destroyed and when it would become an independent Tibet with a government where religion and politics [were] combined together, the present government would not exist at all. It would be a democratic government. The reason is that, again, in the 13th Dalai Lama's testament, he had this thought, but he wasn't able to achieve it. Those who opposed this in the government were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, mainly the highest strata of kudrak, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> midra. It was you [referring to J.T. Surkhang], the lay officials. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> weren't opposed to this.   

**Q:**  The three great monasteries didn't like it at all, right?   

**A:**  It was not the three great monasteries. It was mainly the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> with estates. The kudrak who didn't have estates and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, didn't do much. It was all of the kudrak who had estates. Quite a number of kudrak were thinking in a good way. Since the Chinese Emperor was destroyed and China became a republic, they thought that Tibet would not remain as before. It is possible that five percent of the kudrak were in favor of a democratic government and the 95 percent didn't want democracy. In the monasteries, it was the few monastery kudrak who opposed it, e.g. the Labrangs, the big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་བསོ] The head managers/stewards of monasteries as a whole, especially the large Gelugpa monasteries like Sera and Drepung.">jiso</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་ཚང] 1. Storehouse. 2. Steward, person in charge of a storehouse. 3. A monastic official in charge of storerooms.">nyertsang</a> and the Ling [Tib. གླིང] [like Tsecholing etc.] who opposed the democratic government. Among the monks, five percent were stubborn who were saying they didn't want democracy. 95 percent of the monks liked democracy. The abbots of the three great monasteries were common monks after becoming the abbot for three years, and they were not rich. But they were bribed by the kudrak and they told them to say that in the meeting. The kudrak would remain inside and the abbots would wear the mask and come outside [and speak]. When the Full Assembly <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> was held, only the abbots of the three great monasteries would come. The people, the Labrang, the Ling and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> would never come. The abbots just had the desire to have democracy, but when they left the monastery, the Labrang and the jiso would break their ribs [Tib. རྩིབ་མ་བཅག],[which means to bribe them]. And on the other side, the kudrak would also bribe them. Then when they got there, they would become sick people and they didn't have any choice but to say what they were taught and say, "We don't want a democracy." Yesterday, I told you that I want democracy because this was the idea of the 13th Dalai Lama. Finally, since the monastery kudrak didn't let it work out, he created the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a>, but he wasn't able to do the [switch to a] democracy. So he was agitated. There were a few words in the beginning of the testament, "According to the prophecy given by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> on the exorcism after the Mönlam, it was said, 'You should perform the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> rite for the long life of the Dalai Lama and so his deeds will flourish. You should do the internal rituals well." So in that Water Monkey Year, an extra Mönlam was held for the ritual meant for the Dalai Lama, and they also turned the cauldron upside down. I was also there as a monk. Then the Kashag and the Jigyab Khembo reported to the Dalai Lama, "We have performed the rituals according to the prophecy of Nechung. May we please perform a tenshug for you, and please live long and have your deeds flourish. We will also keep your order in our mind and serve the government. Please subside your anger." I should put forward proof why the Dalai Lama was angry. The reason for [him] being angry was because a democracy was not implemented. So we should keep this in our minds all of the time. At that time, we didn't know much about Tibetan independence and we were sure that Tibet was 100 percent independent. So the People's Association was mainly working on democracy and to expel the Chinese from Tibet. The main responsibility of democracy fell on the farmers and the nomads.   

**Q:**  What kind of work would they have to do?   

**A:**  When democracy got the power [If democracy was implemented], the farmers' and nomads' [livelihood] should improve. [It should] not [do] much for the traders.   

**Q:**  What kind of new government were you planning to set up?   

**A:**  The 13th Dalai Lama said that Tibet needed a modern government [Tib. དེང་དུས་དང་འཚམས་པ]. He saw this from the broader perspective in foreign countries. Especially, when the Chinese Emperor was put down, and Sun Yat-sen set up a democracy and wanted to get rid of the taxes and those things. At that time, it was really like [what] the Chinese said, there was exploitation and oppression.   

**Q:**  Did you have any thoughts of the democratic election at that time?   

**A:**  No, we did not know about elections at that time. Anyway, it was to make the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> not have power.   

**Q:**  If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> would not have power, would the three great monasteries remain as before?   

**A:**  The three great monasteries didn't have any [power] and there would be change in the monasteries also.   

**Q:**  What kind of changes?   

**A:**  Just before I came to India, the Dalai Lama made some changes. For example, in the past, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་བསོ] The head managers/stewards of monasteries as a whole, especially the large Gelugpa monasteries like Sera and Drepung.">jiso</a> position was taken by two people and they collected money from all directions in [all over] Tibet. And they ate [embezzeled] all the things and they gave the monks only some brown sugar at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལྔ་མཆོད] The holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ganden Ngamjö</a> holiday, a little bit of butter-like this amount-and about one bo of the mixed grain-like barley and beans. They ate [embezzled] all of the other things. So the 14th Dalai Lama got rid of the jiso among the monks and changed it to be managed in common, and he also changed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> to be managed by the government. So it would be very good if there would be democracy. This was done with both religion and politics. Before we left, one point was to set up the second association, and the other was democracy after expelling the Chinese. We were saying that democracy was very important. Among our members, most of them were traders from Kham and Amdo. At that time, they were in the situation talking about people living in the area located upwards [Tib. ཡན་འདབས] of the Yangtse River and downwards [Tib. ཡན་འདབས] of the Yangtse. So there was no question of would we do the democracy, and they would serve for the democracy. To tell you the truth, the people [Kham] were not that concerned about that [democracy]. And they didn't care whether there would be democracy or not. There had been the Guomindang and [they] knew about democracy.   

**Q:**  Did the people think that there should be one country including Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  All people had the thought of having a united, independent Tibet because they had been suppressed under the Guomindang. Before that, it was divided by the Yangtse River. So a united independence was our main thought. Regarding democracy, we talked at the second meeting saying that we needed democracy after the Chinese left. Actually, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s and the Amdos had a democracy under the Guomindang. The Khambas who were under the jurisdiction of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Eastern Tibet who was based in Chamdo. It is an abbreviation of dome jigyab [tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].">doji</a> of the Tibetan government, like the areas of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a> (Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ], Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར], Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང]) and Dagkong Posum [Tib. དྭགས་ཀོང་སྤོ་གསུམ] (Dakpo, Kongpo, and Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ]), and the areas below the north (Chang) were under Chamdo. So if we got the democracy, the Khambas living upwards along the Yangtse River who were under the Chamdo and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> areas, mainly needed the democracy. At the meeting, the representatives from the areas under Chamdo and Ütsang were putting a great effort in for a democracy because those Khamba had been very seriously tortured in the past. But the people from Tö Ngarigar [Tib. མངའ་རིས་སྒར], the north [Tib. བྱང], and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> hadn't experienced great suffering because the area was not located on the route where the soldiers and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> would travel. The route from Lhasa to Chamdo became the main route where they would send soldiers, though they couldn't make war, and also the kudrak would travel. So people had to suffer very seriously so that we would feel shame if we told this to the Chinese. But, I didn't use the corvée taxes. I went for trading through southern Tibet to Sadam with my own horses and mules through middle Tibet to Chamdo and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>, and through northern Tibet also. I experienced how the people in those areas suffered. It was terrible. Once we were going with the horses and mules happily and I saw on a mountain pass a person lying down. My muleteers went ahead. When I dismounted and walked, I found that person. Do not record this because it is a different matter. So I thought a democracy was greatly needed in those areas. The others didn't say that they didn't want democracy, but they were not that enthusiastic. Actually, I didn't need democracy because I was totally independent and being a trader, I didn't need to worry about livelihood and I didn't need to work for corvée taxes. I was grateful to the Tibetan government. If I brought tea from India, there was a small tax, but not much. And whatever else I brought, there was no tax. And when I got to Lhasa, the kudraks, especially Surkhang, would invite me for mahjong, and sometimes Yuthok and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> lama, Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས], also invited me and we played mahjong. As for me, even though there was no democracy, I could get into the homes of the kudrak. When we played [rolled] the dice to decide the direction of the seats, we would also come on the top or main seat where usually lamas would be seated. I also had a lot of money since I was a trader. The kudrak had less money. We had more cash and the people who had more money would win in mahjong. So I would brag a little bit. But, my job was to implement the idea of the 13th Dalai Lama, and I had promised to do that. So I really put my efforts into democracy. After arriving in India, I also put my efforts into democracy. After we dissolved the old association, about a month and a half later, we called a new meeting because the Chinese were actively pushing the Tibet Autonomous Region. And the Kashag seemed ineffective, and the members of the Kashag also didn't get along well and they didn't discuss. The government seemed to be collapsed [Tib. སྦོ་ལུག]. Then we discussed the way to hold the association again and many names were prepared. Finally, we had three names. One was Dokham [tib mdo khams] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, one was Dokham Tshogpa, and I can't recall the other one.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have the name, the three provinces, Chökasum?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. This was talked about later on. We were saying that it would not be okay if we didn't have a good name, which would be agreed on by all. We were just discussing and we couldn't ask the oracle to go into a trance for this. We weren't able to decide on which name to use, so we asked Trijang Rimpoche [this was in 1957]. We had some contact with him in the past, asking him to help us and pray for us to be have good luck. These were secret issues, but it is the time to reveal the secrets. And I am going to die soon so I'll say all. There was a Chantrengpa called Sing Gelong who was a real <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སློང] A monk who has taken the full set of vows.">gelong</a> and spoke with a hard Chantreng accent so that even we needed interpreters. He suggested, "Let's consult Trijang Rimpoche about this and follow what he says." Then all of us agreed. Gombo Tashi was at this meeting. This was after the members left to their homelands. Atru Lama was also there.   

**Q:**  Was Atru Lama a real lama?   

**Q:**  No, he was just called Atru Lama and he was from Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ]. Uncle Gyadotsang was also there but his sons were not there. Later, their small sons grew up and took over the main responsibility of making relations with the US.   

**Q:**  One of the sons died in Nepal.   

**Q:**  That was Gyado Wangdü who was with Gen Yeshe [Tib. རྒན་ཡེ་ཤེས]. The younger son was called Gyado Thöndrub. The one in the US used to be called Gyado Buga. Now he is called Kelsang. Two of their sons really worked for religion and politics. The uncle died after he came up. I also have three sons. This is the youngest and I am telling them to work hard. Maybe in the future, they might become like the Tibetan saying, "The son will not grow up until the father has died [Tib. ཕ་མ་ཤི་ན་བུ་མི་འཚར]." Likewise, Surkhang's son does not know anything [about] when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Chemmo was there. But, you [JT] could work in the Tibet Research Center and you can succeed [surpass] your father's work. The next day we went to Trijang Rimpoche. There was Andru Gombo Tashi, Atru Lama, Sing Gelong and Wangchen Lhangön [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་ལྷ་མགོན], who was from Ga Jyekundo [Tib. སྒ་སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ] in the Qinghai area. Trijang Rimpoche was knowledgeable in both politics and religion, and Tibet is grateful to him. We had also asked him to do the divination and he knows [about] those things. We showed him the names we had come up with and we told him, "If the Tibetan government is able to do something, it is good, but if they cannot do that, we, the People's Association have promised that we will not stay idle. We are going to change the name of the People's Association. But, in reality, Kham, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> are all together. So look at these three names and pick one, or make another one if there would be a better one. We will do what you say." Trijang Rimpoche said, "You have been doing your work very well. I appreciate it and we will pray for your success." He looked at the names and said, "The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> is a good name. It has a little significance."   

**Q:**  Was there the name <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> in the names you showed him?   

**A:**  Yes, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, Dokham and also the name of Kham only. These names were consulted in my house. The reason why we didn't ask the oracle and roll the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> in front of the Avalokitesvara was because, if we did that, only one of the options would come out. Actually, there might be some other different names. Usually, the lamas would give the names. So we went to Trijang Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  Did you go with them?   

**A:**  Yes. In the beginning, I didn't understand the meaning of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, and it was not easy to name it Chushigandru because there was a story for the "Four rivers," Chushi [Tib. ཆུ་བཞི], and the "Six ranges," <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་འབྲུ] Grain paid to commune members by a production team/brigade in accordance with the number of work points they earned through their work.">gandru</a> [Tib. སྒང་དྲུག]. So if you don't know that, and when people asked us, we would have to say, "Who knows?" When we went to see Trijang Rimpoche we also told him, "Recently, the Dalai Lama issued the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> and the People's Association had to disperse. The Tibetan government's Kashag told us, 'We will do it and you mind your own business. There is no need for the People's Association.' Since the Kashag committed to doing that, it would be good if the government would do that. Mainly, we should not accept the Tibet Autonomous Region and the movement to expel the Communist Chinese is important. This is the goal of the People's Association. We are going to wait several months, then we are going to set up an association. Internally, it would be the Tibetan People's Association, but the name should be one which would not violate the order of the Dalai Lama. So we are going to give it a small name and these are the three names; Dokham Chushigandru, Dokham and so on. Please pick one of them." And we didn't tell him to give a new name. Then he said, "Chushigandru is good." Then we thanked him. About 2-3 months later, the name of the organization was decided while we were watching what the government was doing. If the government was not doing well, we would decide to start the Chushigandru. At this time, each of the area groups were gathering together in their names enjoying picnics and burning incense, and among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people, there was the Jamphün la [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་ཕུན་ཚོགས], the father of Phündön [Tib. ཕུན་དོན]. Those members of the People's Association are living everywhere and one of the main ones was Kyabying Chöndze. At that time, we made a discipline [rule] saying that the Ütsang people didn't need to ask for an audience [with the Dalai Lama] and burn incense. The Dokham people could do that because it had become kind of familiar in the people's eyes. Even when the Chushigandru would formally meet, many Ütsang people didn't need to attend and we would inform the important people about the meeting. We were thinking that if we didn't do that, it would violate the bugdam. Later, after 2-3 months, the Chinese became stronger whereas the government became weak, and everybody was talking about the establishment of the Tibet Autonomous Region. The Panchen Lama also came up. There were some Chamdo people who were chosen by the Chinese to attend the Tibet Autonomous Region inauguration [which occurred in April 1956]. Some of the main people among them were the same as us.   

**Q:**  Who were those people?   

**A:**  There were two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར] Labrang in Tshakhalho [Tib. ཚྭ་ཁ་ལྷོ]. One of the chandzö was among the ten people from Chamdo attending the Tibet Autonomous Region. This chandzö was great in the People's Association.   

**Q:**  In 1955, the delegates came to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Gongkar Labrang Chandzö said, "The Chinese sent us among the delegates, so we couldn't refuse. But I will do the principle work of the Tibetan People's Association, though it is not right to come out openly." There were also people from the areas downwards of the Yangtse River, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye, which I don't need to talk about.   

**Q:**  This was before New Years, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after 2-3 months, the Dokham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was formally set up [in 1957]. Before, the office of the Tibetan People's Association was in my house. Since the Association was dispersed, if we met in this house many times, it would violate the order of the Dalai Lama. It was written in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a>, "In the future, whoever would meet for the People's Association, the neighbors should inform the government." Therefore, it was not convenient to hold the office [the meeting] in my house. So we met on the top floor of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Nyingma [Tib. རྙིང་མ] in the house of the oracle <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> Ta Lama. Muru Nyingma was the branch of Nechung Monastery in Lhasa. Atru Lama rented this house and moved in there from a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>'s house. There we burned incense and had the audience with the Nechung statue in the assembly hall. There we could talk about whatever we wanted to. And there were Khambas and also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people, and the people also came to burn incense. This was the starting day.   

