# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0004.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and J.T. Surkhang  
**Name:** Alo Chöndze  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Alo Chöndze was a major leader of the People’s Association in Tibet and India in the 1950s. In this interview, he discusses the role of the People's Association and the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. He talks about their petition written against the Chinese and for Tibetan independence, and also about the 13th Dalai Lama’s Last Testament. Additionally, he talks about the start of the People’s Association and their main views, as well as how they opposed the Tibet Autonomous Region. He discusses the danger of this opposition and how he would consult Tshatru Rimpoche on certain matters, but how he would not make this publicly known. Finally, he describes, in detail, the meeting with the Sera representatives and how members of the People’s Association did a senriy lottery to determine when the petition should be given to the Chinese.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0004_05/H_0004_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You were talking yesterday about how the People's Association didn't have a plan for independence, right?   

**A:**  It [Tibet] was indeed 100 percent independent and we were saying that the Chinese occupied it by force. We don't need to mention it. It was said that the Chinese had no religion. So the religion would be eliminated.   

**Q:**  You were saying that, but since the Chinese were there in Tibet, there wasn't independence and you were talking about Inner and Outer Mongolia, and you had a goal that you might also get the same, right?   

**A:**  We were saying that Tibet was 100 percent independent in the past and that the Chinese invaded us by force. So we told the Chinese to leave Tibet. This was how we first opposed the Chinese. Later, we gave the important petition to the Chinese which said we did not need to start the Tibet Autonomous Region as we already had the offices of religion and politics in the Tibetan government. We did not write clearly in our petition that Tibet was completely independent and for the Chinese to go back. If we had written this, we thought the Chinese would immediately eliminate us because they had the power and we didn't have anything. But by saying that we had offices of religion and politics, we were implying [for them] to leave us as independent, like before. In our document, we also included some things on how the Chinese had done many things that violated the 17-Point Agreement. As for Mongolia, we just had that thought, but we didn't write it in the document. At first, there were many people saying that we should go abroad, and we talked about this with Karkhang Chöndze [Tib. དཀར་ཁང་ཆོས་མཛད].   

**Q:**  Was Karkhang Chöndze the same as Kamekhang [Tib. དཀར་མེ་ཁང] Chöndze?   

**A:**  Yes, he was one of the representatives. At that time, some said that we should go outside and have a look [at other countries], and some said that it would be better if we could show our strength within the country. We just thought that Mongolia was under China during the emperors and that there was no inner and outer, but it was said that the Chinese Emperor granted independence, although we didn't know the history in detail. So we thought that we should do something to the 17-Point Agreement and we wrote about this in the petition. But there were some terms we didn't know, like the Common Program [Ch. gong thong gang ling; Tib. ཐུན་མོང་རྩ་འཛིན], and they [the Chinese] were going to do great things using this term. "First, we will do this and then we shall move our steps forward, and we shall use all the methods, like what the 13th Dalai Lama's last testament said. "You should take all the methods and put them into action so that you don't feel regret about everything. This depends on the service of the government lay officials and the tsidrung. As for the common welfare of Tibet as a whole, regardless of the monks and the lay people, rich and poor, all of the citizens should have the right to consider and discuss, and unite and make a cooperative effort. This is your responsibility. If you discard what is wrong and keep what is right in serving the government, according to the Dalai Lama's wish, the chief of the government, the protective deities will help you and you don't need to be afraid of anything. Keep on doing the positive things. I will grant you favor with blessings and accept you as my followers who have been thinking about the common cause of religion and politics, and serve the government honestly. As for the immoral people, if they seek their own temporary gain and are biased, they will not have a good fortune. It is clear that they won't accomplish their goal and that they will definitely be punished, and it will be useless even if they feel regret in the future [Tib. ཐབས་ཤེས་ཡོད་རྒུ་རྩལ་སྤྲུགས་ཀྱིས་གང་ལ་ཡང་མ་ལན་མ་འགྱོད་པ་ལག་ཏུ་བསྟར་ཐུབ་པ་ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་ཞབས་འབྲིང་སེར་སྐྱ་རྣམ་ཀྱི་སྲི་ཞུར་རག་ལས་ཤིང། བོད་ལྗོངས་སྤྱིའི་བདེ་ཐབས་སེར་སྐྱ་མཆོག་དམན་ཆབ་འབངས་བསམ་ཤེས་མ་འཛོལ་བ་གཅིག་གྲོས་ཕྱར་བ་གྲུ་འདེགས་ཀྱིས་ངེས་པར་ཁུར་དུ་བབ་པ་ཡིན། སྤང་བླངས་འཛོལ་མེད་བྱུང་ན། གཞུང་བསྟེན་དགྲ་ལྷའི་གཙོ་བོ་ནས་སློབ་དཔོན་མཐོང་བ་དོན་ལྡན་གྱི་ཐུགས་ཞེད་མཐུན་པའི་སྲི་ཞུ་སྒྲུབ་སོང་ན་གང་ལ་ཡང་ཡ་ང་བག་ཚ་མི་བྱེད་པར་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཐོག་ལ་སོར་གནས་སུ་ཡོད་པས། ངོས་ནས་བསྟན་སྲིད་སྤྱི་དོན་ཡིད་བསམ་གྱིས་མཐུན་པྱོགས་བྱས་པ་ངོ་ལྐོག་མེད་པར་སྲི་ཞུ་སྒྲུབ་མཁན་རྣམས་ལ་སྐྱབས་འཇུག་རྗེས་འཛིན་དང་ལམ་འགྲོ་འཕྲིན་ལས་དངོས་སུ་སྟན་ཅིང། ཚུལ་མིན་རྣམས་ལ་བྱ་བ་ལམ་འགྲོ་ཞན་པས་བཀའ་ཆད་ཕོག་ངེས་པ་མ་ཟད་གནས་སྐབས་རང་དོན་སྒྲུབ་ཕྱོགས་ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང་ངོ་སྲུང་བྱས་ན་ཕུགས་དོན་མི་འགྲུབ་པ་མཐོང་གསལ་ཐོག། སླར་ཅི་དྲག་གིས་འགྱོད་ཀྱང་ཕན་ཆ་མི་སྲིད]." Usually, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> deity was inseparable with my body and it did [protect me all the time]. At the meeting of the People's Association, I said, "The Dalai Lama has said that we should [not] be afraid of anyone. We should talk directly and fight against whoever it is; the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, the Dalai Lama, the Communist Chinese or Mao Zedong, if they are harming religion and politics." This was how we encouraged the people using the Last Testament. I also fought with the Nechung saying, "Last [time] you told us to do that. But, it didn't work out. So what happened? The members of the People Association were imprisoned." The Nechung gave some other prophecies. I have the documents. The 13th Dalai Lama, in his Last Testament, did not mention the name, the People's Association, but he talked about the people assembling. In his testament, he said that the kudrak should do that, but he also implied that the kudrak couldn't do that in the past and also later on. He just said that in prose, not in verse, so we should have had a mental understanding of that. I would say that all the kudrak were not like this. There were some kudrak being biased toward the Chinese. In the beginning, the Chinese treated some kudrak and poor people who were biased towards them greatly, and appointed them as leaders, and they did a lot during the Cultural Revolution. Later, all the people who stuck with the Chinese fell down. And the Communists made the people who didn't stick with the Chinese rise up. Nowadays, everything has changed [regarding] their places. It was really like what was said in the Last Testament, "It will be useless even if they were to severely regret everything." At that time, they were regretful and thinking, "I shouldn't have stuck with the Chinese at that time. We flattered the Chinese and now we got this result. This was because the people were scolding them saying, "You stuck with the Chinese in the past. Now what do you do? Nowadays, all the kudrak were liberated at the same time."   

**Q:**  This is your way of thinking, but were the other leaders of the People's Association also regarding the Last Testament in that way?   

**A:**  Yes, we have been doing this from the beginning to the end. Even in 1983, the People's Association was revived again. And the main implement [Tib. ལག་ཆ] of the People's Association was this [ the Dalai lama's Last Testament]. We were talking about what the government did before the death of the 13th Dalai Lama, and after the 13th Dalai Lama died on the 30th of the 10th month. Just a few weeks after, Kujar Thubden Kumphel [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཀུན་འཕེལ] was arrested and there was an internal fight, and they didn't do anything outside. He [Dalai Lama] had set up the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Magar and that was great, but right after he died it was disbanded. At that time, Yuthok was the rupön. It was extremely necessary to set up the regiment and the Dalai Lama had said in his Testament, "We should set up a strong army who can definitely suppress the enemy [Tib. དམག་རྩེད་གོ་ཧྲག་གཞན་སྡེ་གནོན་ངེས]. And our borders in Kham are very safe and people can't get in easily," and he had said that we should set [place] the border troops well. After the Dalai Lama died, let alone safeguarding the borders, they did all of the unnecessary things, like the Reting case. Finally, when the Communists came, people said that it was exactly like what the Dalai Lama had said. The reason why the People's Association became powerful was not because Alo Chöndze is a knowledgeable person-I don't know how to write well and I don't know any foreign languages. I am good at trading. But when the Chinese communists came, I launched the movement for religion and the politics of Tibet. I was the one who first published and distributed the 13th Dalai Lama's prophecy everywhere in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, Kham and Amdo. The original testament printing block was burnt by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> and those people.   

**Q:**  Did you print the testament?   

**A:**  This was in 1949. In the past, there used to be a small scripture which we would recite by heart. Later, a printing block was made. I based it this on and explained what the Dalai Lama said, so this was the time to do that. And many knowledgeable people in the local area read it. This was the source of our strength. Otherwise, I had neither power nor wealth. If I was wealthy like the Americans, I could have done it with money. Even now, I am not afraid of anybody. If someone had to fight with the Chinese Communists, one would have to sacrifice one's life. In 1983, I went back in and launched a serious movement, and went to Australia in an imposing manner. When I left, I put my life at risk and came with my wife on a plane. When we reached Guangzhou where the plane landed and after the plane flew again, I thought that I would get arrested right then. My wife doesn't know the secrets. It is useless for her to know. After the plane took off from Guangzhou, then I came to know we had reached the foreign country. Then I said, "Fortunately, we made it." My wife said, "Now we have reached Australia."   

**Q:**  When the People's Association held the first meeting in Jarag [Tib. སྦྱར་རག], did you talk about the Dalai Lama's Testament? Or was it after that?   

**A:**  The first meeting was held in the place near the Potala where the Lhasa hospital is now built. The second one was in Tsidrung Linga.   

**Q:**  What was the inner view of the People's Association when you started?   

**A:**  Our main point was to revolt against the Chinese. If we couldn't have solidarity and put our strength together, just a few people opposing the Chinese wouldn't be effective. The Dalai Lama said in his Testament that the Tibetans must be unified. In 1955, our People's Association was on the verge of being scattered, and Gyetong was there. When the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama returned from China and it was decided to set up the Tibet Autonomous Region, we started the middle sized People's Association.   

**Q:**  How many were in there? Were there about 20-50?   

**A:**  There were about 40. Then after that the Dalai Lama returned from China. We were saying that from 1949 until then, the People's Association had done quite well. We went to receive the Dalai Lama and then we planned to perform a ritual for the Dalai Lama's long life, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a>, in Norbulinga. We said that we couldn't tolerate that the Dalai Lama accepted to set the Tibet Autonomous Region. At that time, the Panchen Lama and the people from Chamdo were also coming. We felt that if this was set up, then Tibet would be finished no matter whether the Dalai Lama would be the leader or not. So we should oppose it. I said this to the permanent leaders of the Association. This was the internal talk. We had three levels and this was the first level, like the Standing Committee, and there was a second and the big one. All agreed that this was a critical issue. There were about 20-25 in the smaller group, like the leaders of the groups.   

**Q:**  This was the smaller group, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were Gombo Tashi and Atru Lama there?   

**A:**  Yes. Gombo Tashi was from the Litang group and Atru Lama was from the Traya group, and there was Ngawang Jigme [Tib. ངག་དབང་འཇིགས་མེད]. There were representatives from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> and from all over the place. All the people agreed and said that this would be really good. Our plan was to first organize the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> [welcoming committee] and then to present a petition opposing the start of the Tibet Autonomous Region. Then we had a middle meeting in my Songra House. At this time, we explained the tenshug. I swear by the Three Jewels that there wasn't a single person who liked the Chinese, although there were difference with people who would sacrifice their lives and those who would not, and whether they would dare to do the work or not was due to different conditions such as some having children.   

**Q:**  Weren't there some people saying that there would be a loss doing this?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. They were honest and nice people, like Pegong Chandzö, [who] was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Phala, and Tshatru [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ] Chandzö was there. Tshatru Labrang was my wife's family. Then there was the trader Targye [Tib. དར་རྒྱས] who was from Kham. They were the major supporters and there were also a few people supporting us. We talked about how we should perform the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> very well, and there was also the late person from Reting Labrang. "Then let us yell, 'May the god be victorious!' after burning incense, which indicates that the work is finished, and we should stay still and let us make the People's Association scatter. We don't need to submit a petition to the Tibet Autonomous Region." When we put forward the suggestion, some people supported it. Then I said, "We have been working since 1949 and this was the preliminary [work], and we still have to do the formal work on the common affairs of religion and politics. After performing the tenshug, we must continue our work. This is the most important thing." I quoted again the Testament of the Dalai Lama that we shouldn't feel afraid, that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> deity would help us.   

**Q:**  These five men wanted to end the Association? What was the argument on this? Didn't they say that the Chinese would not listen?   

**A:**  They were saying that the Chinese were powerful, so we couldn't do anything, and they would arrest us and kill us, and we couldn't handle the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did they say it was because the Dalai Lama accepted it, so we should adhere to it?   

**A:**  No, they didn't say this. They were saying that from 1949, it was okay. Now, if we did that, we would be arrested, killed, and cut into pieces. Some of them had wealth and some had many children. That's why they were afraid. It was not the matter that they liked the Chinese. I told them again that the 13th Dalai Lama told us not to be afraid and that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> would help us. When the meeting was held, we had made a petition for revolting against the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Tell us in detail how this all came to be. This is important.   

**A:**  There wasn't anyone who could make the petition. There were some better ones, but they were not experts on the Chinese and Tibetan laws. In the original meeting, there were 20 or so, but most of them were Khambas and from Ütsang. At this time, my wife Yangzomla's father was Tshatru Rimpoche. He was a very good scholar, very good with poems and grammar. Not only that, but he was also working in the Chinese Newspaper Office [Ch. bian hri]. When Phüntso Wangye and the Chinese first came, they invited him to the office where Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] was also there. So he knew a little about the Chinese situation and the Chinese laws. At that time, we had to do that work fast. So in the fifth month, the preparatory meeting was held for the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. Tshatru Rimpoche made the draft of the [our] petition.   

**Q:**  Didn't Tshatru Rimpoche say that if he did that, something would happen?   

**A:**  I regarded him to be like my father. This was secret business, so it couldn't be done by one person. Since we didn't know how to write and about the laws, I asked him to be our advisor and he accepted. He wrote the petition and I copied it in my own handwriting.   

**Q:**  How many pages were there?   

**A:**  Regarding this, please tell the Dalai Lama directly since you are a foreigner, you don't need to be afraid. The first draft of the petition, which was in Tshatru Rimpoche's handwriting, is in the Dalai Lama's private office. Tara [Tib. རྟ་ར] was one of the first students of Tshatru Rimpoche and he knows the handwriting of Tshatru Rimpoche. You should tell him also.   

**Q:**  I will do my best to do that, but tell me in brief about how many pages there were.   

**A:**  The petition had about two pages.   

**Q:**  Was it Tibetan paper?   

**A:**  No, it was like this paper. At the second meeting, I announced it and showed the petition to all of them.   

**A:**  I thought that if they started the Tibet Autonomous Region, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, Chamdo, the Kashag and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> would all be collapsed together, and it would be finished. Before the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, we had to say that and make the petition. Tshatru Rimpoche made the draft.   

**Q:**  You didn't tell the representatives who made the draft, right?   

**A:**  I didn't tell anybody until now that Tshatru Rimpoche wrote it because he was working for the Chinese and he was my family member. Even if he would have said that, people wouldn't have believed that because people called him a Chinese lama, and even his students didn't like him. I internally trusted him and sought his advice. He used to be the personal attendant in charge of clothes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན] An honorific term for a servant or personal attendant.">simpön</a> khembo, and he also went to Japan and went to China as a delegate of the Tibetan government. I only know about his handwriting. Today I am telling you all, but I haven't told people in the past. If I would have told people, then they wouldn't have believed me as he was working for the Chinese. I told him things verbally and he added them in. So I read the letter at the first inner meeting and everybody said it was well done. When the second meeting was held, we told them about holding the first meeting, and the plan was to perform the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> for the Dalai Lama to oppose the Tibet Autonomous Region. Otherwise, Tibet would be lost. And we wrote the reasons why we didn't want the Tibet Autonomous Region. There I also told the points and read the petition. I asked what should be added and what should be subtracted. Most said that it was very good. But, Pegong Chandzö, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> Targye, and others like them said, "If we give such a petition to the Chinese, then we will be finished. Really, it is useless to do this. But, what about your opinion?" And he put forward many reasons saying, "This is dangerous and it will spoil what we have done in the past. The Chinese are so powerful and have taken the sky and the earth. The Chinese are not finding an excuse. If we did that today, there would only be [one] way for us to go. Until now, we have been doing that and some people were arrested and released. Now if we do that, we will be finished." Others agreed. Among the Khambas, there was a Triu Khamba called Getshog Targye [Tib. དགེ་ཚོགས་དར་རྒྱས] who had a house in Nagchu and also in Lhasa, and he was a big trader. He was also standing on Pegong's side. Then they said, "Now it is the right time [to stop the Association]. Let's yell, 'May the god be victorious! [and end it]'" I was short-tempered and I said, "When we first started the Association, we promised to sacrifice our lives for the religion and the politics of Tibet. We should abide by the initial oath to sacrifice ourselves if necessary. Whether the Chinese catch us or not, there isn't anything to be afraid of. Even if they catch us, we have accomplished our goal. And the 13th Dalai Lama's testament said not to be afraid." Let me tell you a story about this. At first, there were 20 men to oppose the Chinese. Before we met, I wrote something and I showed it to Tshatru Rimpoche and told him, "This is what I've thought, so please make it sound good." He said, "It needs to be revised a little bit. But, not only you, do you have solidarity with all the people?" I said, "There is no question about this. We have all promised on this matter and decided to die for this, and we don't care whether we will be cut into pieces." Then he said, "If this is the case, it is good." As for his first advice, he said, "The Chinese will hold the preparatory meeting of the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region on the fifth of May in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s house. If you can give the petition before the meeting, it will be alright. If you give the petition after the meeting is held, they will say that the People's Association opposed them and there will be a danger. If you can give the petition before the meeting, there is nothing because you just said don't do it."   

**Q:**  This is very important. If you said that before the meeting, it would be a suggestion, and after the meeting, it would be opposing, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he said, "I can't say whether this will work or if we will have a good fortune or not. You also can't say that. Therefore, you should ask the Oracle to go into a trance and consult the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> deity. If he says to do it, then go ahead and do it. If he doesn't say to do it, just leave it." Tshatru Rimpoche gave me this advice. Since I was a trader and knew business and how to play mahjong, but not politics, we didn't know about that meeting. So it was from this that I got the idea to consult Nechung, and we decided to consult Nechung. I went alone before the first meeting to Nechung to consult. I asked him three questions: 1. Whether it would be good to give the petition regarding opposing the Tibet Autonomous Region before the meeting was held. 2. Whether it would be good to leave it for the time being and give it after the meeting. 3. Whether it would be good to leave the petition for good.   

**Q:**  Did you show the draft to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a>?   

**A:**  Wait a minute. Usually, people would read the draft to him, but when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> went into a trance, I gave him the questions and told him, "These are the questions for the prophecy. Please put the mark [Tib. ཕྱག་རྟགས] [seal] on the points and just tell me." At that time, Nechung closed his eyes and went like this [moving his head back and forth], and he put the mark on the first point. I couldn't open it right away and put the question in my pouch. I was worried that the deity might have put the seal on recklessly and I almost felt embarrassed, but I found it was put on the first point and this was what we wanted. So I was happy and took the paper and went right to my house. That evening, Tshatru Rimpoche came to my house after he finished work. He asked me how the work went that day. I said he said to do it at once. He said, "The dieties won't let you down." So at the first meeting, I spoke about consulting Nechung.   

**Q:**  Did you show the questions to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> or the petition?   

**A:**  No. Just the three question points written on a small piece of paper.   

**Q:**  Did you ask the deity verbally?   

**A:**  No, I just offered the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and prayed, and gave him the questions and said, "This is what I have to ask you." Then I said that we should do it fast because there was not much time. The meeting was May 5th and this was about April 26, 27th [must be 1956]. Then a few days later, I had the first meeting. There I read the petition and explained about opposing the Chinese. I didn't need to show them the prophecy. They said absolutely, without a doubt, "Now, we don't care whenever we will die. We will do that." It was good that I didn't need to [?] the questions because we should not show all the documents.   

**Q:**  What mark was put on the paper by the deity? Was it a seal or what?   

**A:**  Yes, he put his seal on point one. It's in the Private Office. You can see it. I will give you a letter saying that I have told this to the Tibet Research Center. This was settled and then I convened the second level group meeting. When I read the petition, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> Getshog Targye said, "The Dalai Lama has gone to China and returned unharmed. This is good. Therefore, we should disband now by yelling, 'May the god be victorious.'" I was angry and said at the start that we all agreed to finish the work we started. We knew when we started that the Chinese were powerful, but they were no more powerful then. We agreed to sacrifice ourselves for the religion and the politics of Tibet, so if we died, it didn't matter. "You are all sincere, but even if you want to die, some of you cannot give up your wives and family or wealth, and it is hard to give these up. You don't need to be afraid," I said. "I couldn't make the decision and I consulted with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> who said to do it," and then I showed them the paper with the seal. By that time, even among the five people, they also said, "If this is the case, it is very good." But, Pegong Chandzö said, "Hey! The Nechung put the seal on the point. But, when you consulted the deity, while the Oracle was going into trance, he could have come out of the trance for awhile [Tib. ལྷ་སང་ཤོར]. So maybe the Oracle put the seal on while he was out of the trance." I was short tempered and I told him that what he said was wrong, but I thought of giving some reasons for this and I said, "At the time of the Sera War, our trader representatives went to talk with the Sera representatives. At the first meeting, they didn't listen. The second day, we asked the Sera representatives to come to the sandy area, Chera. When we spoke, we said, 'If you fight the government, you will lose. So don't do it. You don't have good weapons and you are using churns for the cannon and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> will use stones.' On the second day, they came and Phulama said, 'We consulted Nyare Gyalchen and in his prophecy, it was said, "Today you should not give up courage. Go ahead and fight. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> should be Tsenya Trülku."' So they didn't listen to them and left. The next day, at around 9 a.m., Phulama, Tsenya Trülku and the oracle of the Nyare Gyalchen were all brought by government soldiers with their hands tied behind their backs and were stuck in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Prison. The one who was told to fight was also imprisoned. This is called the coming out of a trance. This is real history, you should think about this." So after this, everyone became less sure of the Nechung's prophecy. I had 100 percent trust in the protective deities and I thought that they would let me. But when I heard about the coming out of the trance and what happened to the Sera monks, I also felt kind of a bit [unsure]. So then I said, "If there is a possibility of coming out of the trance, then let's take the issue to the Buddha statue in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, Jo Rimpoche [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. Or the statue of Avalokitesvara, Thuje Chemmo [Tib. ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ], and do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery there. We should have two questions: Is it better to give the petition right now or is it better to leave it temporarily? If it comes out to do it right away, we will do it, and if it comes out to leave it temporarily, let the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region be set up. After one month, we will give the petition to oppose the Chinese." Everyone agreed saying that even the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama was also decided by shaking the golden churn. Only for the 13th, they didn't need to do that. We decided to do it in front of Thuje Chemmo. We put these questions in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤག] Tsamba mixed with a liquid like tea and kneaded into a ball with the consistency of bread dough.">tsamba balls</a> and weighed them to be equal in weight. It was written on the paper slip, "It would be good to do it right away [Tib. འཕྲལ་དུ་བྱས་པ་བཟང]." On the other it was written, "It would be good to leave it for the time being [Tib. གནས་སྐབས་བཞག་ན་བཟང]." This was done in my house with everyone there because I had all the conditions. Then we went to the Thuje Chemmo. The office in charge of offerings, the Lhasa Nyertsang [Tib. གཉེར་ཚང], would extinguish all the butter lamps in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> at about 9 p.m. They would send a servant. Ngawang Thöndrub was a Lhasa Nyertsang at one time. At that time, all the caretakers would shout the korshu [Tib. སྐོར་ཞུ] several times saying, "Beware of fire and theft [Tib. མེ་རྐུན་གཉིས་ལ་ཐུགས་ལྕག་གནང་རོགས]." When we broke up that night, it was about 9 p.m. After that, people were not allowed for the pilgrimage. But we had a connection with the chief caretaker, the Könyerpön, who was from Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> and also our representative. He opened the door for the Thuje Chemmo for us and a few members from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, and Kham went. I didn't go. First, they lit a big butter lamp in the golden butter lamp holder in front of Thuje Chemmo. I told them to put a seal on the tsamba balls and leave it over night in front of the Thuje Chemmo. Then in the early [morning], 4-5 people went there to do the senriy.   

**Q:**  Why leave it all night?   

**A:**  It was for doing the prayers and it was to say please consult. Secondly, it was to make the people have faith in it. The next morning, other people were able to go in as representatives and shook the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> balls. We did things this carefully so that the people would believe in it. There were monks from the three great monasteries in the outer groups, but not the inner one because we thought that they might tell other people what we said. The plan was to have the balls rolled in a water offering bowl the next morning while doing the prayer. Whichever ball came out first, these representatives weren't allowed to open it. They squeezed that ball flat and then would bring both balls back to us. Then the first and second level meetings would jointly meet and examine the result. If it came out to do it right away, we would do it, and if not, [we would] leave it for a month. Making the ball was done and left in the alter room in my house. The delegates were to come at night to pick them up and go to the Tsuglagang. That night, Tshatru Rimpoche came before the representatives came to pick the balls up. He asked what happened. I told him about all of this and about coming out of the trance. He replied, "Oh, if they would have agreed to what <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> said, it would have been okay. You didn't need to do the senriy." Then he asked me what words were written in the senriy. I told him we wrote, "It is good to do it right away." And on the other one it was written, "It is good to leave it for the time being." Tshatru Rimpoche said there must be the same number of words on both balls. I said, "I can't say whether the words are the same amount in each. Anyway, it is in the alter room and I am going to open it when they come. If it is not okay, you please write it and we will make the balls again." When he opened them, he said that the words were not okay. Then he said he would write it again and wrote this.   

