# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0004.10 : Tape 10  
##  : with Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Alo Chöndze  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Alo Chöndze was a major leader of the People’s Association in Tibet and India in the 1950s. In this interview, he continues to describe the Dalai Lama's visit to China and the situation with the People's Association. He discusses donations received by the People’s Association, the importance of religion in Tibetan culture and the rituals they performed. Additionally, he discusses in detail going on the first denshu [Tib. གདན་ཞུ] (welcome delegration) representing the Tibetan People's Organization when the Dalai Lama was returning from Beijing.   

---  
### Tape 10  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0004_10/H_0004_10.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell us about collecting donations for the People's Association?   

**A:**  We used the common money [Tib. སྤྱི་དངུལ] donations for performing the rituals, burning incense and making offerings. We collected donations for this. But when we held meetings in private houses, we didn't use the common money. And there were also big events where we collected donations, like when we performed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> after the Dalai Lama came back. At that time, we got a large amount of money and things from the common [people]. But we couldn't say that we didn't need those things. As soon as we got them, we just kept whatever we got. We spent the expenditures that needed to be spent and as for the remaining, we also lent loans to the members in the People's Association and made use of it and repaid the loan when it was needed. The masses were making a lot of donations. Then we called the goldsmith and cut the gold brick. We didn't have radio broadcasts, but the people were talking to each other about the People's Association collecting everything for donations, even bowls. So people donated gold and satin, and they were rushing to donate things. Even some of the humble households donated copper pots for cooking. We made a list of all of the donations. Finally, we could make a very big golden wheel with thousands of spokes. I have a photo of this. This was not the only tenshug, we performed many tenshug after that. After that, the Dalai Lama went to Powo from Kongpo. In Powo, the road was very [narrow?] and the river was big. In Powo, the Dalai Lama ate his food with Ngabö and the Chinese officials. While the Dalai Lama stayed about a year in China, the People's Association did not meet much. Sometimes we burned incense on the river bank on good or holy occasions, prayed, and we performed rituals as well. We also met in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> in Lhasa. When it was about 10-11 months since the Dalai Lama had left, we said, "Although the Dalai Lama said that he is going to come back in one year, if we don't tell him to come up and if the Chinese don't let him come up, this will be dangerous." We performed big rituals in the monasteries for this and we also gave alms to the Mönlam Festival, where over 20,000 monks gathered and all of the representatives went around the assembly carrying incense. We also built many statues.   

**Q:**  Why did you perform the rituals?   

**A:**  You are not familiar with this. The main local, habitual custom for which we aggressively argue and even die for is to revive the religion. You will know [see] this wherever you go, regardless of Kham, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, many people will say that they will die for the sake of the religion. Ninety percent of the people will say that. If you ask them, "Will you die for the independence?" there will probably be 40-50 percent. I am telling you the truth. That's why the religion is so precious. There are many different religions, like Christianity and Islam. We didn't have anything to show off, like mines and the technology in the world, other than the Potala and the monasteries. The reason why the Dalai Lama is so famous is also because of the religion. The people in the world do not accept the Dalai Lama much with politics, but he is regarded very highly in regards to religion. That's why we performed the ritual and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a>, and all the people made their donations. The Amdo people would come prostrating for several months on their way to see the Buddha's statue in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, in Lhasa. After the Chinese Communist Party came, there were many Tibetans who also didn't have faith towards the religion, and also in foreign countries. Some of them are related to me. On this, I swear by the Buddha's statue that I feel very agitated. During that Mönlam, the People's Association met and performed a lot of rituals in the 3rd Tibetan month, which was probably two months before the Dalai Lama's arrival. Then we said that we must go for the denshu.   

**Q:**  Have you ever heard about the treaty signed between India and China the year the Dalai Lama went to China?   

**A:**  I never heard about this at that time, but later I heard about Panch Shila. Then we talked about representatives going for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a> and there would be the first, the second and the third denshu. For the third, there would be all the representatives and it would be held in the monastery in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Gungtang. For the first, there would be fewer people, and the second would have a little more than the first. For doing this, the representatives from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and Kham should gather together and some of them would have to go for the denshu.   

**Q:**  Did you have a list of the people from other places?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  When was this list made? Was this before you went to India or what?   

**A:**  This was started in 1949 and in the beginning, there were fewer people and the number increased, and it continued until 1956. Chandzö Thamjö Sonam had the documents about this before I went to India. He has a daughter who is now in Assam and has become an old woman.   

**Q:**  My question is that when you came to Tibet, you had the previous name list of the members of the People's Association, so how did you collect the new members?   

**A:**  When we performed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a>, most of the members of the People's Association joined the [new] association.   

**Q:**  If someone liked the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> and wanted to become a member of the People's Association, what would he have to do? Would he have to put his seal on something or what?   

**A:**  I know what you are saying. Here, when you join an association, you have to pay a membership fee. But in Tibet, we didn't know that. We just trusted people and we didn't tell them to join us, they were coming voluntarily. Then we would just write his name [down]. Other than this, they didn't need to sign and pay money. This was done in a sincere manner. When the number of people increased, the name list also increased.   

**Q:**  Supposing I said that I wanted to join the Association, would they investigate or examine me?   

**A:**  Not at all. We didn't need to examine the common people. To tell you the truth, among the representatives, it was like the proverb, "You don't [have] any problems with counting your five fingers [Tib. མཛུབ་མོ་ལྔ་ལ་གྲངས་ཀ་མ་ཐེབ་པ་མེད]." I am not sure whether there were six million [people], but it was just Kham, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, and the 13 regions populated by ten thousand families [Tib. ཁྲི་སྐོར་བཅུ་གསུམ]. It was very easy to examine if someone came from Tö, whether he was good and trustworthy or false. At that time, suspect people didn't come to join us and we didn't need to say that they couldn't join us. As for the people in Lhasa, first we wrote the name list of the thoughtful people and went to request them to join us, and they agreed and they didn't even sign their names. So all the good people were selected. If we didn't select about 20-50 knowledgeable and trustworthy people, the people would not have trusted them and would have said that there was a false person among them. The better people were also introduced by the representatives. For example, Surkhang Drönyer would introduce the better people he knew. Then we decided to send the representatives to invite the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Why did you have to send the people for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a>?   

**A:**  We thought that though the Dalai Lama had promised that he would come [back] in a year, if the Chinese forced him to stay, what should we do? We said that we couldn't bear the responsibility. So we had to go invite him to return up. The first <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a> was to go to China, wherever the Dalai Lama was. The second was to go to Chamdo. The third would be at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Gungtang. Regarding the denshu, we sent notices to the representatives in Kham, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, Tö, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> to come to the meeting. And we also collected donations of whatever they would donate. Then we selected the people who would go for the denshu.   

**Q:**  How did you select them?   

**A:**  The representatives held a meeting and decided the people who would go for the denshu.   

**Q:**  How many people attended this meeting?   

**A:**  The internal one had about 30 and the outer one had about 70, and the most would be about 200. At that time, we held the meeting in Gyambumgang.   

**Q:**  So there might have been about 70, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You heard from Phala that the Dalai Lama was going to China, right? Since he himself was a powerful and high ranking <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and had connections with the government, why did he tell the People's Association to stop the Dalai Lama from going to China? What was Phala thinking?   

**A:**  Phala was my childhood friend and there weren't any politics. The two of us trusted each other. When he became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a>, he was really good and all the people liked him. The reason why he told me that was because he really didn't like the Chinese. Maybe it was because Phala had many estates and he thought that the estates would be taken away. But, as far as I am concerned, he was doing that for the religion and not for private reasons. At that time, he thought that if the Dalai Lama would be taken to China, the Tibetan government would not be able to stop him, and the Kashag, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>, Tsikhang and the Three Great Monasteries also didn't tell the Dalai Lama not to go. Secretly, he told me alone, "If the People's Association can't do something, there is nothing and the Dalai Lama will go." There wasn't any announcement among the members of the People's Association. No one knew about that. So I told the People's Association that I heard the Dalai Lama was going to China and we should tell the Dalai Lama not to go, and we all agreed. When we held the meeting in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a>, we molded 1,000 clay statues and performed the rituals in Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, and everywhere, and applied gold on the faces of the statues. After we sent the letters to Tö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> to send representatives, we received responses after about a month saying that such and such person was going for the denshu. Among them, there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སློང] A monk who has taken the full set of vows.">gelong</a> from Shelkar Chöde [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་ཆོས་སྡེ]. Shelkar Chandzö with crooked eyes was there from the early times. From Shigatse, there was Bisu and other representatives. From Lhoka, there was Bumtang Trunyi and those people. We didn't receive many letters from Kham. We received letters only from two places in Kham and the majority of people were in Lhasa.We gathered together the representatives probably at the end of the 2nd Tibetan month and we held a meeting in my Songra House. Among the people going to China, I had to go because I had to do that [make connections with people in Kham] on the way. In the past, I saw some documents on that, though people didn't sign their names. Then Amdo Gyetong from Amdo, Bisu from Tsang and Shelkar Gelong from Tö were there.   

**Q:**  Before that, did you have any connections with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>, like receiving letters?   

**A:**  Not at all.   

**Q:**  Didn't you send letters asking [them] to help you?   

**A:**  Not at all.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> was there?   

**A:**  I didn't know <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> was there. We had hope from early on, saying that Gyalo Thondup was there in India, although some said that he was in China. Anyway, he came to Lhasa for a short time and he met some kudraks. I also went there and said that Gyalo Thondup was very good and we were very glad. I had not heard the name Jenkhentsisum and we didn't have any relations. There were some more people, about 8-10, going to Chamdo for the denshu. Right after it was decided which representatives to go, we went to the Kashag and told them, "The Dalai Lama is going to come back in one year. But, it has been so many months, so if the Chinese don't let him go, the Dalai Lama won't have anything to do. So we, the People's Association are going for the denshu."   

**Q:**  In 1952, the government banned the People's Association, right? And the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were demoted, but after that, you performed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> in the name of the People's Association. Wasn't that an illegal activity? In the meantime, did you submit a petition to ask for permission to start the People's Association again?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. You can know about this from what the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> dzatsig said. It was why we adhered to it, why the Tibetan People's Association was dispersed and why the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was started. At that time, we were reporting to the Kashag and we didn't have anything to do with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག] The main administrative office in Lhasa that was headed by the &quot;mayor&quot; or mipön.">Nangtsesha</a> office because they were just for whipping people. We started another one after the former was finished. This was a commitment from the beginning. For example, I went to India and the work continued. So it was my great victory to be able to start it from the beginning in Kushu Linga. Now, there was talk in 1950, as I mentioned earlier, [as to] why I didn't come out openly in the People's Association. This was because I had to ask the Dalai Lama to give teachings which would make him famous. Regarding this matter, I also had internal talks with the drönyerchemmo. Our principle was that we would talk if something were to happen to the People's Association, so all the people should not come out. They should have been in the Association, but they had to stay behind [not openly join]. If some people were arrested, they should have been ready to replace them. Later, when we were arrested, the Tibetan government didn't whip us though we were opponents of the Kashag. The Chinese also didn't say anything, but the Tibetan government banned the Association.   

**Q:**  In 1954, when you performed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a>, the Tibetan government had already banned the People's Association, right?   

**A:**  The former one was called the Lhasa People's Association and it was banned, and the later one was called the Tibetan People's Association, and it was the one who performed the tenshug. For example, the Kashag was not allowed to punish Jayan Dawa because he was a Drepung monk and they had to wait for the order from the shengo. And Trunyila was also a monk. The former association was banned and the people in Lhasa were sent to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག] The main administrative office in Lhasa that was headed by the &quot;mayor&quot; or mipön.">Nangtsesha</a> office and the monks were sent to the monastery. But, after that, another group came out with Karkhang Chandzö and those people, and they were also told that they were not allowed to meet. While the Kashag was saying that, we kept on meeting.   

**A:**  When was Karkhang Chandzö there?   

**A:**  Probably in 1952.   

**Q:**  Was it before you went to India?   

**A:**  No, it was the time when I was staying in India. At that time, it was called the Lhasa People's Association. It was also true that the Khambas and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>s staying in Lhasa were included in that. The big People's Association was started in 1954 and while they were saying that we were not allowed to meet, we met in the Shingra in the Jokhang. In this, Kham, Amdo, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people all were included. It was called the Tibetan People's Association. It was like the former was just Cleveland and the later one was the whole USA. At that time, we were making requests to the Kashag and there was also one occasion when we reported to the Kashag, "The people from Tö and those places have come and we are going for the denshu. The best [thing] would be if the Tibetan government Kashag and the Three Great Monasteries would come, so please come. In case you do not come, then we are going." Surkhang was there and some of our representatives went there and made the request. They just said, "We will report this to our superior." And they didn't give any answer. After waiting awhile, because of our inspiration, the Kashag and the Three Great Monasteries could also come. Then the Kashag said, "It is good for you, the Lhasa People's Association to go." Then we said, "We are not the Lhasa People's Association, we are the Tibetan People's Association." . At that time, they [Kashag] were a little bit agitated with the Tibetan People's Association and they were always writing Lhasa People's Association in the edicts. Then it was decided for the Kashag to go, and the Kashag called the abbots of the Three Great Monasteries to go. From the Kashag, Thubden Ramyang [Tib. ཐུག་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས], who was something like an Acting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Sey [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་སྲས], [who] was his staff official, and the abbots of the Three Great Monasteries [were to go].   

**A:**  We left Lhasa together and the Kashag said we, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a>, should go as far as Dartsedo. Shall I continue on this?   

**Q:**  Tell me about how you met Tomden [Tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན]. This is important.   

**A:**  There are only two words. When we reached <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>, the Chinese made the arrangements for us. While we were staying there, we heard that the Dalai Lama had reached Chengdu. Then there was an earthquake. I was very lucky. Before Dartsedo we reached Tau [Tib. རྟའུ] Monastery. It was a long day from Tau to Dartsedo. We didn't go directly to Dartsedo that day and we just went down a short distance. We planned to reach Dartsedo the next morning, saying that it would be auspicious to arrive at sunrise. On the next day, there was a serious earthquake on the Gyüla Pass and great damage was done to the Chinese trucks that left that day. If we had gone on that day, all of us would have been finished under the earthquake. This was really by the grace of the Three Jewels. Then we and the members of the Kashag went to Dartsedo, and it took a few days to get there. When we reached there, we stayed there for a few days. As you said, Jagö Tomden and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye, who were better and powerful people among the people, were given Chinese titles like County Leader [Tib. ྾ཨིཨན་ཞང] or something like that, and they were going to offices. Panda Tobgye and I had relations from early times before the Communists came, when I went [would go] to Dartsedo. Tobgye knEws that I was an excellent shooter and I was famous in Dartsedo. At that time, I met Tobgye la and I told him the secrets about my coming, and told him that we had the People's Association in Tibet and there was no choice but to revolt against the Chinese Communist Party. In the past, Tobgye la also rebelled against the Tibetan government, and [Then]they moved [fled] to Ba from Markham. So I told him, "Please give us instructions on this and have solidarity. We are all good in Tibet." Then he said, "It is very good. We also have the same wish, but on the way of doing this, from my side, you don't need to worry about this. Although, now I can't come out openly [anti-Chinese], but I will do that." He promised very well. Then I met Jagö Tomden. I didn't know him in the past, but I had heard about him when I went to Dartsedo, and he also knew about me. Then I told the same to him and he also said, "This is good. I will do whatever I can." Unlike Tobgye, Jagö Tomden was regarded as very important because he was famous in the areas of Derge beyond the Yangtse River. Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje was his younger brother. As for Tobgye la, he only had the strength of himself and his young men accompanying him [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག], he didn't have anything in the Markham area. In the Markham area, there were many people greater than him, like the Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར] Labrang Chandzö and those kind of people. Jagö Tomden said, "Although I can't come out openly and join the People's Association and hold the meetings, I will indirectly support and help you." He was very good. These two were the main people. Then I met another person. Since I was a nomad from Litang and my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a> (chief) was Tashi Yönrupön, he was the pön of the nomads and he was young then. From the early times, he was about to rebel against the Communists and he didn't go when he was called to the Communist meetings. At that time, the Communists would flatter the pön (chiefes). They knew that the Dalai Lama went to China and he was coming back, and some of the representatives of Litang also went to China. When the Dalai Lama was coming, Yönrupön went to Dartsedo and his servant came to me and he said, "This time, it is very good that you are here, and I am very glad. Until now, I [have] stayed in my homeland. I couldn't oppose the Chinese Communist Party. This time, the Chinese helped me come to Dartsedo, so I had to come because I had to meet the Dalai Lama. You should help me meet the Dalai Lama." Then I told him, "You are good not to stick with the Communists although you are young. This time, you will meet the Dalai Lama. I will help you get an audience." At that time, the earthquake took place in Ya Ngan [Ch. ya an], so after the Dalai Lama reached Chengdu he had to stay there. Yönrupön said, "This time my goal is to meet the Dalai Lama. But I came along with the Chinese, which was my first time. I have never done such a thing in the past, although they told me to." I told him, "Although I can't guarantee [it] right away, you will get an audience with the Dalai Lama. I will report to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> and go through the Tibetan procedures." The two of us talked in detail for some days, and after 10-15 days, we heard that the road was again okay. I was saying that the Kashag told us to go up to Dartsedo, but we were going down [toward Chinese areas, specifically Chengdu] wherever we could, even though there was an earthquake even up to Chengdu, and we talked about the preparation of the vehicles. At that time, the Kashag and the abbots were there, and we told them we were going down and asked whether they would come or not. They said, "We are not going because the order was to go up to Dartsedo and it is useless for you to go [further]." When we reached Ya Ngan where Tibetan brick tea was produced, we had to stay overnight.   

**Q:**  The people in Ya Ngan were not Tibetan, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was a real Chinese area. When we said that we were going to Chengdu, they said that the Dalai Lama was coming up from Chengdu tomorrow or the day after.   

**Q:**  How many days was it from Ya Ngan to Chengdu?   

**A:**  It was probably one day by vehicle. Many people went there because the Dalai Lama was coming. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>, the Chinese had arranged accommodations for us. And in Ya Ngan, they treated us very well and let us stay in a good hotel, and we got satin quilts to cover us and they told us that the Dalai Lama would come tomorrow. Then I told the people, "The name of this place is Ya Ngan, which in Tibetan is similar to the word yarnga [Tib. དབྱར་རྔ], which means thunder and peacocks who would feel very glad when they hear the thunder [Tib. རྨ་བྱའི་རྣ་བར་དབྱར་རྔའི་སྒྲ་གྲགས་པ]." Then we held a meeting of a few people and discussed the activities of the next day.   

**Q:**  Did you plan to give the Dalai Lama a petition to accept your organization again?   

**A:**  No, our organization was accepted.   

**Q:**  No, the government banned the Association, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you have a plan to seek permission again to hold the Association?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. If we did that, he would have said no and it would have been finished, and we would have had to leave on that day. So we thought it was better not to ask him. At that time, the Kashag called us the Lhasa People's Association. It was also written the same in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> edict. If we said the Tibetan People's Association, it would have included all the people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, Kham, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, whether they lived in the US or India. At that time, there were not many in other foreign countries, but there were quite a lot in India. Then we asked through which road he was coming, and I knew the rule that we had to prostrate and hold the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> in our hands and stand on one side. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> or a tsendrön would come and ask where we were from, and they would receive the khata and put it on us. Since the Dalai Lama was chauffeured in a car, we wore Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and Gelong la wore the monk's robe. Then we came out and prostrated, and the car stopped and we were the only ones wearing Tibetan chupa and monks' robes. So it was very good and the Chinese were watching us. Then we requested Phala for an audience with the Dalai Lama and the Dalai Lama was in a big reception room where there was no throne. I was to be the head of the People's Association and tell the Dalai Lama, "We are the representatives of the Tibetan People's Association. The reason for our coming is that we thought you would not come [back] on time. But we thank you so much for being able to come back on time. The Kashag and the abbots of the Three Great Monasteries were with us, but they stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>." Then Gelong la was to say that he was from Tö Shelkar and would report on its situation, and then Bisula was to say that he was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and report on Tsang. And Amdo Gyetong and Lala from Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ] should also report on whatever they liked. So we got an audience with the Dalai Lama. I spoke first and the others also did as planned, but Bisu made people laugh and said, "It is good to meet you this time. After the Dalai Lama left, there was the flood in Gyantse and we had a very hard time." Then we were told to relax and stay there, and on that night the Dalai Lama stayed in Ya Ngan. Then I asked Bisu, "Why did you report about the flood? The Dalai Lama heard of this when he was in Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] when he was going down. Actually, you should have said something auspicious like we the Tibetan people are happy." He said, "I didn't have any idea what to report and I just thought about the flood." On that day, the Chinese gave a big party and the Dalai Lama also attended the party. In the past, we had written in the petition that the Dalai Lama should not eat food with the Chinese. This was the point. So when we saw that the Dalai Lama attended the party, all of us felt sad and we didn't eat the food, and we could no longer stay there and went to our rooms. On the next day, the Dalai Lama left and so did we. Before we went to Ya Ngan, Yönru<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a> said that he wanted to go to Ya Ngan or wherever we would meet the Dalai Lama. I told him, "Do not do this because you can't say that you want to meet the Dalai Lama on the road. You have to report to the drönyerchemmo. When the Dalai Lama comes to Dartsedo, then there will be no problem." During the approximately 20 days from when the earthquake took place and when the road was blocked, not only Yönrupön, but for several months, Litang Monastery had sent people to Beijing to invite the Dalai Lama to their lands and requested him to give teachings, these people also had come back. So along with Yönrupön, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> (manager) of Litang Monastery was also there. They told me, "Last year, we petitioned and we were told it would be okay. But, it was not finalized and when he came here, his coming to Litang Monastery was changed and Trijang Rimpoche was to come to Litang Monastery as the substitute of the Dalai Lama. Karmapa would go to the Kagyü Monasteries. So this time, please ask Drönyerchemmo about this." So I talked with Drönyerchemmo about this and I asked him how long the Dalai Lama would be in Dartsedo, and he said it was one day and one night in Dartsedo. While we stayed in Dartsedo for about 20 days, we went to Litang Monastery and Yönrupön was also there. Then I said, "Since the Dalai Lama will not be able to come to Litang Monastery, when he comes to Minyag Rangakha where there used to be an airport in the past during the Guomindang era, we should invite the Dalai Lama there. And we should pitch tents and receive teachings." At that time, the people like the Dalai Lama's master tailor [Tib. ན་བཟའ་ཆེན་མོ] and the cooks and the monks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Tratsang had arrived there. I had good relations with them and I told them, "There is nothing there, so you should bring tents and the Dalai Lama should be seated on the throne." In Dartsedo, there was the master carpenter of the Dalai Lama and the master tailor. So I made a design and a very good throne was made for the Dalai Lama. This was also a folding one so that we could take it to Litang Monastery. I paid all of the expenditures for this. As for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྟེན་བཞུགས] A ritual done to request a spiritual teacher or lama to live a long life, a long-life prayer offering.">tenshug</a> [longeveity rite], there are three different kinds of tenshug: Dakini [Tib. མཁའ་འགྲོ] Tenshug, Sutra [Tib. མདོ་ལུགས] Tenshug and the Lama Chöpa [Tib. བླ་མ་མཆོད་པ] Tenshug. Among the three, the Dakini Tenshug is the most difficult one where the monks are dressed in Dakini's costume and perform the religious dance [Tib. འཆམ]. And there are many ceremonies. Then I told Litang Monastery, "You requested the Dalai Lama to give a teaching, so he will give you whatever teaching he would like to. Actually, you should mention the name of the teaching and request him to give that. When the [Dalai] Lama gives a teaching, you have to offer presents. You have brought enough things here, but it would be good if you can perform a tenshug rite. It is very important to receive the teachings and perform the tenshug." Then they said, "This will be great, but it might be something that we can't do." I said, "If you start tomorrow, you can do that." Then we told the monks about this and we had to make an effigy of the Dalai Lama. The tailor should make all parts of his monk's robe. So we had a good ability to do that, and all of these were done. Then I told Litang Monastery to bring the tents. I also made a map for pitching the tents for the Dalai Lama, the abbots and the kudrak. Then I made arrangements for food, like preparing meat, butter, dry cheese and so on from Dartsedo, and also from that place. I told them, "Actually, we have to report three times for the tenshug, but this time, I will make the report and [say], 'While I was there, all of the works were done.'" Then I went to Ya Ngan and I met drönyerchemmo Phala and told him, "Litang Yönrupön has purposely come to meet the Dalai Lama. Whatever the situation is, you should grant him an audience. He is in Dartsedo. Then Litang Monastery is requesting a tenshug and a teaching. Please make the report though we can't report three times. We are sorry for that." The drönyerchemmo said," The Dalai Lama will stay in Dartsedo for one day and night and in Minyag, the Chinese made arrangements for him to stay one day and one night. Yönrupön and Litang Monastery can do those things. So do not have any hope of getting something in Dartsedo." Then we came to Dartsedo and the Dalai Lama stayed one day and the night. Then I told Yönrupön that there was no audience at this time. "You go back to Rangakha and there is hope to get the audience in Rangakha." Actually, I would have had to go ahead to check how the preparations were going on, but, I had to be with the Dalai Lama because I had came among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a> welcome reception as the representative of the Tibetan People's Association. Early the next morning, the Dalai Lama came, and I had arranged for the monks to play the trumpets and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] A clarinet type of wind instrument played by monks in religious services.">gyaling</a> when the Dalai Lama came and to perform the religious procession where the monks carry different religious objects. This was the first day for him in the Tibetan area. Then I saw that they had pitched the tents on that plain and they blew the trumpets and the gyaling. In Litang Monastery, there were three pön; Yönrupön, Uthogpön, and Changpapön. I only saw that the lamas and the abbots of the monastery had come, but not a single pön. So I felt strange. The Chinese had prepared the accommodations and the Dalai Lama stayed in a house that the Chinese had arranged. After his arrival, I came down and checked how the arrangements were done, like the way the tents were pitched, the food, et cetera. It was well prepared. They had bought things like gold, silver, satin, et cetera, to be offered, and kept them in a big tent. Then I saw that the pön (chiefs) had pitched a separate tent and that they were waiting there. Then I called the abbot and the chandzö and asked them about the arrangements. Then the pön also called me there and Yönrupön said, "I couldn't get an audience in Dartsedo, but if you don't do something here, it will not be okay." I said, "You will have an audience because Litang Monastery is going to perform the tenshug." Then we talked internally about the quarrel between Litang and the village because the monastery was very powerful like the Communist Party, and the village and the pön didn't have the strength. So they made a rule that this time, when the Dalai Lama came, whatever one had to offer to the Dalai Lama, bring it to the monastery and they would offer it to him. "You are not allowed to request for an individual audience no matter whoever it is, the pön, et cetera. The abbots of Litang Monastery and the lama Shogdrub Kyamgön [Tib. ཤོག་གྲུབ་སྐྱབས་མགོན] will have an audience, but there will be no audience for the masses." Therefore, people brought all of their things, like gold and silver, to be offered to the monastery. So Yönrupön said that Litang Monastery issued the order that they were not allowed to ask for an audience. Since this was an order from the monastery, we couldn't violate it, but we had offered all the things there. "But, please try to get a special audience for me. If I can't get the audience, I will leave my neck [head] here and go." Similarly, the other pön, Uthogpön, and Changpapön, also said the same. When I got there, the abbots and the monks of Litang Monastery showed me the things to be offered to the Dalai Lama for the tenshug and the teaching. At that time, I had a good idea, and I said, "We have to start the work tomorrow morning because there are so many things to offer." Then I asked them how they had prepared, but they said, "This time, please do whatever needs to be done. We don't know anything." Then I asked who was the sponsor of the tenshug and the teaching. I asked them "From where did you collect these things?" They said, "These are collected from the monastery and the people in the villages." Then I asked the monastery, "Did you bring the endowments of the monastery and make it so the monks do not have food to eat in the future?" They said, "No. These were offered voluntarily by the people themselves and we didn't bring (use) the endowments." Then I asked whether the pön were also included in it? They said yes. Then I said, "We need a name of the sponsor who asked for the teaching. We need to write it down tonight and it is very difficult, and we have to write that Litang Monastery and the villagers requested the teaching, and then we should request the performance of the tenshug and then write down the list of presents that were offered. I don't know how to write it, but right now, I will report to the drönyerchemmo and you have to help do things." They said, "We will of course help you with whatever you need." Then I told them, "The sponsor of the tenshug is Litang Monastery and the villagers." Then I rode a horse and went to drönyerchemmo and told him, "We don't have the time to write the document of the tenshug with gold and red ink."   

