# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0004.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein, J.T. Surkhang  
**Name:** Alo Chöndze  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Alo Chöndze was a major leader of the People’s Association in Tibet and India in the 1950s. In this interview he describes in detail traveling with Bumtang Trunyi and Lhabju to Yuthok House in order to give Zhang Jingwu the petition for Tibetan independence. He talks about the struggles they faced once they reached Yuthok, and giving copies of the petition to the Kashag and Yigtsang. He then discusses the order from the Kashag to go to Norbulinga, their meeting with Assembly and the Dala Lama's edict. Additionally, he discusses the reasons for the People’s Association and how they will continue to meet if the Kashag fails to protect the Dalai Lama. Finally, he talks about the inner meeting they had following the meeting with the Kashag, including the important people who came and some background information on them.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0004_06/H_0004_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Now we are coming to a principle that we discussed at the first meeting, and then we announced it at the second meeting, and that, in the future, the Association should disperse. I saw the Dalai Lama's edict (Tib. བུགདམ་ཛཙིག) stuck near my Songra house. If I put so many things in the petition, it would have been too much, right?   

**Q:**  Were the Youth League and the schools written about in the petition?   

**A:**  Probably, I am not sure. Anyway, it was written that they had to adhere to the native customs and habits. I can't remember all of it. Now, I will have to tell about how we went to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Tell us about how you gave the petition to the Chinese.   

**A:**  The next morning, the representatives of the People's Association met in the altar room in my house. My wife and two kids were there also. I put three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarfs on the altar and prayed, and I told the representatives, "This time, we are working for the religion and the politics of Tibet. And we are going there ready to sacrifice our lives. You all have to go like this because you have accepted to go and signed your name."   

**Q:**  Were all the people there?   

**A:**  Yes. The meeting was held in the hall of my house and there were 70-80 people. At this time, Zhang Jingwu was in Yuthok. This wasn't the entire Association, but the representatives and the three people who were actually going to present the petition were saying that all of us were going to die. The other members put <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> on us and we said to them, "Maybe we can meet our wives and children in this life by the grace of the Three Jewels. If we don't meet in this life again, we will pray to be able to meet them in the next life." And we all touched our foreheads and people were crying. At that time, there were motorcycles and the traders were riding the motorcycles, but we went on foot to Yuthok. We picked a day with good astrological signs. On that day, they were holding the enthronement ceremony for the reincarnation of the Reting Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  In your book, I read that you put that [petition] under the foot of a lama in the Potala. What was that?   

**A:**  I think I was talking about how we left the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery under the foot of the Thuje Chemmo, Avalokitesvara statue in the Jokhang. In one of the senriy balls we had written the following, "In front of the Avalokitesvara, we request for you to give this if it would be good to do the work for the wishes of the common affairs of the people immediately [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོའི་སྤྱན་སྔར་མི་དམངས་སྤྱི་དོན་གྱི་འདོད་དོན་དེ་འཕྲལ་དུ་བརྩམས་པ་བཟང་ན་འདི་སྩལ་དུ་གསོལ]." This was written in cursive. Then we went around the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street in an auspicious way and went to Yuthok's house. The thing we were apprehensive about was that there would be a guard at Yuthok's. The Chinese guards were very bossy and they would say, "Go away [Ch. zou zou]." When the Chinese had first come and were at the Lhadong Shenka [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ] ferry site, I went to look at the Chinese, but the Chinese guard told me, "Go, go." The people taking the petition with me were Bumtang Trunyi and Lhabju. We discussed that if the guards stopped us, then it would be wrong to go there. It was very important which way we went. Bumtang and Lhabju were wearing long earrings and the round yellow bogdo [Tib. འབོག་ཐོ] hats. I had short-haired and wore a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>, so I said, "When we reach the gate, you two act as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and I'll act as your servant." At this time, the Chinese were being very friendly to the kudraks. It was almost as if they would even drink their urine. So I told them to act like a big shot and just walked past the guard in an imposing manner. If it would have been an ordinary person, the Chinese would think of eating them at once. They did this [let us pass] and by good luck, we had no trouble passing the first door, and the second and the third. At this time, there were two translators, one had glasses and the other was Phüntso Tashi. We reached a reception room and were asked who we were looking for. We said, "Zhang Jingwu. We are from the Tibetan People's Association and have a petition for him."   

**Q:**  Who said this?   

**A:**  It was a Chinese who spoke Tibetan. He asked what kind of letter. He said, "I am Zhang Jingwu's secretary." He said sit down and he asked what the matter was. We said, "We must meet Zhang Jingwu and tell him the matter since this is a petition from the Tibetan people to Zhang Jingwu." We showed the letter and said we were just here to present it to him. "But," he said, "You can't meet Zhang Jingwu right now." We said, "It won't be okay if we don't meet him because the Tibetan People's Association told us to submit it to him. So we can't give it to you."   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese read the letter?   

**A:**  No, then he asked what the content was and I told him that it was the document of the Tibetan People's Association. We were famous at this time so he knew who we were. The Chinese said, "Are you the representatives of the Tibetan People's Association?" I said yes. He knew me in 1949 and also the Tibetan People's Association. He said, "You can't meet him today because you people do not know Chinese and he doesn't know Tibetan. Give me the petition and I will deliver it to him." He said, "This is written in Tibetan and he doesn't know Tibetan. You better translate it into Chinese. Then it would be good to meet him with leisure. Where do you live?" We said that "You don't need our address," but he still said that he wanted the address, and then we told him the address. Then he said, "Stay for a while and relax," and they served fruit and Chinese tea. Anyway, even though we insisted a lot, it was decided that they wouldn't let us meet Zhang Jingwu. So we could not lay down over there. Then he said, "I will translate it into Chinese and deliver the petition today, and Zhang Jingwu will read it and I will send the message to your address." Then we said, "You don't need to send messages. The three of us will come here tomorrow and it is your duty to translate it into Chinese." He said, "You don't need to come, you will be tired. We will send you a person." Then we gave him the petition and the address and asked him to give us a receipt for the petition. He said, "You don't need a receipt." We said, "We must have one to show to the Tibetan People's Association." The Chinese said, "You three are the representatives of the Tibetan People's Association, so do they have trust in you?" We said, "They have trust in us. That is why they sent us." Then the Chinese said, "Well if that is the case, then you don't need a receipt. You can tell them you have given the petition to me. That will be okay. You really gave it to me and you will meet Zhang Jingwu tomorrow or the day after." So he got the best of us, as we couldn't say that the Tibetan People's Association didn't trust us. So we got no receipt that we later could show abroad, like to the UNO. Then we said, "We are going to come daily starting tomorrow, so please give us a permit to enter." The Chinese said, "You don't need a pass." We said, "We definitely need this pass." Then he said, "Today how did you come in?" We said, "We just walked in." So he then said, "It is the same, you can just walk in like you did today. You didn't need a pass today, so you won't need one in the future." We couldn't say that today we came in pretending to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a>, so we said, "We are coming tomorrow. If you let us in, we will enter, if not we will wait by the door." Then we left. As we left, Bumtang Trunyi said, "We three could have done something to that Chinese because three of us could handle him, but that would have been senseless. But today, giving the petition in person was a great victory for the People's Association. We had some members who rode motorcycles waiting outside to see if we left. If we didn't leave, it would have meant we were arrested in Yuthok. If we left by car, it meant we were taken to the military headquarters, New Magar [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ], where there was a prison. [If that had happened] We were supposed to send six people the day after. We met the people outside and they asked, "Are you coming back healthy and safely?" We said that we were able to give the petition and we were not arrested. Then they said it was great. Then some of the group went on motorcycles and some on foot to the enthronement of Reting at the Potala. And we offered some gifts and they also gave us <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མ་འབྲས་སིལ] A special dish consisting of sweetened rice, melted butter and wild sweet potatoes (gro ma).">droma dresi</a>, and we said that it was auspicious on that day. Then I went home and in a happy mind, slept well with my wife.   

**Q:**  How long did it take?   

**A:**  We left and got to the Chinese at about 9-10, and circled the Potala when we left. Then we went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> where they were holding the Reting enthronement as he got back the previous title, and we then returned home by about 3 p.m. We had a plan that if they arrested us, we had made copies of the petition and other representatives would have taken them to give to the Kashag, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> and the Three Great Monasteries. So when we arrived home, the People's Association leaders came to see us. They asked us what happened and we told them. They said that since we three were already known, it would make sense for us to give the copies, and that we should go to Kashag, et cetera, tomorrow. So we went. On the copy to the Kashag and Yigtsang, it was the same petition as to Chinese, but at the end it was added that we had given this to the Chinese, so please support us in this.   

**Q:**  Who did you give it to in the Kashag?   

**A:**  To the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] The position of aide to the Kashag that was filled by lay aristocratic officials.">gandrön</a> (Kashag's ADC]. Usually, we were not allowed to go inside the Kashag, but later, at the very end, I got an opportunity to meet the Kashag. When I was released from jail, after the Three Great Monasteries had sealed [given guarantees] on my behalf, then I went to the Kashag with the abbots of the Three Great Monasteries. This was the first time for me. First of all, I tried to see the statue of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a> in the Kashag. I thought the kalöns would be seated on high thrones, et cetera, but they were not. They were on low cushions. When I went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Office, I also couldn't go inside. We had to give the letter to the secretary, Yigtsang Nyerpa. Other people took the petition to Sera and Drepung going on motorcycles. The letter wasn't taken to Ganden until later.   

**Q:**  Did you have any plan of showing the letter to Phala before you gave it to the Chinese?   

**A:**  We had no such plan. For example, there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར] A steward, administrative manager, aide.">drönyer</a> (steward) of Surkhang, and those people and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Shatra. We took an oath not to say a word of this. If they were to violate the oath, they would be killed. Phala Chandzö was in the group, but he too couldn't tell Phala. We took an oath and he is a religious believer, so he couldn't tell his boss. If they were to tell it, they would have a hard time in their future lives. We Tibetans do not make agreements and those things, we would just take an oath and drink the oath water. We didn't have any connections with the kudraks because they had harmed us a lot and they had different ways of thinking. Our primary goal was to sacrifice one's wife, children and property (everything) to oppose the atheistic barbarian Chinese. But the Kudrak thought that democracy would rise up and we would take away their estates and their wealth. And they were thinking of suppressing the people. So we didn't want to have any relations with the kudrak. The Tibetan government gave many orders, but we didn't listen to them. Finally, the Dalai Lama issued the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> edict disbanding us, so then we obeyed. Internally, the People's Association and the kudraks both didn't like the Chinese Communists, but there was a difference between us. They thought that if the people rose up, they would not lose their estates, like the proverb, "Getting the head and arms of the enemy killed by others [Tib. དགྲ་མིས་བསད་པའི་མགོ་ལག]." After the Dalai Lama issued the bugdam, they didn't distribute it right away. On the 29th, [9th Tibetan month—that's when the bugdam was dated] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> sent a messenger saying that Alo Chöndze, Bumtang Trunyi and Lhabju should go tomorrow to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> for a meeting of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</a> (Abbreviated Large Assembly), where the trunyichemmo, the abbots of the Three Great Monasteries, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་པ] 1. The Tibetan government office responsible for law and order in Shöl (tib. ཞོལ), the walled town beneath the Potala, as well as for 18 districts (tib. རྫོང) around Lhasa. It handled mainly criminal cases including murder. 2. The head of the Shölpa leygung.">Shölpa</a>, the mayor [Tib. མི་དཔོན] of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>, and the Lhasa Nyertsang, et cetera would be. So we went to Norbulinga. But before going there, we stopped at Drönyerchemmo's house. We had a cup of tea and Phala said, "Today you have to go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཤག] The highest office in the traditional Tibetan government. It usually consisted of 4 ministers (Kalön) who collectively made decisions. It is sometimes called the Council of Ministers in English.">kashag</a>." [Then he explained as an aside] "We gave the Chinese the letter two months ago but haven't received any reply. We went to them many times, but later they refused to let us go in anymore. Later, many people, 70-80, went with us to Yuthok. So I thought that the Chinese must have told the Kashag about the incident and they were going to talk to us about this." After the order to go to the Kashag came, the People's Association had a meeting. I said, "The order is probably about our incident at Yuthok and the Chinese must have told the Kashag about this. Or maybe it is to arrest us. If they arrest us and put us in jail in the Gusung (Bodyguard) Regiment, come see us." That morning, the three of us went ahead and some other members followed a ways behind us. Some members said that we should make preparations to present a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf, but I said they called us, so we didn't have to do this. So we went. Bumtang and Lhabju insisted we should carry khata scarves, so we had khata subshi [Tib. ཟུབ་ཕྱི] [not high quality]. We discussed and decided to first stop at Phala's. We decided that Lhabju would go first and speak, then Bumtang and last Alo Chöndze. When we reached Norbulinga, the Gadrung said we should come into the kashag room. The meeting that day was the hragdu gyepa.   

**Q:**  Were the kalön there?   

**A:**  Yes, and all the trunyichemmo and tsipön and abbots of the Three Great Monasteries. So we went. They were all there. We went one after another in a line. The kalön were right in front, sitting in a line and the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> [were] on the left and the right. We put the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> in the middle [must have been on a table]. The khata was stiff and slipped a bit toward us. I thought that was a good omen since the khata was coming back toward us. The first speaker was Surkhang. "Are you the representatives of the People's Association?" We said "Yes." Surkhang then spoke. We said our names one by one.   

**Q:**  Didn't my [J.T's]father know you from playing mahjong?   

**A:**  Oh yes. It is the custom to ask like this. [You] have to act as if they don't know. Then he said, "You, the People's Association, have held an evil meeting and you have been stirring up trouble between Tibetans and Chinese. Then [were] meeting for evil purposes, and you have been doing this and submitted the petition to the CCP. You have contacted the Kashag many times saying that you are the Tibetan People's Association. The main reason why we ordered you to come here now is that starting tomorrow, the Dalai Lama is issuing a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> dzatsig [edict] and you must abide by it. From now on, you must be extremely careful and do everything correctly [Tib. འགྲོ་བཟོ་སྡོད་མཁས]. So today we are explaining things to you clearly before it appears. From today on, do your own livelihood work, but you are not permitted to hold meetings of the People's Association. In reality, we should imprison you, but this time we won't imprison you. From tomorrow on, you have to return to your own homelands and you should disband the Association."   

**Q:**  Did he give reasons and details?   

**A:**  Yes, he said what was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a>. Surkhang said we should behave well before the bugdam was issued and we said nothing. We just received the order and went back. Finally, he asked, "Are you going to act according to this?" Bumtang Trunyi said, "If the Dalai Lama is going to issue the bugdam, of course, we will implement [follow] it. But, please, you, the Kashag, try not to have the Tibet Autonomous Region set up. The purpose of the People's Association is for the safety of the Dalai Lama. You Kungö have been doing that [watching out for the Dalai Lama] in the past, please do it in the future." Then I said, "Yes, we will adhere to the bugdam, but we have submitted the petition telling you to support us, but it is too bad that the bugdam is going to be issued and will tell us to disband." At that time, there was an old abbot from Sera Jey. He said, "You are really great." At that time, I had the testament of the Dalai Lama and I could speak very well then. Then I said, "The purpose of setting up the People's Association is for the religion and politics of Tibet according to the Last Testament of the 13th Dalai Lama, in which he said, 'The politics of Tibet depend on the work of the lay and the monk officials.' He said that you have to do this, but you didn't implement it. That's why it was written in the Testament [and] why the People's Association was set up. And it is the duty of the people to unite and work together. We set up the People's Association for opposing the communists, not to take over the estates and the wealth from the kudrak. The 14th Dalai Lama's bugdam said we should have harmonious relations between China and Tibet, so we have been acting in accordance with this. Who has been breaking this?" Saying this, we looked at Ngabö. We meant this for Ngabö. In Surkhang's speech, he said, "From the time of the three dharma kings of Tibet [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ་མེས་དཔོན་རྣམ་གསུམ], there were wars from the foreign countries, but the Tibetan political work has been done by monk and lay officials and we did it like the proverb, 'Untying the snake's knot by the snake itself [Tib. སྦྲུལ་མདུད་སྦྲུལ་བཤིག].' There was no People's Association. So there is no need to have a People's Association." Then I gave a good answer to this and I said, "Since the three dharma kings, the Tibetan government had been working, but the enemy of Buddhism, called the Communist, is different from the earlier Chinese who had religion. The Communists are eliminating religion. Thank you for untying the snake's knot. If you can do that, there is no reason to have the People's Association. But, since you didn't do that, the People's Association has to do that. You are saying that you will continue to do that. Thank you very much. Please do that. If you don't do it, even if you told us not to hold the People's Association, we swear by the Three Jewels that we will hold it. It is not so easy to disband the Association because there are representatives from Kham, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and Ütsang. So we have to go back and tell them what happened, and we have to arrange the money that we had pooled and take care of the documents. We will have to meet 2-3 times." Then I said, "Let's go eat." Then we left. At the meeting, Drönyerchemmo was not there but Lobsang Samden was there. Later, I met Lobsang Samden and he said, "At that time, we weren't able to say anything at the meeting. The abbots of the Three Great Monasteries, they are monks so they should have said something like, 'That it is right.'" But they didn't say anything. Then after this, I met Phala and he said, "The abbots of the three monasteries should have said something. Didn't the Ganden representative nicknamed field mouse, Abra [Tib. ཨ་བྲ], say anything? He usually says a lot." I said, "No, he was indeed a field mouse." Phala said, "He usually does, that's strange." Then the meeting was over. Actually, all the people regardless of the people giving the orders and receiving the orders were all the same, having responsibility for their religion and the politics of Tibet. Then I went home to Songra. The next day the bugdam dzatsig was put up near the stupa called Kaling Gobshi [Tib. ཀར་ནེ་སྒོ་བཞི]. This is the original. [Probably showing it] The Lhasa people were gathering there reading it. I was looking from the window. One group was saying Alo Chöndze had been the one causing trouble between Tibetans and Chinese [supporting the bugdam]. Some were looking towards my window. The bugdam was also put up in Dongtsesur [Tib. གདོང་རྩེ་ཟུར], where the big cauldron is placed, the Tro chembo [Tib. ཁྲོ་ཆེན་པོ], and at Shöl. After this, they published the bugdam in a woodblock book and distributed it all over the country. From this time on, the name of the Tibetan People's Association was over and [we] set up the Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  Was Lobsang Samden the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མཁན་པོ] The highest monk official in the traditional Tibetan government. He was the head of the monk official segment, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s household and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s private storeroom [tib. dzbug].">Jigyab khempo</a> then?   

**A:**  I'm not sure whether he was the real <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མཁན་པོ] The highest monk official in the traditional Tibetan government. He was the head of the monk official segment, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s household and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s private storeroom [tib. dzbug].">Jigyab khempo</a> or the Khentsab [Tib. མཁན་ཚབ]. Anyway, he was taking the duty of the Jigyab khempo. At that time, I told Drönyerchemmo that I didn't know the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> was going to be issued, but that we thought it had been two months since we gave the petition to the Chinese, and maybe the Chinese might have given the order to arrest us. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཤག] The highest office in the traditional Tibetan government. It usually consisted of 4 ministers (Kalön) who collectively made decisions. It is sometimes called the Council of Ministers in English.">kashag</a> told us, "Today we called to explain and advise [Tib. གོ་བསྐོན་གསེས་བཀྲོལ] you about the bugdam. Otherwise, we could have just issued it, and if you don't adhere to it, there is only one way to go."   

**Q:**  When they sent the message, did they call you [to] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཤག] The highest office in the traditional Tibetan government. It usually consisted of 4 ministers (Kalön) who collectively made decisions. It is sometimes called the Council of Ministers in English.">kashag</a> or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>?   

**A:**  They said come to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to the Kashag's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu gyepa. I told Phala after the meeting, "You might have known that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a> was going to be issued for several months. Why didn't you tell us?" Phala said, "As for the Dalai Lama's bugdam, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཤག] The highest office in the traditional Tibetan government. It usually consisted of 4 ministers (Kalön) who collectively made decisions. It is sometimes called the Council of Ministers in English.">kashag</a>, and probably the trunyichemmo, have nothing to with it. It was made in the Dalai Lama's Secretariat, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</a> [Tib. འགག], and the Dalai Lama put the seal on it." I don't remember clearly, he might have said that trunyichemmo would know. Phala said, "I also didn't know." I said, "How could you not have known since you are the Drönyerchemmo of the gag?" Phala also said, "Now the bugdam will be issued, it would be good to obey it." I said, "We will obey it. Later, we will come for an audience. Please help us get it."   

**Q:**  Did you go out to read the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a>?   

**A:**  All the people were looking at my house and some might have been saying Alo Chöndze was false, and most people might have been saying now it was too bad [that the Association was disbanded]. The next day, we had a meeting of the People's Association.   

**Q:**  Was this the inner or middle meeting?   

**A:**  This was the inner. Just a few people.   

**Q:**  There were about 20 people, who were they?   

**A:**  There were people from Chamdo, Litang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and all over.   

**Q:**  Were the Chamdo representatives ones living in Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, from Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> they came especially for this. It doesn't sound good if I praise my own homeland Litang, but the fact is that Litang was very enthusiastic and very good. When they practiced the dharma, they could do it very well, and when they fought the enemy, they were very good. And they could also rob people very well. We regard theft as a bad thing and robbery as a good thing. There was a saying for Litang, "Ba Litang is the place of bandits, but you shouldn't listen to what is said because the Dalai Lama was born there [Tib. འབའ་ལི་ཐང་རྐུན་མའི་ས་ཆ་རེད། རྫོ་མི་ཉན་སྐྱབས་མགོན་འཁྲུང་ས་རེད]." There were farmers and nomads. I was a very rich nomad. My father also robbed people and then he went to Amdo Golok [Tib. མགུ་ལོག], and he came to Lhasa and died in Lhasa. My grandfather and his opponent robbed each other, and they speared each other and died together. The nomads were very enthusiastic. When I was in Kham, the movement in Litang was held very well. Gyadotsang Kelsang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང] [the biggest farming household] at that time was young, and there was the Gyadotsang uncle [Tib. ཨཤང] in Litang who took care of the children after their parents died. They are now the wealthiest of the Litang people, like the high <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> in Tibet. Other big families in the Litang area were Jangtsatsang [Tib. འཇང་ཚ་ཚང], Andrutsang, and Jamatsang. Gyadotsang was an old household and they had been to Tibet [Ü]. They were famous in Kham and could gather many people and work hard. When the Chinese first came, Gyadotsang was the best among the farmers because the uncle thought in a very good way. They distributed all of their guns, grains and wealth to their misers and gave them good advice, and then he and his kids came to Lhasa though it was not very early. The number of Gyadotsang's weapons was famous. When Gyadotsang's uncle came to Lhasa, I met him. He joined the Association and was one of the better (more prominent) representatives, and we also had relations when he was in Kham. Another was Andru Gombo Tashi. Andrutsang's main head was Gombo Tashi's maternal uncle who was then called Andru Chöndze. Gombo Tashi didn't spend much time in Kham, he mainly lived in Lhasa. Andrutsang was famous in Lhasa. For example, Andrutsang set up an endowment [Tib. གཏོང་རྩ] for the Mönlam Prayer Festival. He also set up endowments for the Three Great Monasteries. That is why later he was called Andru Jinda [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] [sponsor]. This was the time of the 13th Dalai Lama. The main generation of Andrutsang was Andru Chökyi [Tib. ཆོས་སྐྱིད], who is now in New York. Gombo Tashi was a distant relative and after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱིན་བདག] A patron or sponsor, usually of a monastery, ritual ceremony or religious teaching. This term is also used as a title for famous patrons. For example, Andrutsang Gombo Tashi, the head of Chushigandru, was commonly referred to as Andru Jinda because he had sponsored major religious ceremonies.">jinda</a> died, Gombo Tashi came to Andrutsang and took care of the family. Chama [Tib. བྱ་མ] Jinda was not that famous in Litang, but he had a maternal uncle called Tsultrim Shimgo [Tib. ཞིབ་མགོ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས]. After he came to Lhasa, he did good trading and became wealthy and invited the Dalai Lama to the Mönlam Assembly [Tib. ཚོགས་ཕེབས]. After that, he was called Chama Jinda, and he sincerely did good work in the People's Association. We also had a Chantrengpa representative. Chantreng is included as part of Gyaltang [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཐང]. He was called Sing Gelong [Tib. སིང་དགེ་སློང]. Gombo Tashi didn't do anything by himself, though his family was famous, but this man called Sing Gelong really was a hero and he always charged first [while fighting]. We called in Andrutsang [into the People's Association] as he was famous and important, and people liked him could bring in others and have an influence on other people. Then there was Chamdo Ngawang Jimpa [Tib. ངག་དབང་སྦྱིན་པ].   

**Q:**  Weren't there any from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>?   

**A:**  Also Kyabying Chöndze la and Reting Trunyi were very good and understood things well [Tib. མགོ་འཚོས་པོ]. Then there was the aide or Drönyer, of Ngabö. We called him Drönyer la. When we first started, Jayan Dawa was there, and Tsomönling Thamjö Sonam and Karmekhang Chöndze. There were also Surkhang Drönyer and Reting Fattso [Tib. རྒྱགས་པ]. When we met, we only used their titles, not personal names. Then there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> (estate manager)from Surkhang's estate near Lhasa called Drag [Tib. ?], or Tranggo [Tib. འཕྲང་འགོ]. We had a meeting of the inner people in my house. We talked about what happened at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, the Dalai Lama's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</a>, and how we had to end the People's Association. And we asked everyone's opinion. Even if the Dalai Lama said that the east was not the east but was the west, we had to say, "Yes, it is indeed the west." We could not say that it was the east because he is the owner of religion and the temporal Tibetan government. So we couldn't go against this order, and I told the Kashag, "We cannot disband at once. We have to tell the members. I think we should have a mass meeting tomorrow where all members attend. What do you think?"   

