# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0004.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and J.T. Surkhang  
**Name:** Alo Chöndze  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Alo Chöndze was a major leader of the People’s Association in Tibet and India in the 1950s. In this interview, he discusses his work with the People's Association in search of support from the United States. He describes trying to meet with President Eisenhower during his visit to India, but how he and other members of the People’s Association met with his secretary instead. He details the beginning of the Trader's Association and traveling to Yadong with the Dalai Lama. Additionally, he talks about performing a denshu [welcome delegation] for the Dalai Lama upon his return from Yadong, and also the controversy surrounding it. He then discusses starting the People’s Association, the differences between the different versions of the association, and also the petition they wrote concerning Tibet’s independence. Finally, he gives his opinion on Tibetan independence and briefly discusses the formation of the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0004_02/H_0004_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Was your hope for the People's Association [that it should be] not only a secret association, but also be accepted by the Tibetan government and the Chinese government?   

**A:**  The so called Tibetan People's Association was newly set up for the benefit of the common affairs of all Tibetans. Therefore, whoever it was, the Chinese or the Tibetans, they should [have] accepted it. Everyone knows this. After our organization was destroyed, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> started. And after I arrived in India, I again started a Tibetan People Association. We heard that Eisenhower was going to come to India, so we made preparations to try to meet him and made gifts for him. We planned to go to New Delhi and to dress in all the different regions' outfits.   

**Q:**  Was the Dalai Lama in India then?   

**A:**  Yes he was. We weren't able to meet Eisenhower directly, so we said that we would stand in line at the India Gate and make Eisenhower see us from a distance, so that he would know the People's Association was standing there and we couldn't give the presents to him. The main person who helped us was Phünkang Lhajam [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་ལྷ་ལྕམ]. Tharchin Babu, the newspaper man, was there. Andru Gombo Tashi and Baba Yeshe were also there. At that time, Phünkang Lhajam told us, "You cannot meet him, but I will try and make it so that you can deliver the gifts and meet his secretary. And you can tell the matters to him." I don't know his name. We didn't know how important the secretary was, but later we came to know that he was very important. We invited the American secretary to the Janpat Hotel in Delhi. Andru Gombo Tashi, Baba Yeshe, Phünkang Lhajam and myself were there, and there was another partner who just came in. And there was Tharchin Babu. I said to the secretary, "Gyalo Thondup has tricked us. The US listened to Gyalo Thondup and because of following what he said, all of our army [Tib. དམག] in Kham was eliminated." It was indeed that all of the army was eliminated. The Americans let us down [Tib. དྲིན་ཆུང་བཏང], to tell you the truth. Then I said, "Then all of our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> in Lhasa were also eliminated. So here are the Tibetans, like Gombo Tashi. Later, our work became totally useless. Finally, we lost Tibet and came here. But we Tibetans still believe in the US, and we believe that the US can help us in our fight against the Red Chinese. So in the future, please don't take notice of Gyalo Thondup [Tib. ཁ་ཡ་མ་བྱེད]. We will never accept this. In the future, Phünkang Lhajam is the person in which we seek help and protection [Tib. སྐྱབས་ཡུལ]. We will send all of our requests for support and the secrets through her, and you should work through her, not through Gyalo Thondup." And I said to the others, "Right?" Andru said, "Yes exactly." Phünkang Lhajam didn't translate this because she might have felt kind of shy. At that time, I showed an attitude of getting upset and I also used my hand gestures to tell her to translate it. But she still didn't translate it. So I asked Tharchin Babu to translate and he did. We told him [the secretary] not to have relations with Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa. But until now, we couldn't make connections with the US. They were still using the name of the Dalai Lama. I, Alo Chöndze, don't have anything like money and friends. I don't know English, though I am trying to do something. You can ask Phünkang Lhajam, and also Baba Yeshe, who is alive. On that day, there was a person who delivered the gifts. It was funny. We wore Tibetan dresses in the hotel and we left our usual clothes in the hotel. On that day, an ex-shengo of Sera, who later became the editor of the Freedom Newspaper, had gone there to bring the Tibetan dresses, and all of the representatives were left in the hotel secretly. Since this ex-shengo was there, I told the ex-shengo, "Today, you have heard about this. You should stay still." And I made him swear that he wouldn't tell anybody. This happened in 1960, I think. This meeting will be in the US records. I can't recall the man's name, but Phünkang Lhajam will. After this, we sent several requests to the US government and received answers directly. This time, please tell them [US government], "He [the interviewee] couldn't meet him [Eisenhower] at that time, but now he has come here. He is requesting to get permission to talk about this." This was my request and I think this would be an advantage for me that I am not dead. In the mean time, I petitioned the US government and the UNO, and I got quite good answers from the US and England, though the others didn't give an answer. If I could get an announcement in a newspaper or [on the] Tibetan radio regarding this matter, saying that Alo Chöndze had met him [Eisenhower's secretary] and had this talk, people would know clearly who had worked for the Tibetan issue and how Alo Chöndze and the representatives had worked, and whether it was true or not. Now there is no need to keep it a secret. This time, I got beaten severely [in Dharamsala] and I was accused of being a traitor. If there would have been an announcement on this matter, the people in Tibetan would say like the proverb, "Though he couldn't catch the fish, he had indeed gone around the lake [Tib. ཉ་མོ་མ་ཟིན་པས་མ་གཏོགས་མཚོ་མཐའ་སྐོར་བཞག]." .   

**Q:**  Do you plan to go to Washington?   

**A:**  Yes, I have a good connection with the American Library on Tibetan religion and culture, and later on politics.   

**Q:**  If I call the radio [stations], perhaps they might interview you.   

**A:**  Yes, that would be good. Now the Americans don't need to be afraid to announce things that happened during the Eisenhower administration, right? I am going to get well prepared and talk on the radio. I don't need to do it in a hasty manner.   

**Q:**  When you first started your organization you had four people: Gyabing Chöndze [Tib. སྐྱབས་དབྱིངས], Reting Trunyi [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག], Paljor la [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་ལགས] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lekshey [Tib. ལེགས་བཤད]. What was discussed in the beginning?   

**A:**  In 1947, in the Preparatory Association, it was not just the four of them. It was the Trader's Association and there were quite a lot of people. The second one was Gyabing Chöndze, Reting Trunyi and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lekshey, and I invited them to my house. In the beginning, it also started with the Panchen Lama because the Chinese praised the Panchen Lama very much and they didn't say much about the Dalai Lama. We discussed this matter again. When the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, I voluntarily accompanied him as his bodyguard. We were very glad thinking that he would go to India, but he stayed in Yadong. I went to Kalimpong to take care of my wool trade and also did some work on whatever the Dalai Lama needed in Yadong. When it was said that Zhang Jingwu was coming, there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> and I was also in the Tibetan Trader's Association. The main persons were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and those people. Nepalese traders in Kalimpong made gates in the places like the 9th mile to welcome Zhang Jingwu. Shakabpa also led and talked with the trade mission. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> was also there. They prepared for the welcome and they also blew trumpets and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] A clarinet type of wind instrument played by monks in religious services.">gyaling</a> instrument . Tsatrütsang [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] and I were told to be in charge of the food when they gave Zhang Jingwu a banquet in Panda's House. When Zhang Jingwu came, Gowo Chöndze and myself watched from a ridge and saw that the Tibetans blowing trumpets and gyalings, and playing the cymbals. So I clapped my hands to indicate to stop the disaster [Tib. ཟློག་སྐྱུར], but actually, the Chinese did that to us later on . Then Zhang Jingwu and I each went to Yadong while he met the Dalai Lama. Zhang Jingwu and the important government officials, like Surkhang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a>, went ahead. I also went ahead to Lhasa and started the organization with four people. There was a big welcome for Zhang Jingwu in Lhasa when he first came. At that time, there were two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and there were many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, like Shölkang Jedrungla [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང] and Maya [Tib. རྨ་བྱ], and some ordinary lay officials. Many Nepalese also went to Kyanthang Naga [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་ན་ཁ] to welcome him. Zhang Jingwu came in an imposing manner and we were watching him. I was very angry and argued with the Nepalese, who were very close trade partners, saying, "You live here, but have no taxes, so you don't need to abide by the law. You are so grateful to the [Tibetan government], so why are you now welcoming the Chinese? You better watch out [Tib. ལྟད་མོ་ལྟོས་ཨ]." I really fought with them verbally. On the very next day, I called people like Gyabing Chöndze to my house and we started organizing. Earlier it had been only preparatory talks, now we made a list of names. We discussed the Chinese and then we made a list of people who we thought would be good members. We made the list of names of appropriate people among the Khambas, Amdos and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people. Then the next day we took the list and went to them and said, "The People's Association has to go for the reception, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a>, to welcome the Dalai Lama [when he returns]." I asked, "How did they welcome the Chinese?" So we couldn't stay like this. In two days we went to the homes of the 40 some people who were important persons. A few we couldn't meet. We discussed sending a denshu from the People's Association for the Dalai Lama, and they agreed and signed their names. They were very glad and said that this was a good idea, and that we should think about which method to take. At that time, I went back to Tibet and rented Tresur's [Tib. བཀྲས་ཟུར] house for a couple of months. When the Chinese first came to Tibet, I went to India thinking that it would be better to go out rather than staying under them. But my destiny [Tib. ལས] made me go back to Tibet again because the Indians almost arrested me. The first meeting was held in Tresur's house and a Muslim called Keibi Babu was staying nearby. My Songra [Tib. ཟོང་ར] house was not built then. Andru Gombo Tashi was also there and people had different opinions, saying, "If we go to do a [non-official] denshu for the Dalai Lama, this will be the first time in Tibetan history, and the [Tibetan] government may be angry at this action on our part." So one group said we shouldn't do it. I argued that they wouldn't be angry. I said, "I am familiar with this, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lo Gendun [Tib. ས་འདུ་བློ་དགེ་འདུན] had a group of people and I also had a group when the Dalai Lama went to Yadong. And we went to see him off. So now if we welcome him back, nothing will happen. It would be good in fact, if we go to Gyantse or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> to do the welcome. Andrutsang Gombo Tashi said, "Oh, if we do this now, there is a danger of it becoming an obligation [Tib. ཁྲལ] in the future." He wasn't very brave then. So others said that if we were to do something like this, then we had better first request permission by telephone from the Dalai Lama's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a>, Phala. In those early days, the Tibetan government had a phone in the Telegraph Office in Lhasa, one in Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར], one in Paldi [Tib. དཔལ་དི], one in Nangkarste [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] and one in Phari, and then we could connect with India. At that time they were thinking about the rules and saying that we should make a report. But I didn't think much about that. We should do this and wait for his answer. We contacted him and he replied saying that our plan to do a denshu was very good, but coming to Gyantse was too far, and it would be hard for us, and there also might not be enough time. So we should do it nearby Lhasa. The day after the phone call came, we told the group and they said it was good. There were about 80 members who had signed then. We told them, in addition, to tell others that if they wanted to come along it would be good. I knew all the rules of the government and what to do when Dalai Lama came. We did the welcome reception or denshu at Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང] [about 40 km from Lhasa where the big statue of the Buddha is carved on a rock (Tib. ལྷ་ཆེན་པོ)]. There were probably about 100 people in our group. All of us were important people. I knew all the customs about how to do the welcome [Tib. ཕེབས་བསུ་ཞུ་སྒོ]. I told everyone that they had to wear Tibetan clothes and that they had to ride horses, not mules. Before we reached Nyetang, the advance guard of the Dalai Lama was coming. We thought if we keep on riding like this we might encounter him at the narrow passage [Tib. འཕྲང]. I stopped them and we got off our horses and took the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves, and knew the Dalai Lama would be coming soon. I said that we would do 3 prostrations and then offer the khata, which would be put back on us by the drönyerchemmo or the tsendrön, who would be coming ahead of the Dalai Lama. Before the Dalai Lama came, we would mount up and ride at the front of the Dalai Lama with the khata on our necks. We might have [had] time to go down, but we thought we might have encountered him in some strange place. So we were waiting by the big statue on the rock with scarves in hand. At that time the procession was simple. Then Ngawang Rigdrol, a tsendrön, came and asked, "What are you people doing here?" I said, "We are the People's Association," and he put the scarves on us. At this time they had stopped the Dalai Lama's group. I said we should now go in advance of the Dalai Lama. Others [in the] group said no, the road was bad. Then the Dalai Lama told the drönyerchemmo and he said, "The representatives of the people should go ahead of the Gusung Regiment." Then I told them "Didn't I tell you this. Now let's go." So we went ahead in the front of the procession. Some of us rode mules, but they were not to be blamed if they didn't have horses. Some of them fell down on the sand when they galloped their horses. starthere The drönyerchemmo was very glad at that time. Then the Dalai Lama rested a while at Gang [Tib. སྒང]. There was a denshu from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Tratsang over there with tents. We, the members of the People's Association, also went into the tents and we had a merry time [Tib. སྐལ་བ་བཟང་པོ]. Then at Tshakur Linga [Tib. ཚ་ཁུར་གླིང་ག] there was a denshu by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> Tratsang, which was located near the Trisam [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟམ] Bridge. The Dalai Lama was to stay there three nights. Preparations had been made. There was a ceremony there and they had brought a throne for the Dalai Lama. There, the Dalai Lama said that the representatives of the People's Association should come to him. We went and sat with the kudraks, and drank tea and ate droma dresi. Then they said that the Dalai Lama was staying there for three days. I asked Phala what we should do. He said "Your coming today is very good. You should return to Lhasa." He said that on such and such day and time, you [we] should come and be part of the Great Procession, the Chibgyur Chemmo [Tib. ཆིབས་སྒྱུར་ཆེན་མོ], where even the Muslims and the Nepalese also attended. We were told that the members of the People's Association should come in line. We thanked him. We had brought our own food, so we ate it and left. They made the notice for attending the procession and then the day after that, we came at the time they said and were part of the procession from the Trisam Bridge. This time there were 300 of us. I thought the more that came, the better. I told Phala that there were many people with [me] and asked what we should do. He said, "It is okay. It is fine. You can all go ahead of the Dalai Lama. I will withdraw some others from the possession." We were all dressed in our finest. All the Lhasa people were waiting at Gyetse Luding loication. The Lhasa people were very glad that the People's Association was leading the way. Then there was a ceremony there. Then Phala said, "We are having a big ceremony in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and you, the representatives of the People's Association, can come to this." At Norbulinga, not all the representatives could get an audience with the Dalai Lama, but some did. We did it in the living quarters [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང]. After this we had real enthusiasm [Tib. སྙིང་སྟོབས] to develop the People's Association. From then on we built up the organization.   

**Q:**  At that time, did Lhatsun [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུན] Labrang Chandzö have a different organization?   

**A:**  No. we were all the same. He was there, as was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>'s Chandzö Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས]. We were all together. There were some monks in Sera Mey who kind of separated, but later we got together. Internally we had good relations with the monks, and also with the regiments later on.   

**Q:**  Then what did you do? You didn't do much with politics, you just went for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a> right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was all politics.   

**Q:**  When did you actually start the political movement?   

**A:**  It was started on politics. I had thought that if they gave the Chinese Zhang Jingwu such a welcome, we should do more for the Dalai Lama's welcome. If we didn't do this, our strength would lessen.   

**Q:**  Was this action related to the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  No, that was later in 1954. By that time, we had already started the Association. There was trouble when the Panchen Lama returned [in 1952] about the height of the throne. It was the time for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> to take revenge. So they were not to be blamed. Gyabing Chöndze was a member of the household of Gyabing Dzasa, who was the main person in charge when the Tibetan government governed Tashilhunpo. Although I didn't have any power, the reason why people liked Alo Chöndze was because I acted as the volunteer bodyguard of the Dalai Lama when he went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and when it was said that the Chinese were coming. I was a big trader comparatively. I left trade and took my young men accompanying me [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག] and then bought guns and bullets. There were five people with me who became the bodyguards of the Dalai Lama. And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> Lo Nyendra [Tib. བློ་སྙན་གྲགས] took eleven people with him to accompany the Dalai Lama. I was with the Dalai Lama. Another reason people said I was good was because I had disseminated the last testament of the 13th Dalai Lama and I was the one who mobilized the people, saying that the [13th] Dalai Lama had said that. Because of this, tens of thousands of thoughtful people believed in me, and we could start the organization called the Tibetan People's Association. After that, there was the Cultural Revolution and it was eliminated, but recently the Tibetan People's Association has risen up. I have been continuously working on that from the beginning until now. This is the reason why I came to the U.S and I can shoot the arrow to the target. It will become that even [when] Alo Chöndze is dead, people will say that he has done that movement. Since the three jewels and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> are precious, I could accomplish my work, and could meet you people and get the auspicious chance to talk about it. Otherwise, I was warned many times and my mother-in-law would tell me, "Please, now stay still." People were saying something to discourage me, but I used to tell them, "I have justice on my side. I want to see them to the end and find my way." That is why I returned to Tibet. To tell you the truth, the Dalai Lama also destroyed it [the People's Association] by issuing the bugdam. Then we started Chushigandru. In Dharamsala, they also destroyed us many times and challenged us. But the main thing is inside Tibet. If we could revive it in there, you will see it in my third book. My son and I returned to Tibet in 1983. So please, you people do well in writing in English or Tibetan. I can tell you what documents I have. I have left my last will saying that even when I die, the story will come in English since it has been included in the Tibetan Research Center. Now there are only 14-15 members of the People's Association still alive in Tibet and abroad.   

**Q:**  Who else is there in Tibet? Is Bisula [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ལགས] there?   

**A:**  Yes, he is there. Poor thing! I have a list of the names of the other people.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama came back to Lhasa, what happened?   

**A:**  After that, the Chinese became more and more powerful.   

**Q:**  No, this was in 1951, right? In 1952, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were demoted. At that time, what work did you do?   

**A:**  In the general history books and the Chinese written books, it says something like we were led by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and we also followed the order of the sitsab. But it was not at all like that. Sitsab Lobsang Tashi was my mahjong partner when we were young. Later, he went to China and worked in the [Tibetan Representative] Bureau [Tib. དོན་གཅོད]. We had relations and were friends before that. I also heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was good, but we didn't have any relations. As for what they had told the Chinese on behalf of the government, they had indeed said that. They should have said that because it was their duty. If they didn't say that, they could not accomplish their work because they were the sitsab of Tibet. We were the masses and the people, and many trustworthy <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a>, were not with us. They weren't involved in the People's Association. We rose up voluntarily and did whatever we could. Later on, at the desperate situation, we made some relations with the important people like Drönyerchemmo and Surkhang, and told them we did this and that work, and they should do this and that. Otherwise, we didn't have connections with the sitsab. After that, when everything was finished, the sitsab were demoted, but this was not done because of the People's Association.   

**Q:**  The way the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> opposed [the Chinese] and scolded the Chinese, and the way the People's Association opposed and criticized the Chinese, was kind of the same. Therefore, when people looked from outside, they thought that you had connections, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  It was because you were holding the same kind of goal, like not agreeing to have the Tibetan soldiers converted into the People's Liberation Army, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Regarding the soldiers, in principle, the way of talking was the same. The People's Association was opposing the Chinese through peaceful means if possible. If not, we had decided to oppose militarily. We had kept the relations inside us, and we didn't do anything with the kudraks. We shouted the slogans to disagree with the 17-Point Agreement. Just after the Dalai Lama arrived in Lhasa, Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] sponsored and requested that the Dalai Lama give an initiation on Avalokitesvara in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and we were there among the people receiving the initiation. Some Chinese photographers came and I, myself, came out openly and told the Chinese, "Hey! Come down [Tib. ཀས་མར་ཤོག]." At that point, the government polices were there and they were implying that I was doing something [wrong]. Guja Kumbela [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར་ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས] was my sponsor and we had good relations. When we were sitting at the front of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a>, Kumbela stood up and told us, "Don't do that. Go inside and receive the teaching from the window of Yabshi." Then I stood up by myself and did that. Once when the Chinese gave the first lecture in the People's Square [Tib. མི་དམངས་ཐང་ཆེན], they hung the photos of Mao Zedong and those people. When they told the people to raise their hands, I verbally fought with them.   

**Q:**  Did you get prepared to shout before that?   

**A:**  No, we didn't.   

**Q:**  You just shouted as soon as you got there and you were angry, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this happened naturally. As long as someone didn't like the Chinese, they would be angry and they supported Alo Chöndze.   

**Q:**  I read in a book that people surrounded Zhang Jingwu's house. Did it really happen like that?   

**A:**  It didn't happen like surrounding the house. These are just made up stories [Tib. སྒྲུང] [untrue]. But, the People's Association went there a little bit and did some things. Once when Lhabju, Bumtang Trunyi and I went to the Chinese, on that day, all the representatives and the masses also surrounded the house. It was planned that if chaos [Tib. ཟིང] would happen, we would rise up.   

**Q:**  This was long after that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Before that, I don't have anything to tell you about surrounding Zhang Jingwu's house.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the People's Association have a name?   

**A:**  Yes, we had the name.   

**Q:**  I heard about the name, People's Association of the Western and Central Tibet People's Association [Tib. སྟོད་བོད], and the Western, Central and Kham People's Association [Tib. དབུས་གཙང་ཁམས་གསུམ].   

**A:**  It was called, "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, Phari, Tö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གྲོ་ཕག་སྟོད་གཙང]."   

**Q:**  When did this come out?   

**A:**  This name came from the representatives that came from those places to Lhasa, and they had discussed and elected the representatives and were sent to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  This was probably around 1953. I don't remember the dates. There were two kinds of associations. The first one was in 1952 when the People's Association submitted the petition.   

**Q:**  It was those people, like Karkhang [Tib. དཀར་ཁང] Chöndze, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. This was banned and they were told that they were not allowed to do that. After that, it rose up again. Was that the later one where the people from Tö joined?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. The previous one was called the Lhasa People's Association, where only the people in Lhasa joined the association. Later the representatives from Tö, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> came, and this was the real Tibetan People's Association.   

**Q:**  When did the name of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> Khamsum [Tib. དབུས་གཙང་ཁམས་གསུམ] come out?   

**A:**  This was the three provinces, the Chökasum.   

**Q:**  What name did you use in the petition submitted to Zhang Jingwu?   

**A:**  We used the Tibetan People's Association.   

**Q:**  You didn't use the name <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> Khamsum, right?   

**A:**  Yes. If you say <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> Khamsum, there are no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> in it. If we say Tibetan, the Amdo are also included.   

**Q:**  When they sent representatives from Tö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, they didn't know the situation in Lhasa, so how did they send them?   

**A:**  The Tibetan People's Association incited them and distributed the documents everywhere. At that time we didn't have newspapers and those things, so we set up clerks and wrote letters.   

**Q:**  What did you write in the letters? Give me an example.   

**A:**  In the beginning, when we named the Tibetan People's Association, it was started from the religious point and said it was for the long life of the Dalai Lama that we set up the People's Association. So representatives came from all places and made donations for reviving Buddhism, etc. We didn't write about Tibetan independence right away. It was also inconvenient to write that. Internally, we secretly sent people to the local places and made announcements saying that we had done that. I went to the southern Kham area in person and the work was only done secretly. In Lhasa, we also said that we were going to worship the deities [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ], and held meetings and made secret relations with the important people. And we had appointed leaders. For example, if you were a representative of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, we told them to announce to the people in their area that he [the representative] would take responsibility of the Ütsang. Among the Ütsang there were separate groups. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, Phari, Tö, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and the Ü were separate. Inside the Ü, there was Lhoka, and the Lhasa area had two parts. There were people in charge of the Lhasa and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> area. The Kongpo representatives would also take responsibility of the Kongpo area. In the past, I had already taken back the documents from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and those people. I think it would be useful if they [the private office of the Dalai Lama] would give us the documents because we have become democratic. I was requesting that it would be best if they handed them to me. If not, I requested [the office] to hand them over to the people's deputies. In the documents before 1956, there are all of the secrets, plans and the discussions of the Tibetan People's Association. Some of the letters [were] taken by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Gyetong and could not be opened. So how could we have known what was written in that?   

**Q:**  How did you make the announcement to the local places to send the representatives to Lhasa?   

**A:**  The main thing is that I printed many copies of the last testament of the 13th Dalai Lama and distributed them. All the people who had enthusiasm thought that great things were said in that [last testament].   

**Q:**  Why would your group call representatives from other places?   

**A:**  If we didn't have those representatives, and if our strength became small and remained only with the people in Lhasa, it would not have been effective. If all the Tibetans could have solidarity, it would have a great effect and we could rise up whenever we want to. In the last testament [of the Dalai Lama], it was said, "If all people would have solidarity, you don't need to be afraid, and everything will be good and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> Deity will help you." If we would announce about Tibetan independence, they [Chinese] would do us in [Tib. ཏག་ཏག་བཟོ], so we used a tactful manner before doing any work.   

**Q:**  Did you tell the people to send the representatives to Lhasa at a specific time or to just sign the pledge?   

**A:**  Yes. It was mainly said about reviving Buddhism and the long life for the Dalai Lama, and told them to gather in Lhasa. It was done in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> and Tö in this way. I went to the south and north of Kham in person. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Gyetong and Bisu were there. We secretly met and talked with the important people among the masses who were also regarded by the Chinese. They had to work for the Chinese and they had strength and power. For example, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye was very powerful in Markham, and he also had rebelled against the Tibetan government. The Chinese were saying that he was great. Internally, we had secret relations, and he gave me good advice and told us to do this and that, and that he would support us. Another one was the famous Jagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་སྟོབས་ལྡན], who was the older brother of Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ]. Although he got a high rank position from the Chinese, he was holding the same ideas as the People's Association to oppose the Chinese through peaceful and military means.   

**Q:**  This was later on in 1954, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that the same time when Tö sent representatives?   

**A:**  Tö was before that. Before that we had sent many documents to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and Kham, but I met the persons later on in Litang, like Aba Alo, who is the father of the [lama] Jayan Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ], and Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན]. We talked secretly that we were doing this and that, and made recommendations for each other to do this and that. [And that] in the future, if we would get the chance, we should rise up together. Until then, we were not to be blamed because the Chinese were doing that [suppressing] to us. And we distributed the general documents to the masses and the monasteries. When I went to Tibet in 1983, I also printed the last testament again and took it with me. I also took my second book. By doing this I could make the people's minds unite together. I am not sure what the foreigners were thinking about the religion, but as far as the Tibetans were concerned, no matter whether we had food to eat or not, there were a lot of people who would think about religion very well. When they get united through religion, it is like the struggle between the Muslims [and non-Muslims], where they are going to behead their opponents. If we could do it well in this regard, the Dalai Lama said that it would be good and that the association would have the strength and enthusiasm. And there were people saying that I would really die for this.   

**Q:**  This was for making the people join the Association, but what was your future thinking? There were tens of thousands of Chinese soldiers, and even if you had 100-1,000 people, what was your goal?   

**A:**  The goal was to gain Tibetan independence.   

**Q:**  Yes, but what method would you take to gain independence?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth, we will say [now] that Tibet is independent. I don't have any education on this and don't know [whether or not] Tibet is independent. I just don't like the Communist Chinese and I just thought that Tibet was indeed independent. I never thought that Tibet was not independent. And the main goal was religion because communists don't have religion. So religion would be eliminated. If there would be no religion, then there would be nothing, even if you gain independence. At that time, we were not striving for independence very much because we believed that Tibet was indeed independent. It was like the Chinese came and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> lost the independence. But, in the meantime, there were some changes to the situation after I arrived in Australia. I went back to China in 1983 and came back in 1988. To tell you internally, in between that, there were some changes. Last time I petitioned the UNO, and it was good that I was acknowledged. Just merely saying that they had received the petition was also okay because this is the foundation of construction. If the foundation was not good, how could we do the construction? I won a great victory in getting acknowledgement from the UNO Secretary's Office. I also wrote a petition to the American government and the British government for supporting us in the UNO, and I received letters from the American government and the British government, but these were not so good [Tib. སྤམ་པོ] . However, it was good that they made some explanations, saying that we should try internally to make an agreement with the Chinese. There was nothing on independence. When I sent petitions to many other countries, they didn't even acknowledge them. England mainly had a great relationship with Tibet from the early times, and when I look at what England and the US said, I thought there was not much [hope]. I didn't receive acknowledgement until after seven months. But, I am content with whatever I got. I did whatever I could, but if it didn't work out, then that's it. We didn't get anything when we petitioned the UNO in the 1950s. Recently I petitioned the UNO and I thought whatever I got was alright. If I would be alive for 200-300 years, something might happen, but now it is the time for me to leave.   

**Q:**  I think that in the beginning, you might have thought that if you would submit a petition to the Chinese and the Tibetan government, you might get some advantage [Tib. ཁེ་བཟང] [then] and later, under the desperate situation you had to fight, is that correct?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  Did you think that if you would gather many people it would have an influence?   

**A:**  Yes. For example, we didn't have the ability to make connections with foreign countries, so we just submitted the petition to the Tibetan government. Since the Tibetan government had signed the 17-Point Agreement, we told the Tibetan government to talk with the Chinese. The main thing was that we were opposing the Tibet Autonomous Region saying that we didn't want the Tibet Autonomous Region because we already had many offices on religion and politics.   

**Q:**  What was the reason of not wanting the Tibet Autonomous Region? The Dalai Lama said that it was good, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Before that, the Dalai Lama had said when he gave the teaching, "The Tibet Autonomous Region is good, but some people have different opinions." We thought of the Chinese going back and keeping the friendly relations as before. But if we didn't talk about independence, our masses only talked about independence. So we were making movements on independence, but we didn't have enough strength to handle the Chinese. I am not sure whether there is any proof or not, but I heard that the Chinese themselves granted independence for Outer Mongolian.   

**Q:**  This is true.   

**A:**  Therefore, I thought that even we [might] have to do that with the Chinese. In the future, the Chinese might grant Tibetan independence and nobody would have to strive for it because they had the custom of granting that.   

**Q:**  How did you know that the Chinese granted independence for Outer Mongolia?   

**A:**  We just heard through the talk of the elderly. Otherwise, we didn't have any documents.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you listen to the radio?   

**A:**  I was the first who had a radio in Tibet, because when the Guomindang and Phüntso Wangye were put down, I got a radio and I was listening to the Indian songs.   

**Q:**  Did you think that since the Chinese had granted independence for Outer Mongolia, you would also get it?   

**A:**  Yes. We discussed that internally and we thought that in case we couldn't achieve independence from outside, we would contact the Chinese themselves, like the proverb, "Even [if] the fire would burn, you have to contact it [Tib. མེས་འཚིགས་མེར་གཏུགས]." It would be more effective and easy because they had granted Outer Mongolia independence. All of the Mongolians are the same, but Inner Mongolia is still under the Chinese. But independence was granted at the time of the Chinese Emperors, not the Communists. Anyway, since the matter is similar, the Chinese have the right to grant Tibetan independence. It would be useless to get tired in contacting the UNO because they couldn't handle the Chinese. But, if we said something right away which was so weak [Tib. སླ་པོ], the people might have thought that we didn't have anything but to contact the Chinese. That's how it was and I don't have an education and didn't see anything in the document. I just heard from the elderly.   

**Q:**  Before you people submitted the petition, did you discuss this with the lay officials and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  Not at all. We didn't tell anyone.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Only the representatives of the People's Association gathered in Songra House.   

**Q:**  How many people worked on writing the petition?   

**A:**  When the big gatherings were going on to burn incense and doing religious activities, when the middle size meeting was held, we would tell them about half of what we were going to do. When the Standing Committee [Tib. རྒྱུན་ལས] was held, we would make plans and make the petitions. Then we would hold the middle meeting and tell them what we were doing and ask about their opinion. The majority of the members in the middle meeting would support us. There was no one saying no. The points were said verbally and people who knew writing would write them down and make the petition. It was decided for three of us to go ahead [to give this] and six of them should come tomorrow. We were able to get 72 people to come. We looked at what the first People's Association had done and when they fell down, we rose up as a substitute for them. When we would fall down, the Tibetan People's Association would be set up. This was how we did political things.   

**Q:**  How many were there who were trustworthy and knew all the internal things? Was it about 5-6-7-10?   

**A:**  We had more than that. There were probably two people from each big group or district. For example, when we say Lhasa, it was called under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ལས་ཁུངས] The Tibetan government office responsible for law and order in Shöl (tib. ཞོལ), the walled town beneath the Potala, as well as for 18 districts (tib. རྫོང) around Lhasa. It handled mainly criminal cases including murder.">Shöl legung</a>, which includes Chushul and Metrogongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར], but the people living in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> are a different one and they have the different local areas [Tib. ས་ཁུལ]. Then when we go downwards, Nangkartse and Paldi are also a different group.   

**Q:**  Did you make the petition before you went for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a> or after you came back to Lhasa?   

**A:**  There was one document we had to make after arriving in Lhasa and we made it after we came to Lhasa. This was also in Dharamsala. Before we came to Lhasa, we sent the documents to the local areas, and this was done before that in 1951. We also sent letters to Kham and Amdo. The latter one was different. The plan for the revolt in 1959 was made before I left at the end of 1955 and in 1956. All of the plans, the letters and the maps are with the documents left with the Dalai Lama. As for the root of the 1959 uprising, only 2-3 people knew, and I asked Surkhang and Shasur in the Kashag in Dharamsala, "How did the 1959 uprising take place?" Shasur said, "I swear by the three jewels, it was by the grace of the three jewels and the protector deities, that the people gathered at once in the morning. It was very well done." But the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsen la and someone else knew how the people gathered that morning. Otherwise, no one knew that. Our office of the People's Association was held in my Songra House. I was a Tibetan engineer, and I drew the maps of the places in Lhasa, like of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street. There were some representatives living on Barkor Street, like Jamphünla [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་ཕུན་ཚོགས], the father of the Phündonla [Tib. ཕུན་དོན་ལ]. I said, "We have to make a map of Lhasa, and if something happens in the future, we should let the people know immediately. So we have to do an experiment." Usually, the messages were delivered by the low level workers in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག] The main administrative office in Lhasa that was headed by the &quot;mayor&quot; or mipön.">Nangtsesha</a> who deliver the messages called Korchagpa. We would tell them to deliver the messages to the house managers in Lhasa and there were also the chiefs of the beggars called Ragyaba, an untouchable [group of] people who took the corpses to the sky burial site. They were our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and we would also tell them to deliver messages. Later, we said that we should send actual members [of the People's Association] to deliver the messages to Lhasa, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> and the three great monasteries. All the representatives were not allowed to go to one's homes right away and had to come to Songra. And you had to meet everybody and deliver the messages to the landlords [Tib. ཁང་བདག], or the substitutes of the landlords or the house managers. We sent those representatives and in 40 minutes they delivered the messages in the Lhasa area and they came back to Songra. But Shöl is a little further away, so they came back a little later. Anyway, in one hour, all the people in Lhasa knew that. And the people who went to the three great monasteries came back later on. Anyway, we made it so that the people could gather at one time. For example, Jamphünla and I, and 3-4 people, delivered messages in the Barkor. Three of us also met and assigned the places where each had to deliver the messages. Jamphünla was the one who delivered the messages around Surkhang House.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  This was in 1955.   

**Q:**  This was after the Dalai Lama came back, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Tibet Autonomous Region had become more powerful and the Dalai Lama also said that it was good.   

**Q:**  This was before the People's Association was eliminated, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This must be from the 7th to the 9th month, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in some areas in Lhasa City, in the areas like Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག], there were more Khambas and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> representatives, and there were fewer in other places. So we adjusted and made it an equal number. We made the documents and the maps and sent them. After the representatives came back, we said, "The Chinese will definitely invite the Dalai Lama to China. Last year it was okay. But, now if they invite the Dalai Lama, we will not let him leave Norbulinga." At that time, the airport in the north in Dam [Tib. འདམ] was made. We said that Sera and Drepung should block the way in Tölung. This was internally decided. At that time, we didn't sign the pledge, we just took the oath. Who would look at the pledge? I am not sure whether they have that in foreign countries, and we just swore that we would do that.   

**Q:**  In your book, you wrote about the swearing water [Tib. མནའ་ཆུ]. What is that?   

**A:**  In the beginning, we would put water in the offering bowl and offer it to the three jewels. And the best would be the water offering in front of the Buddha statue in the Jokhang. We would take that water and all of us drank this water and swore. This is the swearing water.   

**Q:**  Was this a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> custom?   

**A:**  It was a real Tibetan religious custom.   

**Q:**  Did they do that in the monasteries?   

**A:**  I don't think so. But there might have been a little bit when they held the meetings. When the Sera Monastery opposed the Tibetan government, they might have drank the swearing water. The so-called "signature" also came into being later on. We didn't have that in the early times.   

