# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0004.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Alo Chöndze [Tib. ཨ་ལོ་ཆོས་མཛད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Alo Chöndze  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1919  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Alo Chöndze was a major leader of the People’s Association in Tibet and India in the 1950s. In this interview, he discusses the start of the Dokham Chushigandru, including its first meeting, who was there and the location of future meetings. He briefly discusses the beginning of the People’s Association and discusses how internally, the Chushigandru was still considered the People’s Association. He talks about designing various buildings, such as his house in Lhasa, and how he later sold it to the Chinese and deposited the money in a bank in India. He also talks about wanting to invite the Dalai Lama for the tshogpa, asking him to give a teaching, and other people’s opinion on this. Finally, he discusses the return of the Panchen Lama and the Panchen Lama’s meeting with the Dalai Lama.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0004_08/H_0004_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  So the opening [ceremony] of the Dokham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was done in the hall of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Nyingpa, but we didn't make any announcements outside. We just said at the meeting, "Today we have started the Chushigandru," and counted how many people there were from the different groups like Chantreng, et cetera. Later, just before the Mönlam, we met more frequently.   

**Q:**  Was that after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ལྔ་མཆོད] The holiday commemorating the death of Tsongkapa. It falls on the 25th of the 10th Tibetan lunar month.">Ganden Ngamjö</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, then we met in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Nyingpa during the New Year and burned incense. We were just doing religious activities like burning incense. And then we sent letters everywhere to the representatives that had returned to their homelands saying that we had set up the Dokham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, so they had to do their things there and we should have solidarity [Tib. ཆིག་སྒྲིལ]. Then the secret was revealed and we started the Chushigandru, and our gatherings also increased.   

**Q:**  Did you hold a kind of opening ceremony?   

**A:**  Not really a ceremony, this was what I just told you, that we met in Atru Lama's house. Then we came down and burned incense in the courtyard, and we prayed and asked the protective deity to do [us] a favor. This was the opening.   

**Q:**  How many people were there on the first day?   

**A:**  There were probably about 70-80 people. These were the representatives from Kham and Ütsang.   

**Q:**  There were many Chinese spies. Didn't they know that?   

**A:**  Of course, they did. Although we didn't meet in my house, it was very conspicuous, and the Chinese would have had less suspicion because it was a temple. So we went on a pilgrimage to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> and then came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Nyingpa, and there were men and women burning incense. Usually, we didn't [all] go there at one time. On opening day, we gathered together and we prayed. After the next day, we didn't have to meet every day, we just held discussions and sent the letters.   

**Q:**  You mostly communicated through letters, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and there were people going purposefully. Although we didn't have postage like here, we used horses and on this we spent, the common money. Just before the 12th month, we gathered together and went to the river bank, and it became conspicuous and all of the people knew about that. And it was then said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had started. Most of the meetings were held by Andrutsang because he had a good house and sometimes, in some other bigger houses. Jamatsang also had a big house. Internally, it was the Tibetan People's Association and outwardly, it was the Chushigandru. As for the movement, since the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> didn't do well, we planned to oppose the Chinese again by giving them the opposing letters. We mainly had a good connection with Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, especially, with Kham. So we also sent them some signals [Tib. བརྡ]. When the Dalai Lama went to China, I was among the welcome reception, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. གདན་ཞུ, 2. གཏན་ཞུ] 1. Literally an invitation, but it also referred to the formal welcoming delegation that traditionally went to greet an important figure coming (or returning)to Lhasa. These welcome delegations generally consisted of monk and lay government officials and representatives of Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries. 2. A long-life ceremony.">denshu</a>, with Amdo Gyetong and the representative from Tö called Gelong. Trijang Rimpoche and Gyawa Karmapa were among the retinue of the Dalai Lama. When the Dalai Lama came up and when we went down to Yangon and came up, Karmapa had to go to Chantreng as the representative of the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama came along the main road. Now, this is again a story in Litang, you might think that I am only talking about Litang. When we went down, we contacted and talked with the Pön and the important personnel in the monasteries and among the people. We had the document of the People's Association when we met for the first time, on which our names were written and we made the pledge.   

**Q:**  Was that when Jayan Dawa was there?   

**A:**  Yes, and there was also the name list of the newly joined people. We had the names of the Khambas and also the people from Tö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, but the names of the people who were staying in Lhasa were not in that name list. So we took these documents with us when we went to Kham and told the important [people] about the People's Association and said that when we got a chance, we had to do that.   

**Q:**  In 1951, a People's Association was set up where Lhatsun [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུན] Labrang Chandzö was there, and it was eliminated in 1952. You started again in 1953, the People's Association, right?   

**A:**  No. In the beginning, when we started the People's Association, we were together. And there was Lhatsun Labrang Chandzö et cetera. In the beginning, when we started that, we discussed in the park and met a few times. We needed somebody to come out. We couldn't just say that we met, right? So when he discussed who would come out. By that time, I had the thought of coming out, but I said that I would not come out because it was inconvenient to come out. Ngabö Drönyer was also there. I was the sponsor of the teachings of the Dalai Lama. There were three different kinds of religious activities. One was the initiation [Tib. དབང], one was the transmission [Tib. ལུང], and the third was the explanation [Tib. ཁྲིད]. The Dalai Lama gave his first initiation in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> Dunggar [Tib. དུང་དཀར] Monastery. This was an initiation of the Avalokitesvara sponsored by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a>. The second initiation was as soon as he arrived in Lhasa. Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> asked him for a transmission in Norbulinga. As I told you yesterday, I also went to receive the transmission and the Chinese took photos, and I stood up among the tens of thousands of people and told the Chinese, "Hey! You come down." The Chinese took many photos. At that time, I wasn't married to this son's mother. I had built a new house after the Communists came. All of the people were scared saying that the Communists had come, and nobody built new houses. At that time, Denyertsang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> was living in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> and he renovated a house there, and I was building a house after cleaning out a cesspool. I was a trader and I wanted to build a house, though nobody wanted to build a house. It was said that the Communists were coming and the carpenters and the construction workers didn't have jobs. So I bought a space near the Dongtsesur [Tib. གདོང་རྩེ་ཟུར] where there were cesspools. I got it cheap and I cleaned the cesspool and built a house. I made a great profit from that because there were many carpenters and masons to be hired. The Lhasa people were saying there were two crazy people. "One is Alo Chöndze who is building a house in Lhasa, and the other is Denyertsang who is building a house in Shöl." The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> nicknamed me "crazy." At that time, I had a personal thought that the Communists, the enemies of religion, had come. So the situation in Tibet would not be good. It would be better to go to India. At that time, the meeting of the People's Association was started. The reason why [I] didn't come out was [because] I thought that if the Communists wanted to eat [annex Tibet], they would eat all of the things. Nothing would happen to me alone. It is like the saying, "If the whole country would be flooded, it would be impossible to leave a single dry stone [Tib. ལུང་པ་ཆུས་འཇིག་ན་རྡོ་ལེབ་སྐམ་པོ]." So I thought of selling my house and going to India. I used to be a monk, but I had committed some negativities, like doing things to my teacher. So I thought of staying in India and reading some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> (scriptures), and I had some money to spend. In the meanwhile, the Chinese started to buy houses in Lhasa. The first house was sold by Kündeling. This was one of many houses that they had. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> also sold their house, which used to belong to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>, and they bought the third or the fourth house. Then I thought of selling my house. At that time, Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and they were the main [ones] in charge in the Chinese Trade Office [Tib. ཚོང་དོན་ལས་ཁུངས]. I told them that I would sell my house if they wanted it. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s house was also sold. This was where Zhang Jingwu stayed in the beginning. After that, I talked with the Chinese about selling my house and I also told my tenants that I was going to sell the house. Then the Chinese came to see the house and this was the house where the Youth League and Women's Association [meetings] were held. That area was called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> Para [Tib. པ་ར]. Later, the Chinese liked the house and I charged a high price like I did to the Nepalese because they had money and I was a trader. I charged something like 70,000 dotse. Anyway, it was an extremely high price for then. At that time, the Chinese didn't get houses to buy. Kündeling didn't have any choice but to sell because it was a big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and had many houses. Sandutsang was a big family and Trimön also had a reason to sell the house. The Chinese said, "The house is good, but the price is high. We also bought a house from Kündeling." This house used to belong to Tasetshang [Tib. ?] and later it belonged to Kündeling. The Chinese said, "Kündeling's house is big and Trimön's House is three stories and very big. But, they didn't charge so much." They sold their houses very cheap. Of course, it would not be okay to give them the house for free, right? The Chinese were using this as an example and said, "Your house is not that big, but the price is many times higher than those houses. So please discount [reduce] the price." I said, "I don't care whether you will buy the house or not. If you give me a good price, I will sell it. If not, I am not selling it. I am living in this house and I have rented it out to my tenants. I can't discount the price like those people did. The reason is that Kündeling is a very famous and rich labrang in Tibet. This house was just for them to throw away, and this was like a present to you. Trimön was a kalön and also very rich. Sandutsang was a famous trader. I am a small trader. What I have is the house and I am living on the rent from the house. If you compare me with him, there is no way to talk about the business." Then I stood up and said, "I will not sell the house. You can get many people selling their houses." I was also agitated. Later, Liushar came and said, "This is a business, so you should discount [decrease the price] a little bit." Before selling the house, I went to Dombor to whom I would seek advice [from]. I told him, "The Chinese said this and I charged this price." He said, "Don't you feel ashamed? How can you say that? How could they buy such a house for this price? You are different from the others. This is true." Then I said I was not going to give them any discount. After a few days, I was called again and fortunately, I got that price. .   

**Q:**  Was it 70,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>?   

**A:**  Oh! It was 7,000 dotse. The actual amount is written in my book. And then I really became a person with a lot of money. I thought that rather than staying under the Communist barbarians, it would be good to go to Kalimpong. At that time, there was a custom to invite the Dalai Lama to the Mönlam called tshogpe [Tib. ཚོག་ཕེབས]. You might have heard about [how] Jamatsang and the big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> also did that. Before going to Kalimpong, I also thought of inviting the Dalai Lama for the tshogpeb and I went on a pilgrimage to all of the three great monasteries. And I left endowments and gave alms. Regarding the tshogpe, I also asked <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> about the procedures. He said, "Inviting [the Dalai Lama] for the tshogpe is a very complicated thing and it takes time. You have to report three times before one year and you have to prepare a lot of things. Rather than doing this, it would be better to ask the Dalai Lama for a teaching." Then I went to Drönyerchemmo and asked him about the tshogpeb. Anyway, I had to ask for this. He said, "It is very good to invite the Dalai Lama for the tshogpe, although it is very complicated. The main thing is you have to prepare the things for the expenditures." The next year was when the Panchen Lama was to come to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  This was in 1952, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So I left aside the tshogpe. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> also told me to leave it saying, "It is not a purely religious activity because it is for the fame of being the sponsor of the Dalai Lama. Until now, nobody has asked for him to give the religious explanation. You will become the first one to do this. But you have to report beforehand." At that time, the People's Association was set up, but I didn't feel happy about staying in Tibet and thought it would be best to go to India. I had the feeling that people could not implement the 13th Dalai Lama's testament. So the Communists, the enemies of the religion, had already arrived and the Tibetan government could not handle them. We, the People's Association, met and talked, but we didn't have weapons to make war. Since I was a mantra prayer, it would be good to keep quiet and not to trade [??]. My only son was in Homes School in Kalimpong in 1948. Before leaving, I went walking to make offerings to the monasteries because it was not right to ride a horse when doing that. So I went on a good pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  When you sold the house, did they pay you [in] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they paid so much <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> that later I still found some dayan boxes in my warehouse. At that time, the traders and people didn't like them to pay in dayan and people didn't like it when they paid dayan. This was because you have to hire people to carry boxes of dayan, which contain 1,000 dayan each, and it was not convenient to pay and receive dayan. The best was the Tibetan 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> notes and 10 sang notes. Another thing was that we had to check whether the dayan was fake or not. The fake ones had a smaller proportion of silver. The good ones were pure silver. At that time, the rate of the dayan was 15 sang. Then the Tibetan government issued an edict saying that the rate of dayan should be 15 sang, but that most of the traders counted 13-14 sang for one dayan, though some people might have counted 15 sang. Since the Chinese had only dayan coins, there was no choice but to accept it. I had my former wife who is not this son's mother [with me]. The two of us went to India and I deposited the money in the bank, and I found that it would be enough for my children and also for my grandchildren.   

**Q:**  You mean the bank in Lhasa or India?   

**A:**  In India.   

**Q:**  How did you exchange the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> there?   

**A:**  At that time, the Chinese were exchanging a lot of dayan. In Lhasa, the Chinese had set up the new bank in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a>'s house. The small traders who went with horses and mules did the trade with only 1,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>, and were told by the Chinese to take 10,000 dotse as capital and to do the trade for them. Then I went to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> Trunyichemmo, who was my sponsor. I sought his advice and I told him, "Now, the Communists have arrived and we have started the People's Association, but it seems that we will not be able to be effective. Maybe it would be better to go abroad. Before leaving, I am going on a pilgrimage and to make offerings as much as I can. I am going to invite the Dalai Lama for the tshogpe." Dombor said, "The responsibility of inviting the Dalai Lama for the tshogpe has a very heavy responsibility because you have to be responsible for the life and safety of the Dalai Lama during that time, and you need a lot of money to get prepared. Rather than doing this, if you ask the Dalai Lama to give a teaching, you can just spend whatever amount on that occasion and there is no danger because you can do that in a short time." Then I went to meet the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> and told him what I told Dombor. In those days, not only with religion, but people needed three things; food, clothing, and fame [Tib. ལྟོ་གོས་གཏམ་གསུམ]. And if one could invite the Dalai Lama for the tshogpe, he would become very famous. In the past, only the Ling, like Kündeling and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚེ་མཆོག་གླིང] 1.The name of the incarnate lama who had served as regent. 2. The monastery of that lama in Lhasa.">Tsecholing</a>, could invite [the Dalai Lama] for the tshogpe. Later, there were just a few private people. If I could invite the Dalai Lama for the tshogpe, I would become very famous. So I wanted to do that. But Dombor gave me sincere advice. When I told Drönyerchemmo about what Dombor said, he said, "As Dombor said, there is a lot of work to do for the tshogpe. You can't just invite the Dalai Lama. When the Mönlam is held, you should invite him. So it takes time. It is good to do the tshogpe, but it takes time. So it would be good to ask him to give a teaching." The Dalai Lama should become famous through religion, although he is for both the religion and the politics [of Tibet]. If he would become famous for religion, all of the monks and the lay people of Tibet, and the foreigners like Bhutan, Sikkim, Nepal, and Ladakh, will know that his fame in religion is great. If I were to invite him for the tshogpe, I would have to wait for the Mönlam. So I asked for a teaching in the fourth Tibetan month. It was like what Dombor said, "If you ask for the first religious explanation, you will have a great name because the people will be very glad and [will] have faith in the Dalai Lama. Both you and the Dalai Lama will become famous." At that time, the time of the Panchen Lama's return from China to Tibet was settled, but when he was to come, [I] was not sure and we didn't know he was coming in the fourth month. So it was said that if we could arrange the Dalai Lama's teaching, we could show off to the Panchen Lama the situation that many people gathered to receive teachings from the Dalai Lama, and how people respected him and they had faith in him. It was also meant to show this to the Chinese. Now we were going into politics. But, I wanted to leave soon for India for private purposes. We decided to receive the teaching and we were told to come to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</a> [secretariat] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> with a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf and make the first report on what kind of teaching we wanted to ask for. After some time, we had to make the second report and then ae third report.   

**Q:**  Where did you have to make the first report?   

**A:**  At the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> ga, where the tsendrön were. We mainly had to make the report to the Drönyerchemmo. At that time, I asked for the explanation of the religious text called Yönden Shigyurma [Tib. ལམ་རིམ་ཡོན་ཏན་བཞི་གྱུར་མ] of the "Graded Path" Lamrim. On the next day, I went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</a> to make the report. I knew Drönyerchemmo from childhood. I was born on the first floor of Phala's house. We used to play together, and later I played mahjong with him also. We were always very close. Otherwise, it was very difficult to talk with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a>. But, my destiny was to get together with the high ranking officials. I asked for the teaching to be held in the Shugtri Lingka [Tib. བཞུགས་ཁྲི་གླིང་ག], located at the front of the Potala in which there was a remnant of the throne of the Dalai Lama Kelsang Gyatso [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ], where he gave teachings. Phala said okay. The Panchen Lama was coming to Lhasa at the end of the third month. So I asked for the Dalai Lama's teaching to be given on the 13th-14th-15th of the 4th month. The 15th of the 4th month was the biggest Buddhist festival, the Sagadawa. The normal custom of Sagadawa [was] where all of the people, regardless of [if they were] monks or lay people, would [go] for circumambulations around Lhasa City, and the Kashag, the Tibetan government <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, and all of the people would go to the Naga Temple called the Dzongyab Lukhang [Tib. རྫོང་རྒྱབ་ཀླུ་ཁང], located behind the Potala. The temple is located in the middle of a pond. It was not a day for giving teachings, but I asked for the teaching and they said okay. At the end of 3rd month or the start of 4th month, the Panchen Lama came to Lhasa. He came with a lot of Chinese soldiers,and his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> officials. In the past, the Tibetan government had suppressed Tashilhunpo. In order to take revenge, they came in an imposing manner while the Tibetan government was there trembling with fear [laughter]. There was a little trouble, primarily over the height of the Dalai Lama's and the Panchen Lama's thrones. Later, when the Panchen Lama came to meet the Dalai Lama, it was in a room in the east of the Potala. At that time, internally, there was serious dislike. But since the Chinese were there, they didn't have any choice but to do that. I was there also. When he came to the Potala, there were many Chinese soldiers with guns staying near the place where the Trungja morning tea was held. After the official meeting of the two, the Panchen Lama went into the Dalai Lama's hall [Tib. ཚོམ་ཆེན] at the east side of the Potala where there were two big portraits of the 13th and the 14th Dalai Lama, which were drawn by the famous artist <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Champa [Tib. བྱམས་པ]. I offered these two portraits before I left Lhasa. Later, I heard that the Dalai Lama kept the portraits in his bedroom, but [they] were kept in that room. After their meeting, they went to a smaller room and had a simple meal together. This was their first meeting and the Panchen Lama stayed on the top [floor] of the Jokhang. At that time, the drönyerchemmo and I were angry with him [Panchen], and when we looked from the windows of the Potala, we were saying, "Look, that guy is going over there." We could only say this from behind. . After a few days, Phala said, "Regarding having the teaching in the Shugtri Lingka, it is confirmed. But, you go down there to have a look. It is very big." It was a big plain with trees around where the Tibet Autonomous Region [meeting] was held. Then he said, "Even if all the Lhasa people and the monks of the three great monasteries would come, the place would still seem empty because it is too big." I was an uneducated Tibetan engineer building houses. I also helped Sitsab Lama make the design when building a small house when he was a tsendrön. Later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> came to check because the two of them were the teacher and the pupil, and [he] said it was well done. I also worked on building the Dalai Lama's palace in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and I built many monasteries. My son is also very good at making house designs. So I went and measured off by footsteps, and it really was enormous. The next day, I went to meet Phala and told him that Shugtri Lingka was really big. Phala then said, "We should have it at Norbulinga. It is smaller and people will all be crowded in, so everyone will say the people mobbed in to hear the Dalai Lama's teaching," and I agreed. What Phala meant in principle was that it would seem that there was just a small number of people receiving the teaching in Shugtri Lingka. So the teaching was set for the 13th, 14th and 15th of the fourth month. The final day was the 15th. The day for the final meeting of the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama was also set for the 15th in Norbulinga. I suggested that the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama meet first, and that all of the people wait until the Panchen Lama left. Then after their meeting, the Dalai Lama would do his last day of the teachings.   

**Q:**  Did the teaching first start and then stop for the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama's meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. First, the Panchen Lama would come in the temple in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and take a rest. Then he would go wherever the Dalai Lama was staying, like the palace Jensel Phodrang, or wherever. One special thing that happened was that on that day, there was a peacock tent called [Tib. རྨ་བྱ་ཆེན་མོ] pitched on the stage and the best throne was set out, and the thankas were displayed in the back with all of the best ones and the famous ones. And on the left and right, the two tutors were there. It was the most elaborate one [tent]. Yesterday, I talked with Mrs. Yuthok and she said, "Normally, the peacock tent is only pitched in the field called Döguthang [Tib. འདོད་རྒུ་ཐང] at the east side of Lhasa for the reception when the reincarnation would come." But the reason for using the peacock tent then was to show off to the Panchen Lama and the Chinese. From my side, I made the offering at the beginning and the end to the Dalai Lama. Normally, when we received the teaching, in the beginning, we would offer the three Mandala offerings, which consisted of a statue to tand for the body, a scripture to stand for the teachings, and a stupa to stand for the mind [Tib. བན་དྲལ་སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས]. For this, we had to pay money, not give the actual items. Some people would also offer real silver to make the mandala. Among the documents of the People's Association left in the [Dalia Lama's] private office, there was the document from when I asked the Dalai Lama for the teaching, in which it was written what I offered at the beginning and at the end. It was written in gold, red and black ink, and the wording should be in the religious style. Later, the People's Association also performed the Tenshug [long life ritual] many times and we wrote the same documents, and they just copied my document and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a>ed the names. At that time, I went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> and asked him to write the documents for the offerings. Although he was a great scholar, it was hard for him to write and it was also hard for Drönyerchemmo. So Dombor suggested that I go with a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and ask Tshatru Rimpoche to write it because he was a great scholar. Then when I went to meet him and he accepted to write it, he said it would take some time. And the letters in gold and red ink should be written by another person called Epa [Tib. ཨེ་པ] who usually wrote the printed script. Please request for the Private Office to give me back my document. I am also going to submit a petition to the Dalai Lama and I will give you a copy. If we get those documents, you will find that tens of thousands of people sacrificed their lives and how they worked. At that time, I had my former wife, but at that time, I met my second wife, who was the daughter of Tshatru Rimpoche, and there were some younger daughters who were pretty. While I was going to meet Rimpoche la, [I] also met them. So I was going there even though I didn't need to, and the daughters told me to sit and they served tea. Like this, we had the relations [formed a relationship] and we got married in 1954, [not] long after I came back from India to Lhasa. As I mentioned above, normally we could just pay money for the mandala, but at that time, I made a mandala from pure gold which the Dalai Lama could use. And I put a diamond on top of the mandala and the small vase was made from coral by the Mongolian Dharma. The mandala was wrapped in satin and this was ornamented with gold and diamonds. I also made a wooden case for the mandala. I requested the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> for permission to have the golden mandala set made by the government's chief goldsmith craftsman. One regretful thing was that we didn't have photographs then. Taring might have taken some photos. On the 15th, all people gathered and Norbulinga was full of people. The Panchen Lama came and saw how the teaching was going, and the people gathered there. We could show off very well and the Tibetan government had a good reputation. I also got a good reputation. It was like the proverb, "You will get beaten along with bad people and you will get tea and chang along with good people [Tib. ངན་པའི་ཞོར་ལ་རྒྱུགས་རྡུང། བཟང་པོའི་ཞོར་ལ་ཇ་ཆང]." While showing off to the Panchen Lama, I had a great opportunity. The Dalai Lama met the Panchen Lama and I heard that the meeting went well. The drönyerchemmo was also a little bit glad when he saw the friendly way of talking between the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama in the Dalai Lama's room, although something happened between the Tibetan government's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and the Chinese. On that day, he said, "Panchen Rimpoche," whereas usually he would just say Panchen. Then the Panchen Lama left. As for the leaders of the People's Association, we were saying something against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, but not [against] all of the people. After the Panchen Lama, we received the teachings and it was over around 1-3 p.m. On that day I brought 500 people. Not exactly 500. It was like 511 people to carry the offerings to express my gratitude. The offerings were gold, silver, copper, satin, silk, tea, butter, rice, and fruits. In the three great monasteries, I belonged to Washü [Tib. ཝ་ཤུལ] Mitsen, Jabra [Tib. བྱ་ཁྲ] Khamtsen and Dora [Tib.?] Khamtsen. So I called the monks from these Khamtsen. In addition to that, there were Litang people who were not there, but it was not enough, so I called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Triukhampa [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར]. They were very glad to come. The reason they were glad was that the Dalai Lama's throne was on the side with the kudrak, and on the other side, were the lamas, the abbots, the monks of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང] The monastery of the Dalai Lama located in the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Namgye Tratsang</a> and then the people. So these 500 people could sit in the front. Then people came to offer khata to me. That's why all the people liked me. Although I didn't have power and money, I had prepared to go to India and I was almost ready to leave. At that time, I had rented a house called Thönsur [Tib. ཐོན་ཟུར] after I sold my house. This was just after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was demoted. I knew him. One day, he said that he wanted to come and he came to my home. He said, "I have a request for you. I am going to sell the house on Lhasa Street and I am going to build a house in the park. Please design my house." Though I was busy, I accepted. Kapshöba was very tactful and said, "Now, we are the same person. I am a kalön no more. Please help me." I had made two golden pendants and I also had another one. He asked me what kind of statue, stupas and scriptures I had, and asked me where my chapel was. I told him that I had already offered those things to the monasteries. I offered the things to the Dalai Lama which are in the Potala now. Even now I am offering a lot of things to the American Library. After that, we had a good relationship and I also went to his house. Then I left for India.   

**Q:**  What goods did you take to India?   

**A:**  I didn't take goods, I took money. My plan was to buy kerosine, plows, and soap. The transport price was more than the cost of the items. The Chinese were buying a lot. They gave Lhasa traders money and told them to buy this and that from India. So the transportation fee had increased many times. So I bought some of the Indian goods like iron, which was cheap in Lhasa, and rented a storeroom in the bottom of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>'s house, and I stored a lot of goods there and left them there. If we did that here, it was illegal. Then I asked my servants to inform me of the prices in Lhasa, and I would let them know when they should sell them [the goods] and left the keys in Lhasa. I went through Nathula. At that time, the Communists were very suspicious of me and I was also afraid of what would happen on the way. Fortunately, when they reached the Nathula, I burned incense and hoisted a prayer flag and prayed not to have to go to the Communists. And I was very glad to reach India. Then I stayed in Kalimpong reading scriptures.   

**Q:**  Why did he buy the things in Lhasa and store them?   

**A:**  He was waiting for the prices to go up I think.   

