# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0045.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1909  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Mrs. Taring [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང] was a famous Tibetan aristocrat married to Taring Dzasa. In this interview, she speaks about how Tsarong protected the 13th Dalai Lama when he went to India, and about the discussions Tsarong had with the 13th Dalai Lama about expelling the Chinese. She also discusses how Tsarong was sent back to Tibet to expel the Chinese and how he later became the Magji Kalön. Mrs. Taring also tells how her father and brother were killed in Lhasa. She tells how Dasang Dramdrü came to the Tsarong family as a magpa. She also explains how Tsarong was demoted from magji to kalön to dzasa. She also discusses Lungshar and Künphel and the Drepung Loseling incident when the monks mobbed Norbulinga in protest. Mrs. Taring also explains in detail how Tsarong set up the gold coin office and how he sent people to Kolcutta to learn how to print paper currency.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0045_04/H_0045_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Could you tell us anything about what he [Tsarong] was thinking looking back in history up to when the Dalai Lama died?   

**A:**  The 13th Dalai Lama, Thubden Gyatso [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱ་མཚོ], came back from India probably in 1912. Before he came back, at that time, there was Tsarong Dasang Dramdrü [Tib. ཚ་རོང་ཟླ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ] who was said to be the favorite [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ] of the Dalai Lama. Dasang Dramdrü used to tell me that he was very young, about 22-23 years old, when he made the great accomplishment in Jagsam by stopping the Chinese. When he stayed in Darjeeling, the Dalai Lama told him that he should learn English and it was planned to send him to school. His clothes and all the necessities were arranged for. However, at that time, because of the karmic merits of the Tibetans, the civil war took place in China. In the beginning, it was expected to take several years, but after three years the situation in Tibet was changed because of the civil war in China and the Chinese who were in Lhasa were unable to afford to manage their expenditures so it became easy to expel the Chinese. So when they were in India, they crafted a military strategy for expelling the Chinese. After that, Dasang Dramdrü came to Lhasa through Shigatse to help many people like the kalön lama and Trimön who were then in Lhasa expelling the Chinese. When it was decided to expel the Chinese, he was vested with the great power to make strategies. At that time, Dasang Dramdrü hadn't come to the Tsarong family. After that, he was appointed as the General Regimental Commander [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མདའ་དཔོན] and sent back to Lhasa for recruiting soldiers and expelling the Chinese. At that time, the main leader in Lhasa was the Regent Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] with my late father Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག་རྒྱལ་པོ] as his assistant. Before they laid down the military strategy for expelling the Chinese, the Dalai Lama might have told my father to come to Darjeeling. However, when he was thinking about going to Darjeeling, the Regent told him not to go, saying, "Now you are assisting me on guarding the Potala Palace and the Jokhang. If you go, I couldn't bear the responsibility." Like this, when he was staying in Lhasa and when they were making the strategy for expelling the Chinese, it was said that we should not only expel the Chinese, we should also destroy all the pro-Chinese people. When the people in power were saying that, probably, they wanted to get rid of my late father. They said that Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo was pro-Chinese and was very close to the Chinese. So we should get rid of him. Later, we came to know that Kalön Shatra [Tib. བཀའ་བློན] probably were holding a kind of grudge towards my later father, though my father didn't hold any kind of grudge to him. Maybe they were holding a grudge and maybe they might have thought that when the Dalai Lama came back, . At that time, I was young and I just heard these from people when I asked people about that many times after I grew up. At that time, Dasang Dramdrü knew that those people were going to destroy Kalön Tsarong, but he definitely didn't have any thought of becoming the bridegroom of Tsarong. However, I heard he was very close to Kalön Tsarong. In 1908, when they had to return some areas like Yadong and those places to the British, my late father was sent to India to do this. At that time, my father came back from India it was year 1908. My father had a very good memory and he was kind extraordinary. He was also skillful in photography. At that time, Dasang Dramdrü used to come to my father frequently and ask about taking photos. At that time, my older brother Gandrön Samdru Tsering [Tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན་བསམ་གྲུབ་ཚེ་རིང], who was then 25 years old, became a friend of Dasang Dramdrü. I heard that at that time, when they were planning about killing Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo and his son, some other people like Dasang Dramdrü told them not to do that. Then they said, "if Dasang Dramdrü would let us do what we want to do, there is no problem. In case he would stop us from killing Tsarong father and son, it would be better to kill Dasang Dramdrü also." Therefore, he [Dasang Dramdrü] didn't have anything he could do and they brought Tsarong father and the son to a park and they were killed.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Lungshar close to you people?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that he was close to us. At that time, Lungshar was an ordinary lay official and he was very good in playing the Hoching [instrument] and my late father was very fond of music. So after the Kashag office was closed for the day, my brother played the flute and Lungshar played the Hoching and they were enjoying the music. At that time, Lungshar was poor and my late father treated him nicely. Even though they were not friendly in terms of policy, they had good social relations. Later, I asked David McDonald in Dehradun, and [I said] "You people know about this clearly. How did they kill my father?" This person had a close relation with the Dalai Lama when he and the Dalai Lama was living here. He said, "Oh! I cant' tell about this. Just leave it. That was a terrible event." This shows that at that time, the Prime Ministers [Tib. སྲིད་བློན] living in here [in India] had a great kind of [Tibetan unclear--Tib. 'di byed po yod pa 'dra] towards my father. Like this, my father and his son were killed. They also killed 4-5 people with them. After that, the Dalai Lama came back and when he was staying in Chöngor Yangtze [Tib. ཆོས་འཁོར་ཡངས་རྩེ], the Chinese were already expelled. At that time, Dasang Dramdrü was about 22-23 years old, but he went to the Dalai Lama. At that time, among the personal attendants [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར], there was the reincarnated Lama of Sera Monastery called Tshatru Rimpoche [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] or Tshawa Tritrul [Tib. ཚ་བ་ཁྲི་སྤྲུལ]. He was very intelligence and he was one of the scholars of Tibet. The Dalai Lama liked him very much and he sent him to Japan when the Dalai Lama was staying in India. My older brother's wife Rinzin Chödrön [Tib. རིག་འཛིན་ཆོས་སྒྲོན] was a [Tashilhunpo aristocrat] from the Delerabten [Tib. bde legs rab btran] family and Tshatru Rimpoche was the son of Dele Rabten. When my brother was killed and his wife was widowed, the Dalai Lama was living in Chöngor Yangtze and Tshatru Rimpoche was also there. At that time, in the past, my older brother used to go to visit Tshatru Rimpoche. So Tshatru Rimpoche got the idea and told Dasang Dramdrü that there was a widow in the Tsarong family, and he thought it would be good for him to go to the Tsarong family as a magpa. My sister-in-law, the widow, was pretty and was also about 21-22 years old. She was about 3 years younger than Dasang Dramdrü. So Tshatru Rimpoche talked between them and arranged for him to come to the Tsarong family. He also reported that to the Dalai Lama. At that time, the Dalai Lama treated Dasang Dramdrü very well as he was courageous in making war. There was another household who also wanted to take him as a magpa. Finally Dasang Dramdrü came to the Tsarong family as a magpa for Rinzin Chödrön, the widow of the late Tsarong Samdru Tsering. At that time, Dasang Dramdrü was young and I am not sure about his political matters. Anyway, he was powerful then. At that time, he had a third rank dzasa title and he was called the Dzasa Commander [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཛ་སག]. He was not a kalön then. After 1-2 years, he was appointed as the Minister Dzasa Commander, Kalön Magji Dzasa [Tib. བཀའ་བློན་དམག་སྤྱི་ཛ་སག].   

**Q:**  At that time, was he about 28 years old?   

**A:**  No, not yet. I heard that he was 24 when he became a Shape. My father was about 45 years old when he was killed and my mother was also quite young. She had two daughters, me and my younger sister. After that, the older servants of the Tsarong said, "The widow of the Tsarong Samdru Tsering was also from outside and we can't refuse Dasang Dramdrü to be the magpa but both of them are from outside. So Dasang Dramdrü should take a second wife [who was a Tsarong by blood]. He can choose from among Pema Drokar [Tib. པད་མ་སྒྲོལ་དཀར], the mother of the Tsarong Dündül Namgyal [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] or Norbu Yudron [Tib. ནོར་བུ་གྱུ་སྒྲོན], the daughter of Delerabten." Finally, it was decided that Dasang Dramdrü should take two wives my and he took Pema Drokar as his second wife. At that time, the family of the widow Rinzin Chödrön tried to stop him from taking a second wife, but Rinzin Chödrön was a very moral woman who didn't have any objections for Dasang Dramdrü to take a second wife. Just after he came to Tsarong, he became the kalön Magji Dzasa. After he became the kalön, he was thinking that the Chinese and also the British had invaded Tibet. So he had the idea of developing the military. At one time, the Dalai Lama was fond of him and Tsarong became so powerful that whatever he said was accepted by the other [kalön] and he made relations with foreign countries. So he worked very powerfully [Tib. ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ] and he set up the post office [Tib. སྦྲག་ཁང] and the telegraph office [Tib. ཏར་ཁང] and also said that the taxes should be exempted and schools should be set up and the schools were set up.   

**Q:**  Did they set up the post office first?   

**A:**  Yes, it was set up at first and the telegraph office was set up later on when I was 12-13 years old. Before that, the postmen had to run when they would deliver letters. When he worked powerfully, the Dalai Lama also liked him. So the great monasteries, Sera, Drepung and Ganden, said that Tsarong is making a lot of relations with foreign countries and he is making many new customs and setting up schools. If he does that, .   

**Q:**  Where did they set up the school?   

**A:**  The school was set up in Gyantse. This was long after that. At that time, he was saying powerfully that we should improve the military and set up schools. Many soldiers were sent to the schools in Lhasa and many military officers were sent to Ceylon and he bought guns and ammunition [from the foreign countries]. He was thinking of making the country rich. He also set up the new police. He also took the example of the military drills from the British and the Russians. He also called a man from Japan to teach the military drills. Finally, he became close to the British and sent many students to school in England.   

**Q:**  Did the military changes come first or second?   

**A:**  The military changes came the first. As for other offices established from the time of the Prime Minister Desi Sangye Gyatso [Tib. སྡེ་སྲིད་སངས་རྒྱས་རྒྱ་མཚོ], Tsarong didn't make any changes to them and he just left them as before. The way of establishing offices like the Agriculture Department [Tib. སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུངས] and the Financial Department [Tib. རྩིས་ཁང] was very good. He was just saying that we should improve the military and the schools and emphasized setting up English schools. At that time, the Dalai Lama liked him very much so the Dalai Lama approved whatever Dasang Dramdrü would report to him and the situation got improved.   

**Q:**  Did he suggest to send the students to England?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether he suggested this or not. Probably, that was the idea of the Dalai Lama himself. It was at the time when Tsarong was powerful that they sent Lungshar to take the students to England. At that time Tsarong was in the Kashag and the Kashag might have made the policy. I can't say that it was done by him alone, but he might have said this is very important. At that time, Mondrong [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོང], Kyidu [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྦུག], Ringang [Tib. རིན་སྒང] and Gogkhara [Tib. སྒོག་མཁར་བ] were sent to England. I think if they could have graduated from school, Tsarong's idea would have been realized. One of them was to learn mining and one of them was to learn military and one of them was to learn the telegraph and one of them was to learn electricity. Mondrong was to learn mining. Kyidu was to learn telegraph, Gogkhara was to learn military and the Ringang was to learn electricity. They didn't have much time to learn and they had to come back after three years. After they came back, Gogkhara was a great boy who learnt about the military. He was about 22-23 years old, but he was poisoned and died here.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  It was in 1918-19. When I count the years I went to the school, it should be something like that.   

**Q:**  Did he change anything saying that the old army is no good and it should be changed in this way or that way?   

**A:**  I am familiar with him. Usually, he would never say that. But he would just improve or develop the things that should be developed or improved like improving the infantry, the cavalry or the canon regiment and sending people abroad. He would never say that the old ones are not good. His idea was to join the world of the developed country who were standing on their own feet, and we should merge together Bhutan and Sikkim because we are same and we should develop relations. He was a person who never did anything bad to other people. He didn't trust people when people told him that Lungshar didn't like him and those things. He was not a person who didn't have faith towards religion, but many people were saying, "if Tsarong set up schools and the regiments and called foreign people and set up the soldiers, anyway .   

**Q:**  Why did they set up the school in Gyantse?   

**A:**  It was being careful not to set it up in the capital. At that time, there were very good teachers and there were not many students. One of them was the late Surkhang Depön Lhawang Tobgye [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་མདའ་དཔོན་ལྷ་དབང་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] and there was Delerabten [Tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] and Derge Theiji [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་ཐའི་ཇི]. At that time, when he [Tsarong] developed the military and schools, there were some suspicions in the three great monasteries - Sera, Drepung and Ganden - that the religion would decline [Tib. ཉམས་ཆག]. Therefore, in 1927, Tsarong asked for a vacation to go for a pilgrimage in India although he was making those developments. At that time, he was the Commander-in-Chief of Tibet [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་དམག་སྤྱི་ཆེ་བ]. While he went to India for a pilgrimage, they reported to the Dalai Lama, "If Tsarong would make the military so strong, in the future, he would become more powerful than the Dalai Lama. He had the thought of becoming the Commander of Tibet, so if we don't destroy him, it would be not good for the Dalai Lama yourself." At that time, the Dalai Lama also said, "Tsarong had made a great accomplishment. When we ran away to India, he saved my life and the lives of the ministers, so he would never do anything bad. Temporarily, we should remove his post of commander-in-chief." When Tsarong came back from India and arrived at Chushul, I was also there. At that time, he received a letter from the Kashag saying, "Now, because the great country of Tibet is in a peaceful and calm situation, so there is no need for both the Commander-in Chief and the Junior Commander. Therefore, you don't need to continue to fill the position of Commander-in-Chief. The Junior Commander Drumba [Tib. bhrum pa] can take the position. However, you should come to the Kashag as usual and take the position of the kalön as before." This was in the year 1925.   

**Q:**  At that time, who else was demoted?   

**A:**  Before Tsarong arrived in Lhasa, Dingja Dorje Gyentsen [Tib. ལྡིང་བྱ་རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] and Depön Sambo Tashi Paldrag [Tib. མདའ་དཔོན་བསམ་ཕོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་གྲགས], Doring Theiji [Tib. རྡོ་རིང་ཐའི་ཇི], Trendong [Tib. འཕྲེང་གདོང] and Salungwa [Tib. ས་ལུང་བ] were demoted. Altogether, 5-6 depön were demoted.   

**Q:**  Among them, there was Surkhang Surpa [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་ཟུར་པ], right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time he was the Regimental Commander of the Dalai Lama's Bodyguard Regiment. When Tsarong came back, the military officers were not there.   

**Q:**  How did they come back as enemies and people didn't like him [not clear] and manipulated the situation? How did that happen? How did they make that major decision?   

**A:**  At that time, it was up to the Dalai Lama whatever decision he wanted to make and the people had to make the Dalai Lama think about [what they desire.] Therefore, Drumpa or Lungshar told the Dalai Lama while Tsarong was absent that, "If Tsarong seized the military power too strongly, it won't be good for the Dalai Lama." I just heard about this though I didn't see it. I heard that Drumpa Dzasa cried and told the Dalai Lama like this. I just told you truly what I have heard, but I can't say that it was true. At that time, I saw Tsarong reading the letter [from the Kashag] and he didn't feel much angry. He just rolled up the letter and we kept the letter very carefully not to damage the seal.   

**Q:**  I heard that at that time they held a meeting and signed a pledge and some people didn't sign the pledge and ran away. How did that happen? I heard that there was some kind of trouble in 1923-24 having the representative of the army in the meeting; something like that.   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about the meeting because I was just 14-15 years old then. When Tsarong went to India for the pilgrimage, his younger wife Pema Drokar [Tib. པད་མ་སྒྲོལ་དཀར] was with him. His older wife, the mother of my brother Samdru Tsering [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཚེ་རིང] was in Lhasa. She had a very good memory and she knew all about those things and told me about those events. They couldn't do anything more than that because at that time the Dalai Lama had the power and I heard that he told them they were not allowed to treat Tsarong very badly. When Tsarong came back from India, people were wondering what would happen. Tsarong bought a lot of gifts from India for the Dalai Lama and some of the gifts were so precious that a person had to carry them on his back. After he arrived Lhasa, he was granted an audience with the Dalai Lama at 10 a. m. and he brought the gifts with him and he took his lay official bodyguard [Tib. གཟིམ་འགག] and his steward [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར] and his servants. The audience was granted until 10 p.m. By that time, his family members were kind of scared because he had been demoted from his position of commander-in-chief, but the conversation between the Dalai Lama and Tsarong was not finished till 10 p.m. On that day, the dinner for the bodyguard, the steward and the servants was also served from the kitchen of the Dalai Lama. I heard that the servants came back very happy saying, "As for the relations between the Dalai Lama and Tsarong, the Dalai Lama treated Tsarong nicely just as before and they were talking all the day long, though people were talking about [the demotion]."   

**Q:**  Did you hear anything about what they talked other?   

**A:**  I was just a child and didn't know what conversation was about. Maybe my older sister might have something to tell you. Since then, Tsarong just went to the Kashag and didn't take any other posts.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for Tsarong going to India for a pilgrimage?   

**A:**  Who knows! At that time in 1925 I was in the school. I think he went to India for trading because he was fond of doing trade and he bought pearls and diamonds for his two wives. The British Government also treated him very nicely and he was the guest of the British Government. When he went to Kolcutta, he met the British Commander and the officer called Wise [unclear] and they came to see him at the airport. Similarly, when he went to Nepal, he was treated very nicely. He went there as the Commander-in-cheif of Tibet, so they treated him accordingly and fired 21 canons. It was the time of King . Previously, when the Shotön [Tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] Tibetan opera was performed in Norbulinga, Tsarong never stayed in the tent where the other kalön were seated. He used to stay with the Dalai Lama. After he came back from India, he just controlled himself and stayed with the other kalön. After that, Tsarong was also demoted from his position of kalön. When I asked how was he demoted from being kalön, they said, "They put forward a very old case and told him that he executed people without seeking instructions from the Dalai Lama. Probably, he might have executed some people. I also remember that two people were executed. They also said that Tsarong stationed guards in his house. At that time, Tsarong said, "Yes, I executed some people. If I asked the Dalai Lama about executing people, he wouldn't give the order for the execution because he was the political and temporal leader. This was my job as the commander-in-chief, so I executed them." When they asked him, "Why did you station guards at your home? He said, "Yes, I stationed guards in my house. This was not for safeguarding me and my house. This was for the dignity of the state, because I was the commander-in-chief and the commanders-in-chief of other countries also have guards in their house. The state should station guards for me because I have the right to be guarded." I heard at that time, the Dalai Lama said, "I won't treat you badly and demote you from the status of a government official and won't untie your head knot [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག] and take off your uniform boots. You should be a [the third rank] dzasa and be seated at the head of all the lay dzasa and below the monk dzasa. Since then he had the rank of dzasa until his death, and he also worked in the mint. At the time of the regent Reting [Tib. རྭ་སྒྲེང], he was told to be a kalön again, but he refused because he was old. The people who hated Tsarong wanted to treat him badly, but the Dalai Lama treated Tsarong well and didn't let them do it. Otherwise, Tsarong's property would have been confiscated. I heard this from my sister-in-law Rinzin Chödrön who was very attentive to politics.   

**Q:**  When Lungshar did the tax investigation on newly opened fields [Tib. འབབ་ཞིབ], was Tsarong involved in that?   

**A:**  Probably not. At that time, he was already demoted.   

**Q:**    

**A:**  I think Lungshar was alone when he did the babshi tax investigation.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Lungshar a tsipön or what?   

**A:**  He also became a kind of advisor of the commander-in chief [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་འཚོ་འཛིན] in 1923.   

**Q:**  Before Lungshar became the advisor of the commander-in chief, he did the tax investigation and the Tashilhunpo event took place. At that time, probably, Tsarong was the commander-in-chief.   

**A:**  Yes, he was.   

**Q:**  He was the commander-in-chief, but Tsarong didn't treat them [Tashilhunpo] badly, right?   

**A:**  Yes. By that time, Lungshar was gradually becoming the favorite of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I heard from some people that at the time of Tsarong, it was said that the military was held too strongly. But later changes came slowly and they established the Drongdrag Regiment. Do you think the people were talking about the military becoming too strong and such stuff?   

**A:**  According to my point of view, there wasn't anything like this because the people were not educated, so they would not discuss much about government policy. People just trusted the Tibetan Government and they didn't have the knowledge to be attentive [to policy]. They just had thoughts for the moment and they didn't have any thought of making changes. At that time, Lungshar said that we need to have some changes. He was a knowledgeable person. But, whoever wanted to make some changes, they were unable to do it. So in the end we lost to the Chinese. I heard that there were some British, Russian or Chinese spies in the three great monasteries and they instigated [the monks] saying that if there would be development for the state, the monastic estates would be demolished. I think definitely there were such spies. Since Buddhism is very precious in Tibet, when they said that if there would be new customs, this would harm that, people didn't have anything to say and couldn't make changes. Even the school was unable to be set up.   

**Q:**  How did that [incident with] Drepung Loseling happen?   

**A:**  It was about collecting 1 tramka as a tax on animals by calculating the number of animal ears [Tib. ཨམ་ཏྲམ].   

**Q:**  Did they collect that tax?   

**A:**  Who knows! Probably, it was about collecting that tax. This was in 1923, when I was in Horkhang House in Lhasa. When I came to Lhasa for a vacation, I didn't have any clear idea about that. At that time, Tsarong was the commander-in-chief. At that time, I heard that all the monks of Drepung came to Norbulinga and the commander-in-chief was called. Probably the monks were opposed to the matter of collecting the tax on animal ears. Later, the monks were punished and some of the monks were handed over to the aristocratic households [as prisoners] and they were shackled for a while.   

**Q:**  Do you know this in detail? How the monks came up and how did they talk about that?   

**A:**  At that time, I was just 12-13 years old. So I don't know in detail. I heard that the main leader of the monks was called Tsaja la.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to India, something happened, right?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about that.   

**Q:**  In what month did the event of the ear tax happen?   

**A:**  Probably it was in summer, in March or the end of February. At that time, I was in school in Darjeeling. We had to reach the school before the 15th of March.   

**Q:**  Did Tsarong leave the party right away?   

**A:**  Yes, he left. There were our family members at the party and he left with his bodyguards.   

**Q:**  Did he stay there overnight?   

**A:**  The event took place in the afternoon and we knew about the next day.   

**Q:**  Were there any shooting of guns in Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't. We were just playing.   

**Q:**  At that time, the monasteries were unhappy about the events and all the trouble started right after this, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did Tsarong do for the economy?   

**A:**  He established the gold coin office [Tib. གསེར་ཏྲམ་ལས་ཁུངས] and the mint and he also stored a lot of gold. This was in 1918-19-20. At that time, the gold was brought from India by the Nepalese. They stored the gold in the storeroom (Tib. Tse Namse Gandzö [རྩེ་རྣམ་སྲས་གན་མཛོད]) in the Potala. Tsarong also sent Künphel la and the Chagnang Lhawang la [Tib. ལྷ་དབང་ལགས] to print the notes.   

**Q:**  Where did he send them?   

**A:**  They were sent to Calcutta to learn the skill of printing notes. When Tsarong was the commander-in-chief, the gold coin office was already set up. It was said that if we have to print notes, we should have gold and silver stored up. This was the gold and silver which was later brought to India.   

**Q:**  Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] said that he had brought the gold from America.   

**A:**  Probably, he had brought a little bit of gold from America. There was a large amount of gold stored at that time.   

**Q:**  Later, the Trapchi Legung [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་ལས་ཁུངས] mint was set up at the time of Tsarong, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you know how much gold and silver were stored at that time?   

**A:**  I don't know. At that time, the gold that the Nepalese brought was the gold biscuits with the letter National bank on it and there were also gold bricks. It was in 1918-19-20 when the gold coin office was set up.   

**Q:**  Was it set up in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. It was the time when Tsarong was the commander-in-chief and kalön. The gold coin office was set up in Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག].   

**Q:**  How did they stop that office?   

**A:**  At that time, the woolen material weaving factory [Tib. འཐག་ཁང] was also set up.   

**Q:**  At that time, the gold was bought from the Nepalese, right?   

**A:**  I heard that most of the gold was brought by the Nepalese and some other people also brought gold.   

**Q:**  Before Tsarong worked to print the paper money, weren't there any notes?   

**A:**  Probably, there were notes before that, but it was improved and Tsarong bought the printing mould [Tib. པར་གཞི] from India. At that time, Trekhang Khenjung [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང་མཁན་ཆུང] also went to India for that.   

**Q:**  What kind of notes did they have before that?   

**A:**  There was a 50 tranka note. [the note for 7 sang and 5 sho]. At the time of Tsarong, the note of 100 sang was printed. This was printed with the printing mould brought from Calcutta.   

**Q:**  Who was sent to Calcutta to learn how to print paper money?   

**A:**  Trekhang Thubden Kunkyen [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཀུན་མཁྱེན] and the Chagnang Lhawang La were sent there. I remember that when Tsarong went to India in 1921, the two of them told us that they had already learned how to print the notes. They learned it at the Thapasing Company in Calcutta. At that time, they had to buy the oils and the inks for printing the notes from India.   

**Q:**  Probably, before that, there weren't many notes, right?   

**A:**  There were. I had seen the old notes before that. After that, there were the notes of 100 sang and 25 sang and the small notes for 5 sang. Before that, there was a note of 25 sang and a note of 50 tranka. After the new printing machine was brought, they printed the new notes. I heard that if the state has to print paper notes, they should have a gold stored in the Namse Gandzö [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གན་མཛོད] storeroom in the Potala. Otherwise, the state would become like a beggar and it would become different among the world countries.   

**Q:**  When the Drongdrag Regiment was set up, what did the people say in Lhasa?   

**A:**  All the soldiers in the Drongdrag Regiment were recruited from the well-to-do families. At that time, people didn't like that at all. However, it was said that it was very important for the state and there were not many soldiers in that regiment. It was regarded as a very important for the state, but people didn't like it because all the better children were selected to be soldiers. Therefore, the parents and children all didn't like it.   

**Q:**  There were many well-to-do households and about 1,000 soldiers recruited. So how did they select the soldiers? Were the sons of the aristocrats included in that?   

**A:**  Yes, they were if they were not serving the government and if they were not monks. The government also told the dzong and estates to send soldiers. Many of them asked for an exemption to Kujar Künphel La. Some of them got the exemption and some of them didn't. Like this, they recruited 1,000 soldiers and there were also the sons of the aristocrats. Ngabö Sawangchemmo was also in the Drongdrag and then he got the post of jupön, gyagpön and rupön in the regiment.   

**Q:**  Was that the idea of Künphel la or what?   

**A:**  Probably it was his idea and he might have consulted with Lungshar. But he didn't consult with Tsarong, though Tsarong and Künphel were not that unfriendly. He used to come to Tsarong [House].   

**Q:**  Did Künphel have any title in the government?   

**A:**  Didn't he have a title as the personal attendant?   

**Q:**  It was said that he had the title of Ta Lama but it was also said that he didn't.   

**A:**  Actually, the Dalai Lama liked him and he became the personal attendant and got a kind of limitless position [power][Tib. ཚད་ལས་འདས་པ]. I don't remember whether he was granted the title of the Ta Lama. Künphel was a smart person. If he had received a good education he would have become a remarkable person, but he didn't have any education.   

**Q:**  The personal attendants had to know how to write, right?   

**A:**  Not only writing, they should have had other education. I am not sure whether he knew drawing or not. I saw him when he was a very poor epa and didn't comb his hair well. But the Dalai Lama liked him. He was wearing a woolen chupa and I heard that he was from a poor household.   

**Q:**  Where was he from?   

**A:**  Probably, he was from E Lhagyari [Tib. ཨེ་ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི]. They were writing Tibetan scripture for carving the wood printing blocks. His partner was called Tashi Thöndrub [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཐོན་དྲུབ]. The reason why I am saying they were not educated was because they didn't go to school. At that time, the people who went to the Tibetan school and learned the writing and how to talk [eloquently] and learned Tibetan grammar and poems and also some religion were considered educated people. At that time, in general, the Tibetan aristocrats were educated through sending their children to school to learn writing and sending them to learn grammar and the ancient style of math [Tib. རྡེའུ] and learn how to talk [eloquently]. If they were from a better household, they would get the impact of a good education. But Künphel was a farmer's child.   

**Q:**  In 1926, they closed the school in Gyantse . What happened at that time? Was it because of the Reting incident or what? It was very strange.   

**A:**  At that time, they set up a good school in Gyantse, but the three great monasteries told them [the government] to close the school because we don't need foreign schools and we don't need foreign teachers in a Tibetan school.   

**Q:**  To whom did they tell that?   

**A:**  They told Taktra. At the time when Tsarong was demoted in 1923, they said that they didn't want the foreign system to become popular. At that time, all of the foreign customs were prohibited and the military was getting destroyed, and they said that they didn't need people who knew English.   

**Q:**  In the monasteries, the abbots [Tib. མཁན་པོ] said that, right?   

**A:**  When the three great monasteries said that they didn't need anything, the abbots would report it to the Assembly.   

**Q:**  But, since I lived in one of the great monasteries, although the abbots had power, if there wasn't anybody pushing them, they wouldn't make a move.   

**A:**  As I mentioned earlier, the persons who pushed the abbots were maybe the British or Chinese spies who were in the monastery. I think they were definitely staying in the monasteries.   

**Q:**  This could be, but the British spy wouldn't say that they didn't want the English school and they wouldn't say that we didn't want education. So I think the person who said that we didn't want foreign education were those people who were not spies and they might have been some monk officials among the aristocrats like Commander-in-Chief Tempa Jamyang [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] and the bearded Lord Chamberlain [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ་ཨབ་སོག]. Those people might have pushed [the abbots] in the monasteries.   

**A:**  I don't know about those things. But according to my point of view, we can assume that the British spy didn't say to close the English school. But we don't know whether the Chinese did that. Later, I saw a little bit about that. When the Chinese arrived in Tibet, they gathered the scholars to teach Tibetan in the unit called Study Center [Tib. སློབ་གཉེར་ཁང]. There were some geshe who spoke fluent Chinese. They would say that if the foreign customs become popular, the monks would get less and we wouldn't have the monastic estates and it would harm the religion.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that magji Tempa Jamyang and Drönyerchemmo Apso instigated the three great monasteries.   

**A:**  It could be. Drönyerchemmo Apso was a very tough [Tib. དཔེ་འདྲ་པོ] person. He was called the drönyerchemmo Dada.   

**Q:**  Dada and Apso was the same person. Even if there were some people pushing the abbots in the monastery, how could they push all the abbots? But if a kudrak like Drönyerchemmo and the Drunyichemmo gave them a hint, the abbots would rush forward.   

**A:**  Probably, it was like that. For example, even if there was nobody instigating the people like the Drönyerchemmo, they themselves might have disliked the foreign customs and they disliked Tsarong for receiving the foreigners. And the people like Tempa Jamyang pretended to have patriotic thoughts and they disliked the foreign customs to become popular.   

**Q:**  I heard that Drönyerchemmo Apso didn't like Tsarong.   

**A:**  Probably, he didn't like him because .   

**Q:**  For example, at that time in Tibet the soldiers were wearing foreign uniforms. When the soldiers saluted, Drönyerchemmo Apso would say, "The monkey has come." [Tib. སྤྲེའུ་ལགས་ཕེབས་བྱུང] Did you hear about that?   

**A:**  Probably, it could be. Apso didn't like that. At that time, the drönyerchemmo interrogated Tsarong many times. They were allowed to interrogate the kalön directly. The kalön had to send his chandzö [Tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] or steward [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར] for that and I remember the clerk Tsering used to go there every time and the drönyerchemmo scolded him very much because he didn't like Tsarong. The reason why he didn't like him was because he didn't like the new customs. The English and foreign customs. Who knows whether he liked the Chinese Emperor or not? At that time, there wasn't any influence from the Americans. Tsarong was young then and he did things too strong on reform, for example, like making the uniforms for the soldiers of the cannon regiment. He used to give orders right away.   

**Q:**  I think Kalön Lama Tempa Jamyang and Drönyerchemmo Apso might have had a kind of group, though they didn't give it a name, for stopping Tsarong's strong military influence and destroying the schools.   

**A:**  Probably, it could be like that, but I don't have any proof to tell you.   

**Q:**  Later, Tempa Jamyang also became the commander-in-chief, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did he become the commander-in-chief?   

**A:**  At that time people didn't like it and there was talk saying he was the monk who took the position of the commander-in-chief. However, it was up to the Dalai Lama whatever kind of appointment he would like to make.   

**Q:**  I heard that when Tsarong was the commander-in-chief, 350 rifles were missing and those rifles were given by the British as a gift to the Dalai Lama, was that correct?   

**A:**  I have never heard that and there weren't 300 rifles in Tsarong house. I just saw 1-2 Lewis guns in Tsarong house. They were kept in green trunks. If there would so many guns, I would have known that.   

**Q:**  I heard that Lungshar also reported that Tsarong's guns were missing.   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this. I don't know if Lungshar reported like this.   

**Q:**  When they set up the gold coin office, didn't they also store silver?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. There were gold biscuits and bricks and there were many silver bricks also. The Trapchi Office bought the silver.   

**Q:**  Did they store them in the Trapchi Office?   

**A:**  No, they stored them in Namgan [Tib. རྣམ་གན] in the Potala.   

**Q:**  Did the people under Tsarong and Tempa Jamyang and those people go to each other's houses?   

**A:**  At that time, they would not go to each other's houses. When Tsarong was the Commander-in-Chief .   

**Q:**  I mean at that time.   

**A:**  At that time, Tsarong gave a lot of parties for the military officers and showed some shows [Tib. གཟིགས་མོ]. He was fond of doing those things. This happened in the old Tsarong house and also in the new Tsarong house. Tsarong also liked very much to listen to things about politics on the outside. Many people used to come to him and he would talk for hours. But there wasn't any kind of group [Tib. ཚོགས་པ]. Furthermore, Surkhang's father used to talk with him a lot.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was a group of people who liked Tsarong and there was also a group of people who opposed him. Who were the people who liked Tsarong?   

**A:**  The military officers under Tsarong liked him.   

**Q:**  And the people who went abroad to school also liked him, right?   

**A:**  There weren't many people who went abroad to the school. Actually, there were less people who liked the revolution [change]. The ordinary people didn't have any idea regarding liking the revolution or disliking the revolution. Among the aristocrats, there was a difference of liking or disliking the revolution. When the Dalai Lama liked some person, he would become powerful. When the Dalai Lama was fond of Tsarong, he was doing whatever Tsarong told him to do and it almost seemed that the Dalai Lama also liked the revolution. So Tsarong could work very strongly. When Tsarong asked for the vacation, and when those people reported to the Dalai Lama that if the military became too strong, this would harm the Dalai Lama, although he didn't treat him very badly, but he demoted Tsarong and the other military officers who liked the revolution.   

**Q:**  At that time, didn't the military officers hold a meeting and go to the Drönyerchemmo Apso ?   

**A:**  Yes, it was said that they held a meeting, but I didn't know the details because I was just a child. In the years 1921-22-23-24, after the first world war when the Dalai Lama came back from Darjeeling, Tsarong was most powerful. At that time, they were preparing for Tibet to be independent. For making Tibet independent, we should have a strong army. But this also didn't work out. At that time, he [the Dalai Lama] announced Tibet independence.   

**Q:**  At that time, what was Tsarong thinking? What kind of personality did he have?   

**A:**  His character was very good and very fair and honest [Tib. དྲང་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ]. Usually, he would never harm people.   

**Q:**  Was his character kind of humorous or kind of reserved [Tib. སྒམ་པོ] or what?   

**A:**  He liked to hear people talking about interesting things and he liked to talk. He also liked the geshes [Tib. དགེ་བཤེས] and the Mongolian monks very much because he knew Mongolian language. He went to Mongolia with the Dalai Lama and he was also very fond of women and loafing around. I had been living with him, so I think he was really one who thought broadly [Tib. དགོངས་པ་ཆེན་པོ]. He would not make a move easily.   

**Q:**  Was he a kind of reserved person [Tib. སྒམ་པོ] or a frank person [Tib. རྡབ་བེ་རྡོབ་བེ]?   

**A:**  He was not a reserved person who didn't talk much and he also liked your father very much. He liked very much to talk with people. He liked his own country and he would never change his faith towards the Dalai Lama no matter whatever he did to him. Before the Dalai Lama left for India when the Chinese chased them, he wrote a letter to Tsarong and gave him a protective talisman [Tib. སྲུང་བ]. Tsarong had faith towards the talisman. When the Dalai Lama died, Tsarong told me, "My lama granted me the leave at the right time. If I had been there at the time when my lama was sick, I would have given the Dalai Lama an aspirin. So at this time, I would definitely have gotten banished. This shows that I am faithful [Tib. དམ་ཚིག] towards my Lama." When people told Tsarong that Lungshar was not good, he never believed them. At that time, Gyantse Nyishaba [Tib. ཉི་ཞབས་པ] also told Tsarong that he should be friendly with Lungshar. Nyishaba was one of the toughest persons in Gyantse. Tsarong said, "What did I do to not be friendly with Lungshar? We didn't have any unfriendly relations." He also called Lungshar for a party in Tsarong house and two of them talked to each other. His character was like a lama and he knew about the world situation. His error was on the matter of women though it was not very severe. When he liked a woman, he would keep her for a long time.   

**Q:**  He was not practicing religion very much, right? Usually, what would he talk about?   

**A:**  He knew a lot of religion. If you visit the Tsarong house, it could be compared with the Jokhang [having many statues] and he would offer the water offerings.   

**Q:**  Did he talk about the politics or economy or history?   

**A:**  When he was the Commander Kalön, he was always engaged in political matters.   

**Q:**  Did he do that at home also?   

**A:**  Yes. Whoever would come to visit him he was always talking about politics. When there was no politics, usually he would do gardening at home holding a shovel and wearing a white woolen garment and trousers and planting vegetables and flowers. At that time, my aunt used to say, "Now, Tsarong is showing a bad omen [Tib. ལྟས་ངན] by carrying shovels." But, he says, "Planting vegetable is very important." He planted tomatoes, grapes and also apples and he also made them plant apples in the estates.   

**Q:**  At that time, did Tsarong say that he tried to make a change, but it didn't work out?   

**A:**  He never said that he did something. For example, when they said something strong in the Assembly meeting that all people like Reting Dzasa's legs should be cut off, Tsarong told them that you shouldn't do that. At that time, my sister told him, "You should control yourself. Do you remember what happened to our late father? Then Tsarong said, "Why are you telling me not to talk when attending the Assembly meeting? I should say something that is the truth at the meeting." At that time, when they had to punish Reting Dzasa, some people said we should cut off his legs and hands and some of them said that we should banish him. Probably Tsarong said that we should not cut off his hands or legs. This is what I heard.   

**Q:**  Did Tsarong go to examine the dead body of Reting?   

**A:**  Yes, he did.   

**Q:**  What did he say when he came back home?   

**A:**  He said, "Reting died and his eyes were open and there were kind of [scars] of getting beaten very severely with switches." At that time, Shatra Kungö [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་སྐུ་ངོ] was with him.   

**Q:**  Not only Shatra, there were also other people.   

**A:**  There might have been many others.   

**Q:**  What else did he tell you?   

**A:**  He didn't tell me anything else. Usually, he never said such things.   

**Q:**  I heard that at that time Tsarong said, "When we interrogated Reting on the Assembly, we didn't even flick a finger on him, but there was a bruise on his bottom. Probably, the protective deities beat him up." Did you hear that?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  After 1925, did the military officers stop coming to the Tsarong house?   

**A:**  They came.   

**Q:**  When Tsarong was demoted, did he and his friends feel kind of sad?   

**A:**  He didn't care about that at all and he didn't tell us anything.   

**Q:**    

**A:**  We don't know what Lungshar was doing to Tsarong, but Tsarong didn't dislike Lungshar. Lungshar used to come to the Tsarong House, but he was not very close to Tsarong.   

**Q:**  I heard that Lungshar ran away to some of the monasteries, was that correct?   

**A:**  I don't recall anything about Lungshar running away. At the time when my father was treated badly, Lungshar hadn't become a high aristocrat and didn't have any fame. Running away and hiding in the monastery was my mother. At that time, Drepung Monastery treated my mother very nicely. At that time, women were allowed to stay in Drepung's Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་གསར].   

**Q:**  Tashi Khangsar was not a khamtsen.   

**A:**  At that time, Tsarong belonged to Tsangpa Khamtsen [Tib. གཙང་པ་ཁང་ཚན], so they helped us because we treated the khamtsen nicely and invited them to perform rituals. When my father was killed, all of the relatives were very scared, but the Gyütöpa [Tib. rgyd stod pa] helped us. After that, in order to repay their kindness, my sister bought some large tea cauldrons that could make tea for several thousands of people and offered them to the monastery.   

**Q:**  After that, another English school was set up, right?   

**A:**  It was set up in the park in Lhasa and the teacher was called Parker. I heard that he is still alive in Canada.   

**Q:**  I heard that Parker was invited and signed the contract for 1-2 years, but, it was stopped all of a sudden.   

**A:**  Parker was invited and people and the aristocrats were very glad when the school was set up. But the three great monasteries said that they didn't want the school.   

**Q:**  I am trying to find out how that happened, though the result was that the school was closed.   

**A:**  At the beginning, the Kashag discussed that we should learn foreign languages and set up the school and all people agreed to that. The aristocrats and the people liked more and more to teach knowledge to the children. When there was no school, people sent their children to India to schools. Therefore, all people like the aristocrats and traders were glad to set up the school in Tibet. When it was confirmed to set up the school, they talked with the British representative in Lhasa through the Foreign Office and they agreed to send a teacher. They discussed where the school should be set up, and decided on Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་ཆེ་གླིང་ག] which used to be the place where the lay officials gave parties. They arranged a room for the teacher and some rooms for 20-30 students. At that time, Parker came to our house many times. He was a nice person. Tsarong George and Ringang who knew English helped Parker to arrange his room.   

**Q:**  How long did the school last?   

**A:**  Probably it lasted only 5-6 months. The three great monasteries stopped the school.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  Then they told Parker to leave and apologized to him for that. I heard that the abbots reported to the Kashag that it would not be okay if you don't close the school and then the Kashag gave the order to the Foreign Office.   

**Q:**  If the Kashag told the abbots that we needed the school for the government and it was wrong to stop the school, the abbots would have had to obey it, right?   

**A:**  Probably the Kashag didn't dare to say that because they [abbots] might have said that they were pro-British and treated them like my father. So they were very scared of them. There wasn't anybody who had the courage to say that. If the three great monasteries told the Kashag, "Now we don't have a complete Tibetan school so first we should set up a complete Tibetan school. Then if we could set up a foreign language school, it would be the best. If we teach the children foreign knowledge right away, their belief towards religion and culture will get less." Then how could the Kashag respond to them? It would be very hard to respond to them.   

**Q:**  At that time, the three great monasteries were so powerful that they could even reject what the Dalai Lama told them to do, right?   

**A:**  In Tibet, if people dared to say something, everybody had the right to talk. It was like a democracy, but people were scared that if they said something, in the future they might have to suffer. When the general assembly was held, even the master carpenter who had the fifth rank title [Tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] could attend the meeting and they were allowed to talk if they had something to say. The kalön would not attend the general assembly.   

**Q:**  The question was that what kind of evidence is there of a case where the three great monasteries rejected what the Dalai Lama suggested because they were so powerful?   

**A:**  I don't have any evidence to tell you about when they rejected what the Dalai Lama said. Anyway, everybody was allowed to say whatever they wanted to say at the Assembly meeting. Actually, the Dalai Lama didn't attend the meetings and orders were passed down.   

