# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0045.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Rajpur, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1909  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Mrs. Taring [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང] was a famous Tibetan aristocrat married to Taring Dzasa. In this interview, she talks about the family background of Tsarong Dzasa (Dasang Damdrü) and his early years leading to his becoming a favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama. She talks also about the time he accompanied the 13th Dalai Lama to exile in China and Mongolia due to the British invasion, and how he held back the Chinese troops in 1910 so that the Dalai Lama was able to escape to India. She also talks about Tsarong's role in the 1911-12 expulsion of the Chinese/Manchus from Lhasa as well as his vision of what Tibet had to do to modernize, including his dream of a Greater Tibet that would merge Tibet, Sikkim and Bhutan. She also explains his accomplishments in developing Tibet. She then tells about his pilgrimage to India and how he received an edict demoting him from his post as military commander-in-chief when he reached Chushul on his return trip.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0045_05/H_0045_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The main thing that I want to ask you is about Tsarong Sawangchemmo's life story. The way of his thinking and the way of his working and how he got hindrances and how took the positions. Please tell me in as much detail as you remember.   

**A:**  Yes, I will tell you about Tsarong Sawangchemmo. I am the daughter of the Tsarong family. My father was known as Kalön Wangchuk Gyalpo [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག་རྒྱལ་པོ]. My father died in 1912. You need the information about Tsarong Dasang Damdrü [Tib. ཟླ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ]. At the time of Tsarong Sawangchemmo [the Dasang Dramdrü], I was a child but I had been living with him and I asked him about the history and I also saw the history. I will tell you what I know in detail. Tsarong Sawang Dasang Damdrü was the son of quite a well-to-do household in Phenpo [Tib. ཕེན་པོ]. They belonged to Phurbuchok [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་མཆོག] and his father was a maker of bows and arrows. As we know, Sawangchemmo had an eldest brother whose name was Thöndrub Norbu [Tib. don grup nor bu] and the second son was Dasang Damdrü. The third son was Kyenrab [Tib. mhkyen rab]. He was the chandzö of Tsarong. Then the next child was Yangchen [Tib. དབྱང་ཆེན] who was the wife of the third rank Dingja Theiji [Tib. ལྡིང་ཆ་ཐའི་ཇི]. Their mother was a miser of Maya [Tib. རྨ་བྱ]. After their father died, the mother got remarried to Lhundrup [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ] who was the steward of Tsarong. He was also related to Dasang Dramdrü's father. After their mother remarried with Lhundrup, she had two daughters, Tsering Drolma [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ] and Changchub [Tib. བྱང་འཆུབ]. Tsering Drolma was the queen of Tsopa. Changchub was sent as a bride to the Lumo [Tib. ཀླུ་མོ] Estate. That's how their family was. I heard about this from the late Sawangchemmo. The Chandzö of Phurbuchok was the brother of Dasang Dramdrü's mother's second husband. So among Phurbuchok's taxpayer household miser, they were quite a well-to-do family. One of their relatives was a khangnyer in Norbulinga and a monk official. His name was Jimba [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ]. After that, he became a teacher in the Tse labdra. When Jimba was working as the khangnyer, Sawangchemmo was sent from Phenpo to Lhasa and he stayed with Jimba. Sawangchemmo was very smart and at that time, he was 13 or 14. Therefore, the Dalai Lama knew that Sawangchemmo was smart so Sawangchemmo became the Dalai Lama's favorite [Tib. སྤྱན་གསལ].   

**Q:**  How did Dasang Dramdrü become the Dalai Lama's favorite?   

**A:**  I don't know about this. But, definitely, he was very smart and had to take care of the flowers because his master was the khangnyer and he moved the flower pots around. The Dalai Lama also liked flowers and he did whatever the Dalai Lama made him do because he was kind of an extraordinary person and he became kind of special and the Dalai Lama was also fond of him and he became the favorite of the Dalai Lama. At that time, his name was not Dasang Dramdrü. His name was Namgang [Tib. གནམ་གང] because in Tibet when a child was born on the 30th of the Tibetan month they were called Namgang. In Norbulinga, he was known as Namgang and he became the Dalai Lama's favorite. In 1904, when the British made war on the issue of trade routes and came to Tibet, the Dalai Lama had to leave for China.   

**Q:**  The British war came to Tibet in 1904, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In 1904 the British invaded Tibet because of the trade routes. At that time, the Dalai Lama went to China and he [Nangang] went as a servant for the Dalai Lama. Probably, he was 16 or 17 years old then. He used to tell us that the Dalai Lama was treated very well by the mother of Emperor. After that, the Dalai Lama came back from China and stayed for a long time in Mongolia. The Dalai Lama knew Mongolian language and Namgang also could speak the Mongolian language like a Mongolian. He served the Dalai Lama very well in China. At that time he was the favorite of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  What was the difference between the person who previously was the Jensel and the person who became the Jensel later on?   

**A:**  Jensel means that the person became the Dalai Lama's favorite. But they didn't have any rank.   

**Q:**  Before, when he was called Namgang and was taking care of flowers, he was not the Jensel, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Later, he became the Dalai Lama's Jensel, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after he stayed for a quite long time with the Dalai Lama, people called him Jensel. He was not given a rank, like saying that you are now a Jensel.   

**Q:**  Even though he was not told from above that you are a Jensel of the Dalai Lama, he just inferred that he was the Jensel, right?   

**A:**  There wasn't any document indicating he was the Jensel, but people just respected him and called him Jensel.   

**Q:**  What did he say about the time when the Dalai Lama visited the mother of the Emperor?   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama had the audience with the mother of the Emperor, she showed great respect to the Dalai Lama. He said that the Emperor Shonthong who was Fuyi was also there and the Dalai Lama visited him. The Dalai Lama stayed 3 or 4 years in China and Mongolia. After that he returned to Tibet. Just before the Dalai Lama went to China, he demoted 4 Shape: Horkhang [Tib. ཧོར་ཁང], Shatra [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ], Changkhyim [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ] and Shölkang. The replacement of Shatra was the Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག་རྒྱལ་པོ]. After the 4 shape were demoted, among the new shape, Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo was the main minister. Before the Dalai Lama left for China, he gave orders about politics to the shapes: Yuthok [Tib. གྱུ་ཐོག], Tsarong, Sechung [Tib. གསར་བྱུང] and one Kalön Lama. During the 3 or 4 years that the Dalai Lama stayed in China, Namgang served him well, but he didn't work in politics because he was just 13-14 years old and there were other personal attendants. At that time there were the personal attendants of the Dalai Lama and there was also the Jigyab Khembo. I don't remember his name. Sawangchemmo regarded him very highly. After the Dalai Lama returned from China to Tibet, the Chinese Luzijun sent troops to Tibet. I am sure you know about this. I heard that the Chinese came to Tibet at the time of the Tibetan New Year. My older sister told me that she saw the Chinese coming into the Barkor shooting guns. At that time, the Mönlam Prayer Festival was taking place. The Chinese almost killed the Phünkang Gung [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་གུང] so the Dalai Lama could no longer stay in Tibet. The Dalai Lama and the Shape discussed this. At the time when the Dalai Lama went to China he demoted the shape, but the Dalai Lama appointed Shatra as Silön from China and he said that he was wrong, that he demoted him, and at the same time, the Dalai Lama also appointed the other ministers again.   

**Q:**  You mean to say Shatra was appointed as the Desi [Tib. སྡེ་སྲིད]?   

**A:**  I heard that Shatra was the lönchen. Shatra told the Dalai Lama, "I am not going to come out from jail alone if you don't appoint the other ministers also." I heard that Horkang was very timid and he jumped into the river.   

**Q:**  Was he the father of Horkang Sonam Pembar [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་འབར]?   

**A:**  No, he was his grandfather. At that time, Shatra, Changkhyim and Shölkang were appointed as lönchen and probably, my father and Yuthok and some others were the shape. Then all of a sudden, the Dalai Lama had to escape to India. They did the packing from Norbulinga and the Potala and they left. The Dalai Lama probably gave an order to Jensel Namgang [Dasang Dramdrü] that if the Chinese came before the Dalai Lama left, he should stop them. The Dalai Lama and his retinue went to India and before they left, the Dalai Lama prayed and he did divination about whether it would be better to go through Bhutan or go directly through the Nathula [Tib. སྣ་སྟོད་ལ] mountain pass [to Sikkim]. The Dalai Lama went through Nathula. At that time, the Governor General of the Yadong [Tib. གྲོ་སྤྱི] area was Mr. MacDonald known as MedonSab. They treated them very well. At that time, the Jigyab Khembo and the Dalai Lama's personal physician were with the Dalai Lama. Because the Dalai Lama had given Namgang an order to stop the Chinese if they come, so he put together a group of young tough men [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག]. Probably, they didn't have many people. Tsarong told me that he went to stop the Chinese at the Jagsam [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ] Ferry site. At that time, among his people the most reliable person was Kunga [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ] who later became the Chandzö of Shölshar [Tib. ཞོལ་ཤར་ཕྱག་མཛོད]. There also was the Government Astrologist [Tib. བླ་རྩིས་པ] who used to stay in the yellow house in Shöl [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་སེར].  

**Q:**  Was he the one who stopped hail (Tib. latöpa [ལགས་སྟོད་པ])?   

**A:**  The latöpa's title was lower than the latsipa. The latöpa was ordinary. I don't know how many guns they had when they came to the Jagsam Ferry site at night and they took the ferry with them. That night they rested, sleeping in the Jagsam Monastery. Sawangchemmo was also sleeping. He said that suddenly someone slapped his face. Not knowing who slapped him, he woke up. When he looked through the window, he saw that the Chinese had sat on wood beams and crossed the river and had already reached on this side of the river were trying to set the monastery on fire. Then they woke up the astrologist and went to the back of the monastery and then went up to the top of the mountain and shot at the Chinese from the mountain and annihilated the Chinese. Sawangchemmo told me that they were all marksmen and they probably killed 200 Chinese. After they killed the Chinese, they ran away through Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ]. At that time, the Dalai Lama, the lönchen and the Kashag told the people on the way [to India] that Namgang would come along and you people should give him good horses and mules. At that time, when he ran away, the Chinese were unable to catch up with them. Sawangchemmo himself told me about this.   

**Q:**  They killed all the Chinese at Jagsam and they went, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Why did they run away?   

**A:**  If they didn't run away, they wouldn't be able to handle the Chinese because they would send more troops. The 200 troops were sent from China and they were told that they should kill or arrest the Dalai Lama and his personal attendants. But Dasang Dramdrü and his group annihilated the 200. If they didn't run away, then the Chinese would chase them. At that time, Sawangchemmo had a golden charm box [Tib. འབྲལ་སྤང] in which there was a letter from the Dalai Lama, but he didn't show the letter to me. He said this protective talisman [Tib. སྲུང་བ] was very holy. When he ran away, wherever they reached, the horses were ready for them to ride.   

**Q:**  When they ran away, how many people were with him?   

**A:**  There were only 3 or 4 people. The other people went in different directions. When they came to Khangmar [Tib. ཁང་དམར], he met Babu Norbu [Tib. ནོར་བུ] who had been lucky with the negotiations between the Tibetan Government and the British Government. At first the Tibetan government gave him the rank of depön and then he got promoted to the rank of Dzasa. At that time, Babu Norbu was wearing a Chinese hat called Tangmaotse [Ch. zhang mao zi] and he did a reception for them.   

**Q:**  What does Tangmaotse mean?   

**A:**  Tangmaotse was a hat which was probably made at the time of the Chinese called Zhang. Maotse means hat. The hat looks like the hat which Kongpo people wore. When they came to Khangmar, at that time, the British were there and Babu Norbu received them and told them, "You should go fast because the Chinese have already left from Lhasa. The Dalai Lama gave us the order that Namgang will come and you should help him." They left from Khangmar to Kala, Dochen [Tib. རྡོ་ཆེན] and Düna [Tib. དུས་སྣ], and then they came to Phari [Tib. ཕག་རི]. Babu Norbu gave a letter to Sawangchemmo to go to the Dak Bunglow [inn for travelers] in Phari. When they came to Phari, there was an Indian person named Rosmiya who was sending telegrams. He did the reception for them and served them tea and food. He told them, "You should leave because the Chinese are already after you and they are in this town, so the only thing you can do is to leave tomorrow. You should wear my clothes, hat and my eyeglass and ride my horse and take my servant with you. When the Chinese leave, you should go with the Chinese. If you dare to go in this way, that is the only way to get away. The Dalai Lama has given me an order to help you." So Sawangchemmo told him, "I will do that." And he wore the clothing of Rosmiya. At that time, the Chinese also left from there and he left at the same time. Sometimes, they and he came to the same place. After he crossed Galingshar and just before he came to Sharsingma, he felt very afraid that the Chinese might recognize him. So he sent back the horses and the servants and he went to the back of Sharsingma Mountain and went down to the house of the Governor General of Yadong [Tib. གྲོ་མོ་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]. The Governor asked him, "Are you Namgang?" He said, "Yes." The governor said, "Very good, The Dalai Lama asked me to help you and the Chinese have already come here to chase after you. So tonight you should stay in our storeroom and we will serve you food. Tomorrow the postmen will go from the village so you should wear postman's clothing and leave. At that time, all the postmen were walking. Later, at the time of British, the postmen had horses or mules to ride and they hung a bell on the horse's or mule's neck. At that time, they would blow a horn indicating that the postman has left. They told Namgang, "When they blow the horn, then you should cross the Nathula mountain pass and go." So he went to town at night and the next morning he changed into the postman's uniform and wore eyeglasses. When the other postmen left when they blew the horn, he went with them. After he passed the Zeleb la [Tib. རྫ་ལེབ་ལ] mountain pass, he was relieved. When he came to Nagthang, the Dalai Lama sent his personal attendant in charge of serving food [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན་ཆེན་མོ] and servants with horses to receive him.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama knew that he was coming, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he knew because the British told the Dalai Lama. That's how he reached the Dalai Lama. This was considered the greatest accomplishment of Tsarong. Then they came to Darjeeling.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the Dalai Lama stay in Darjeeling?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama safely came to Darjeeling. He also came to Kalimpong. When the Dalai Lama came to Kalimpong, Kaji Urgyen Dorje [Tib. ཀ་ཇ྄ི་ཨོ་རྒྱན་རྡོ་རྗེ], who was the father of Dragshö Tetse la's husband Kumar Sab [Tib. བྲག་ཤོད་བཀྲས་ཚེ་ལགས] and his wife Ayi Wangmo [Tib. དབང་མོ] served him very well. Consequently, their house was known as the palace because the Dalai Lama stayed there. The name of the palace was Mingyu Ngönga [Tib. མི་འགྱུར་མངོན་དགའ]. Later, the Dalai Lama gave him an approval note [Tib. འགོ་མཆན] on a piece of brocade and gave him the dzasa rank to Dragshö Urgyen for his accomplishment. He also was allowed to ride his horse in the Norbulinga and Ayi Wangmo was allowed to be carried in a sedan chair inside Norbulinga. It was written on the brocade, "When the Dalai Lama escaped to India because of political matters, Dragshö Urgyen and his wife served the Dalai Lama very well. Therefore, Ugyen will be given the Dzasa rank." Mostly, the Dalai Lama stayed in the place called Hillside in Darjeeling, which was located near St. Joseph's College where the Yabshi built a factory.   

**Q:**  It was the Tibetan Refugee Center, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, there was a house called Hillside where the Dalai Lama stayed. The name of that area is Singamari. The Dalai Lama used to go see performances like football in St. Joseph's College.   

**Q:**  You mean the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, when Sawangchemmo or Namgang came there he was only 20 or 21 years old. The lönchen and the kalön were taking care of the politics. They told Sawangchemmo that he should go to school. They already made him a uniform for St. Joseph's School and the school agreed to enroll him especially. He told me that he liked photography, so he went to learn photography at Das Studio. He learned how to develop and how to enlarge. That's how he stayed there. At that time, the British guide for the Dalai lama probably was Sir Chance Bell. There were also some young officials like Derge Theiji. For entertainment they went for music in Jimkana. The Dalai Lama stayed there for a few years.   

**Q:**  At that time, the poem Lhasa Trenlu [Tib. ལྷས་དྲན་གླུ] was written, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the poem was written by Shekarlingpa [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་གླིང་པ].   

**Q:**  At that time was there any connection between the Dalai Lama and Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, probably there was a secret connection between Lhasa and Darjeeling.   

**Q:**  From Lhasa they were sending their needs to Darjeeling, right?   

**A:**  Yes. My late father Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo got an order from the Dalai Lama that he should come to India. At that time, he didn't get leave from Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང], so he didn't get the chance to come. That was his karmic effect.   

**Q:**  If he had come to India, it would not have happened like that to him, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was his karmic effect. After that, luckily, in 1911, in China they had a civil war so the Chinese officials and the soldiers who lived in Tibet didn't receive their salary and the situation got worse. So the situation came to be that we could expel the Chinese. They organized and expelled the Chinese. During these three years, the Chinese were kind of powerful, but it was neither like they had completely annexed Tibet nor was it like they didn't completely annex Tibet. At that time, the Regent was Tsomönling and under that my father Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo was working with him. They had treated the Chinese tactfully so they blamed Tsarong, saying that he was close to the Chinese. At that time, Tsarong house was well known.   

**Q:**  Tsarong was not one of the aristocratic families that had the highest Depön Midrag status [Tib. སྡེ་དཔོན་མི་དྲག], right?   

**A:**  Yes. According to the number of manorial estates, Tsarong was a middle standard family, but Tsarong was well known at the time of Kelsang Chödrag [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཆོས་གྲགས] who was the Dalai Lama's personal attendant and also one of the Jigyab Khembo. There was one park called Tsarong Park, but it did not belong to Tsarong. That park was made by Kelsang Chödrag. After that, there was one Tsipön called Rinzin Dorje [Tib. རིག་འཛིན་རྡོར་རྗེ] who was my grandfather. He was a very well-known person. He went to Nagtshang to negotiate between Tibet and Sikkim and later he got appointed as a shape, but he died before he held the ceremony for getting appointed and having the sarje audience with the Dalai lama. The name of Tsarong became well-known, but he was not like the Depön Midrag families like Shatra [Tib. བཤད་གྲ] and Samdru Phodrang [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང]. Tsarong was a middle standard aristocrat.   

**Q:**  How did they differentiate the middle standard and high standard among the aristocrats [Tib. སྒེར་པ]?   

**A:**  It was differentiated according to the size and the number of the manorial estates that they had.   

**Q:**  How many estates did the high aristocrats have? For example was it like a five star hotel and a four star hotel?   

**A:**  For the small aristocrats, they got only 1,000 khe of grain for one year and they had to take many loans. For example, the estates that belonged to the high aristocrats like Shatra, if you went from one estate to another estate by horseback, it would take 7 days. They also had herds of livestock. Not only did they get yields of several thousands of grain from their estates, but their herds were so big that they would bring like 400 or 500 loads of butter packed in skins to leave on Shatra's courtyard's stone floor. Some of the estates were given to the aristocrats for their accomplishments. The families of the Dalai Lamas, Yabshi [Tib. ཡབ་ཞིས] had big estates. For example the Samdru Phodrang family had very big estates. Under the support of Lungshar, 9 aristocrats got out from under Sambo's jurisdiction. I don't remember their names. One of them was Jede [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ].   

**Q:**  How did you categorize who were the big aristocrats and who were the small ones? Was it categorized according to the number of the dön that they had?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't anything like this. When you talk about the highest status of the aristocrats known as depön midrag [Tib. མདའ་དཔོན་མི་དྲག], the aristocrats like Ragashag [Tib. ར་ཁ་ཤག] and Gapshi [Tib. དགའ་བཞི] were regarded as depön midrag.   

**Q:**  How did they categorize them? Were they regarded as depön midrag if they had 100 or 1000 dön of land?   

**A:**  The babshi tax was levied according to the number of dön they had. But at that time they didn't kind of label [Tib. རྟགས] them as the depön midrag. It just depended on how they were obliged to pay the taxes and how many riders [Tib. རྟ་པ] they were obliged to send during the Mönlam Festival and how many soldiers they were obliged to send as a tax.   

**Q:**  They were obliged to send soldiers according to the number of the gang and dön? How did they send the riders during the Mönlam?   

**A:**  If you were a shape, even if you didn't have a big estate, you had to send 24 riders.   

**Q:**  This was special for the shape, right?   

**A:**  Yes, usually, the riders were sent according to the government position, not according to their estates. For example, the Sambo's riders were the First Left Battalion [Tib. གྱོན་རུ་དང་པོ]. Tibet was a very small country; mostly there were about 200 aristocratic families, so it was easy to count and it was easy to know who belonged to the big depön midrag and who were small ones. When I am telling my life story and talking about Namgang or Dasang Dramdrü, I have to tell about the former Tsarong Kalön Wangchuk Gyalpo at the same time, because their history was attached together. We don't know what would happen later on. As I said, Namgang was thinking about going to school in Darjeeling and learning photography until they would go to Tibet after about six years. While he was thinking in that way, in Tibet they had already planed to expel the Chinese. So he was told to stop going to school and go through Shigaste to conscript soldiers. At that time, since the Dalai Lama was great, probably he might have seen that the Namgang had the karmic effect [Tib. las dnag skal ba] .   

**Q:**  What was the reason that the Dalai Lama saw his karmic effect?   

**A:**  Because he was smart and clever.   

**Q:**  Were there any other reasons? I was told by my relative Tsarong that the Dalai Lama had a dream. In his dream the Dalai Lama saw that he and Dasang Dramdrü were going together and there were many monkeys and Dasang Dramdrü expelled all the monkeys. Was that correct?   

**A:**  I never heard about that. As I told you, there was a red letter which was in the charm box. In that, it was written something about the monkey, but he didn't show me that letter. Tsarong Dündül even now has this letter.   

**Q:**  You mean to say the red letter?   

**A:**  Yes. He has the letter but he wouldn't show us.   

**Q:**  So Dündul might have read the letter and told you about it?   

**A:**  After he died, what would be the use of the letter? If there was a marvelous accomplishment of his father [Dasang Dramdrü] he should tell us about this. Otherwise, in the future no one will pay attention to it. He just told the story of the monkeys, but he didn't show the letter. If it was marvelous, he should have shown us. In the red letter, it was written about the monkeys. The red letter which was in the charm box was the Dalai Lama's own handwriting. At that time, I was young and I didn't ask him much. I just asked him a little bit.   

**Q:**  Then what happened? Was Tsarong the most powerful person in Tibet?   

**A:**  No, I don't think so. At that time, they set up the war office and in that there were powerful persons like Trimön [Tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] and Champa Tendar [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར].   

**Q:**  Trimön was also in the war office, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Later they were saying that Tsarong Dasang Dramdrü wanted to become the magpa in the Tsarong house. Therefore, he was among the members of the conspiracy to kill the father and the son of Tsarong. However, Tsarong's wife, Rinzin Chödrön who used to be the wife of Tsarong Samdru Tsering [Tib. bsam grup tshe ring] told me, "Dasang Dramdrü was not in the conspiracy to kill Tsarong father and the son." Namgang said in the meeting that they should not execute Tsarong father and the son, but the other people said, "If Namgang is saying that we should not execute Tsarong, then we have to beat [Tib. གཏོར] him. So from that, we could know that Dasang Dramdrü was not the most powerful one and there were others above him."   

**Q:**  How did he come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  He didn't come directly. He came through Shigatse to Lhasa and he was there when those things happened.   

**Q:**  Did he conscript soldiers?   

**A:**  Not really conscripting. At that time what they had to do was to make the plan to expel the Chinese and Dasang Dramdrü was involved in that. In 1925, when Dasang Dramdrü came to Kalimpong, he was very cautious and he didn't go out at night. He said that in Kalimpong there were many Chinese who were expelled from Tibet and they would attack us. He said we shouldn't stay long in Kalimpong. That's how they expelled the Chinese. After that, they took the Dalai Lama to Lhasa and the sun of happiness started to shine in Tibet. They told the Dalai Lama that they would annihilate all the Chinese including their followers [Tib. ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས]. So Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo was among the people that should be annihilated. It was not true that Dasang Dramdrü wanted to come as the magpa to Tsarong. But he was involved in the conspiracy. The Dalai Lama also might have had doubts about coming right away to the nation because at that time the situation was kind of chaotic. When the Dalai Lama came to Tibet, he stayed in Chöngor Yangtze [Tib. ཆོས་ཁོར་ཡངས་རྩེ] for one year until the situation calmed down in Lhasa. After the Dalai Lama slowly came to Lhasa, then Dasang Dramdrü worked on military strategy in the Military Administration [Tib. དམག་དོན་ལས་ཁུངས] and he might have been the main person in charge. At that time, he was the overall Depön [Tib. སྤྱི་མདའ].   

**Q:**  At that time, did he help the Dalai Lama in the Dalai Lama's room?   

**A:**  No. At that time he was working in the government. In the past, he was the attendant of the Dalai Lama and he served the tea to the Dalai Lama. After that, the [age] limit was over. He became the person with whom the Dalai Lama discussed political matters. He became a very important person. At that time, we were told that he had another woman called Sonam Pelzom [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་འཛོམས] but she was unable to become the wife of Sawangchemmo. I heard that at that time there were many big households who wanted him to come as their magpa because he was very smart and powerful. At that time, among Jensel there was Tshatru Rimpoche [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] who belonged to the Sera Monastery. Tshatru Rimpoche was the son of the Delerabten family. He was the brother of Rinzin Chödrön who was the wife of Tsarong Wangchuk Gyalpo's son Tsering Samdru who was killed with his father. At that time, my mother was young. She was in her 40s and my sister-in-law Rinzin Chödrön was 21 or 22. Consequently, Tshatru Rimpoche was thinking that my mother and sister-in-law had became widows so he thought that it would be good to send Dasang Dramdrü to Tsarong as the magpa and he talked to both of them. Rinzin Chödrön was called to Chöngor Yangtze [Tib. ཆོས་འཁོར་ཡང་རྩེ] from Lhasa. She was very beautiful and about 21-22 years old. Dasang Dramdrü agreed to come to Tsarong as the magpa. At that time, in our house, we received many letters sent from Chöngor Yangtze by Tshatru Rimpoche to my mother.   

**Q:**  Tsarong Dasang Dramdrü came to Lhasa before [the Dalai Lama]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, where did he stay?   

**A:**  He stayed in Yabshi [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] Phünkang [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང] where the war office was located. At that time, he didn't have a house. Dasang Dramdrü came to see my late father and he was friend of my late brother. They were the same age.   

**Q:**  At that time did they set up a kind of war office?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where was the war office located?   

**A:**  The war office was in Lhasa in Phünkang's house.   

**Q:**  Who else was there in the war office?   

**A:**  There were Trimön and Champa Tendar who later became the Kalön Lama. At that time, there were many letters sent by Tshatru Rimpoche to my late mother. In the letters it was written, "The father and son of Tsarong got demoted like this, so if you ask the [Dalai Lama] to give Namgang as the magpa for Rinzin Chödrön that will be very good."   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama stayed in Chöngor Yangtze, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for Dalai Lama staying in Chöngor Yangtze?   

**A:**  It was because [in Lhasa] the situation was chaotic so the Dalai Lama stayed in Chöngor Yangtze until the situation calmed down. Later, my mother and the servants and the chandzö of Tsarong told Tshatru Rimpoche that they agreed to ask for Namgang as a magpa, so please request this from the Dalai Lama. They requested the Dalai Lama and Dasang Dramdrü agreed to come as the magpa. After that, Dasang Dramdrü came to Tsarong.   

**Q:**  At that time Tsarong was the most well known among the people who were executed, right? Who else was executed?   

**A:**  They executed some other people like Möndrong [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོང], and some others. I heard that on that day they executed five people.   

**Q:**  Did they execute five people in one day?   

**A:**  Yes. At the time my father was executed, he went to the Potala Palace. At that time, he lived in his house in Lhasa and he was going back and forth to the Kashag Office. My mother and we, the children and our brother who was a trulku, were in the monastery. My brother the trulku was in Pönpora [Tib. དཔོན་པོ་རག] Khamtsen and my mother was staying in Tashi Khangsar [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁང་སར] and Tsangpa Khamtsen [Tib. གཙང་པ་ཁང་ཚན] who treated her well. My late father was executed on the 1st day of 4th month. On the 30th, it was the monthly worshipping (Tib. ཌསོལ [ཟླ་གསོལ]) for the Protector Deity Nechung. They told Dasang Dramdrü, "You can choose whoever you would like from among the two daughters: the elder daughter Pema Yudrön [Tib. པད་མ་གྱུ་སྒྲོན] or the younger daughter Norbu Yudrön [Tib. ནོར་བུ་གྱུ་སྒྲོན] who was a nun, but she can grow her hair." When they said that, the mother of Delerabten who was very tough came to Tsarong and said that Tsarong should not take two wives because there wasn't any custom like this. At that time, Rinzin Chödrön didn't say anything. I heard they had a serious argument. At that time, the mother of Delerabten used a proverb, "It would be better to ring the bell underneath rather than playing the cymbal to the sky." [Tib. སིལ་སྙན་ནམ་མཁར་འཕྱར་མེ་དགོས་པར། དྲིལ་བོ་འོག་ནས་འཁྲོལ་ཆོག་པའ], [which means it would be better to solve the problem internally, rather than making it wide spread.] She was implying that she was going file a law case. However, it was decided to have two wives and the elder wife gave birth to three children, but none of them survived. As for Tsarong Pema Dolkar, she had many children, but the older ones died. Dündul and Shatra Künsang [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་ཀུན་བཟང]were the youngest. That's how it was.   

**Q:**  When Dasang Dramdrü came to Tsarong was he a shape?   

**A:**  No. He was the Overall Depön [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མདའ་དཔོན].   

**Q:**  That was for his accomplishment in expelling the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was also for the [accomplishment] when the Dalai Lama... I saw the appointment letter. It was written Overall Depön which meant the highest among all the depön. Later he was appointed as the, "Senior General of the Tibetan Regiments." [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་དམག་སྒར་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཆེ་བ་བཀའ་བློན་ཛ་སག་ཚ་རོང་པ].   

**Q:**  He was appointed as a shape and dzasa at the same time, right?   

**A:**  Who knows! These were written together. You can ask the Tsipön [?]. He worked as a kalön and magji for 14 years after he came to Tsarong.   

**Q:**  How long did he work as a depön?   

**A:**  I think he worked a little more than a year. At that time, in Lhasa, there was a restaurant named Jintian owned by one Chinese named Than Thako who was the husband of Tsarong's relatives called Phüntso Drolma [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་སྒྲོལ་མ]. In the restaurant they sold noodles and dumplings. He told me that Tsarong had been working as a kalön for 14 years since Water-Tiger year.   

**Q:**  Did he get the position of kalön in the Water-Tiger year?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time he was very well-known.   

**Q:**  At that time, his name was Dasang Dramdrü?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  His name was Namgang?   

**A:**  Namgang was given by his mother because he was born on the 30th of the month. At that time, Sawangchemmo had one brother whose name was Thondup Norbu [Tib. don grup nor bu], His son was Yeshe Targye [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་དར་རྒྱས] who was the chandzö of Tsarong. And his sister was the wife of Dingja. During these 14 years, he was treated very nicely by the Dalai Lama. Tsarong was only thinking how to develop the country.   

**Q:**  What did he think and do about developing the country, no matter whether the Dalai Lama liked him or not?   

**A:**  No matter whether the Dalai Lama liked him or not, the reason he became the favorite was that the Dalai Lama hoped that Tsarong would be helpful for the nation. So he thought that whatever Tsarong told him was right. The main thing was that he was saying that we should develop the country and make good roads and bridges. He was saying, "The Regent Reting was kind of okay, but he was so incapable that he didn't even build the Phondo [Tib. pgod mdo] Bridge. Tibet is not a small country." He was thinking that we should make one Tibet and we should invite Bhutan and Sikkim and we should make a Greater Tibet. He was saying these things very often. Later, when we came to India, he [Dasang Dramdrü] told Taring Jigme la [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང་འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས], "You should hold discussions with the Sikkimese Ministers saying we should become one polity and you also need to talk to the King Raja Sab saying that Tibet and Bhutan should be one country." This was the time when Taring went to get the guns from India and Kungö [her husband] himself also held discussions with some of the ministers of Sikkim. The main thing is that you can ask Banag Athing who was the main minister of Sikkim. Kungö told him about becoming one country and Banyag Athing said, "The way you are thinking is very good. We have the same religion and we are the same nationality. We also have faith in the Dalai Lama. But regarding Sikkim getting united with Tibet, the way the Tibetan Government implements its policy is scary. If something went slightly wrong, the Tibetan Government would confiscate their property and make their wives and children become beggars. So because of this policy, we would not dare to join with Tibet. The political policy of Tibet is not good."   

**Q:**  When did he say that?   

**A:**  It was around 1937. I heard that he told him this. Oh! No. It was after Tsarong was demoted.   

**Q:**  Was it at the time of the Reting Regent?   

**A:**  At that time, he was not in the Kashag. I think that was after the 13th Dalai Lama passed away at the time of Reting, because at that time we went to China and Kungö went to get the guns to India. It was very clear that it was in 1937. Kungö also told Raja Sab that Sawangchemmo has the idea of Bhutan getting united with Tibet. Raja Sab laughed and said, "Bhutan is a Country and we have a First Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་དང་པོ] and a Second Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་གཉིས་པ]. We ourselves are independent." He just went through the motions of bursting into laughter. He regarded this as a joke, saying, "Should we do according to what Sawangchemmo said?" Sawangchemmo was thinking that he wanted to make this country developed.   

**Q:**  When he had the power in his hand, what kind of things did he do for the development of Tibet?   

**A:**  The main thing was that he prepared the regiments and he also set up the mint.   

**Q:**  Did he also work on sending children to school?   

**A:**  Yes, he worked on sending children to school and set up the mint.   

**Q:**  When they sent the children to the school in London, at that time, was Sawangchemmo there?   

**A:**  Yes, but I don't know if he had put his effort to it or not.   

**Q:**  At that time, the main power of making decisions in the Tibetan Government was in Tsarong's hand, right?   

**A:**  Probably he had the power, but at that time, I was a child. He sent children to school in London and he was interfering in this matter. Some of them came back from London after learning electrical studies. Ringang was sent back again to London to learn to be an electrician. Ringang went to London twice to learn about electricity. In 1925, Ringang came back from London and his children were smart. When Ringang came back the second time, I remember he had an accident when riding a motorbike and broke his hands. The main thing was that Sawangchemmo said that we should make the country rich. At that time, gold and sliver were cheap. At first for the gold coins, it cost 20 sang. Then he set up the Gold Coin office and he developed the post and telegraph office. He said that in order for the country to become rich, it should collect taxes from the wool and yak tails [Tibet's major international exports]. It was impossible for the country to become rich if it didn't have an income.   

**Q:**  When did he make the taxes for wool and yak tails?   

**A:**  I don't know when he made that tax. At that time in Tibet the main decisions were made by the Kashag. But at that time, when we were talking about the Kashag, all the ministers were like listening to the minister who acted more powerful. Some of the ministers were working for the country and some of them were just doing things for their own affairs like pulling up their relative and giving them the positions. When Sawangchemmo had the power, he wanted to make a Greater Tibet, set up school and to have education for the masses and to make a good military and build bridges and make roads. He built the bridges even after he got demoted. He couldn't stay without working. At that time, he was not a Shape but a Dzasa. He was saying that we should make good roads for the animals to pass easily. If we just rely on yaks and donkeys then how can we develop the country? He was really thinking about that. The way of his thinking was just to work .   

**Q:**  Why did he come to India in 1925? Did he have the thought of going on pilgrimage?   

**A:**  That was because he hadn't come to India for a long time, so probably he wanted to come to India for a pilgrimage. At that time, he was working in the mint and they were printing the one sho coin [Tib. ཞོ་ཁང་སྒོར་མོ], the three sang coin [Tib. srang gsum sgor nmo] and the 10 sang coin [Tib. ཇུགོར [བཅུ་སྒོར] using a lathe. For doing that, they needed a lot of fuel and firewood was rare in Lhasa. So they were making this in the places where there were more firewood. So in Norbu Tsokyil [Tib. ནོར་བུ་མཚོ་འཁྱིལ], which is located in Yadong, he set up a factory to lathe copper and sliver.   

**Q:**  That factory was set up by Tsarong, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did he set up that?   

**A:**  It was in 1922 or 1923. Therefore, he came to India and on the way, he also inspected the factory. In Yadong there was very good wood. So he asked for leave to go to India. I don't think that the Dalai Lama sent him to India. At that time, I was in the school.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were in school in Darjeeling?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where did you meet Sawangchemmo?   

**A:**  When Sawangchemmo came, I was on vacation in Kalimpong and I was staying in Nuter Sab's house.   

**Q:**  At that time, the house was not a hotel, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you came to Kalimpong, had Sawangchemmo already arrived there?   

**A:**  After we came there, Sawangchemmo arrived and he stayed in Greme Koti which belonged to Kumarsab Dawa and Kumarsab Namgyal [Tib. རམ་རྒྱལ] they had a very good Koti [house]. After that, they sold the house to a another household. At that time, no one had cars, but they had a car and a motorcycle. No one had the horse breed called Tibija, but they had two Tibija horses. At that time, Sawangchemmo, my sister and Dündul who was 5 or 6 years old, were there. Dasho Jigme la [Tib. བྲག་ཤོད་འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས] was one year older than Dündul la. They came from Gangtok to Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  How long did they stay there?   

**A:**  They didn't stay for long in Kalimpong because they said that there were many Chinese there who had been expelled from Tibet [fear of retaliation]. Then they went to Kolkata.   

**Q:**  You went to Kolkata with them, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I went with them.   

**Q:**  Did you travel in a plane?   

**A:**  No, we traveled by train.   

**Q:**  Was it a special train?   

**A:**  After he came to Kalimpong, he was the guest of the Government of India. Dzasa Raibadur did the reception. On the train it was written, "His excellency, Marshal, the Commander-in-Chief," and he was given a separate place. In Kolkata, he was arranged to stay in the Grand Hotel, but he told them that he didn't want to stay there.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  He told them that he had a lot of business to do so he wanted to rent a house.   

**Q:**  Where did he rent a house?   

**A:**  He rented a flat far away up there. He rented the flat for one month. At that time, I had to do shopping in Kolkata. There was the babysitter, two servants and one cook. Then he did a lot of shopping. At that time he didn't even give me one rupee [Tib. སྒྲོ་མོ]. I was thinking of going back to Kalimpong because I was much happier there. There was a clerk called Chöying [Tib. ཆོས་དབྱིང] who said to me, "Don't do a stupid thing. You have to go on the pilgrimage." I told him that I was not happy because I didn't have any money because Sawangchemmo and my sister didn't give me money. We got the invitation card for the party given by Dzasa Raibadur for each and every person and Sawangchemmo wore his yellow brocade chupa.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  It was in 1924.   

**Q:**  Did he go there once or twice?   

**A:**  It was once.   

**Q:**  You had seen Raibadur once, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At the party Dzasa Raibadur wore a yellow brocade chupa and a vest and the Chinese hat called Tamaotse [Ch. da mao zi] and he put the label of Raibadul Rank on his vest. Sawangchemmo wore the Jantha [Tib. ལྕགས་མདའ] hat. His wife wore all her jewelry. I wore only the cap called Tsering Kyinkhab [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྐྱིན་ཁབ]. They sent a car to receive us. At that time, the party was held in the house Lauradon Reting and there were more then 70 guests. All of the guests sat around the hall and they arrived one after another. After all the guests had arrived, they opened a big gate. There were two Indian women who were said to be lawyers but most of guests were British. When Raibadur and his wife came in, all people paid respect to him and all the wives had to pay the respects to his lady. Sawangchemmo and his wife offered a scarf to the lady. They took many photos. Before they arrived, all people were looking at my sister's jewelry and talking about that. After the regent [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཚབ] arrived, all the people took their seats and they talked a little bit and when the regent left, everybody followed him. Before that, they gave the number of the table and the map where people should be seated. We didn't even had to pull the chair out as there were great looking people who were pulling the chairs for us. The food was not that elaborate. I did the interpreting for my sister. After we had food, when we came out, first the ladies came out, and then they took the guests to their home.   

**Q:**  At that time, what kind of conversation did you have?   

**A:**  I don't know what Sawangchemmo talked about, but they were asking me and my sister if we felt happy and was this our first trip to India. They invited Sawangchemmo to the navy as he was the Commander. Sawangchemmo fired a few cannons. My sister and I also fired cannons. The Commander-in-Chief had one son who was the same age as Dündul. They also invited us to see an underground regiment called Fort Milliant ?   

**Q:**  What kind of things were there in the underground regiment?   

**A:**  There wasn't anything special and all of us we were just driven there in a car. When Sawangchemmo came from Tibet, one secretary in the Kashag, gadrung had to come with him. At that time, the gadrung was Lukhangwa [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ]. In Kalimpong, Sawangchemmo told Lukhangwa that he could go for his pilgrimage wherever he wanted and then to meet him at Phari [Tib. ཕག་རི]. After we finished all the shopping in Kolkata   

**Q:**  What kind of shopping did he do?   

**A:**  Oh, my God! He did so much shopping. Like 4 pairs of brass beds and iron beds which were sparkling. He bought jewelry for both wives.   

**Q:**  What do you mean two wives?   

**A:**  He had the older wife.   

**Q:**  Do you mean Pema Drolkar?   

**A:**  No, Pema Drolkar was with him, and there was Rinzin Chödrön, the wife of my late brother.   

**Q:**  Did he buy the same jewelry?   

**A:**  Yes, he bought same jewelry for his wives. He bought gifts for the Dalai Lama and also things used for flowers [garden]. The most important thing was that he got a permit from the British Government and bought 300 Mauser pistols, which were called Lentu. He said that this was to regain the expenses that we were spending in India. In Lhasa he sold the pistols for 3 dotse each. I was the one who sold the guns. Later, the Mauser Pistols cost 150 Dotse. At the same time, he was doing business and bought some necessities and bought some things for the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  What kind of things did he buy for the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  He bought 6-7 birds like parrots with big tail feathers. He sent these birds ahead. He bought a very big vase from a Chinese store. After that, Sawangchemmo went with Dzasa Raibadur to Bombay to buy pearls and turquoise. My sister, Dündul and I were told to go Bodh Gaya to do prostration and circumambulation.   

**Q:**  At that time, was the food served free by the Government of India?   

**A:**  No. He told them that he didn't want the food but wanted to manage that by himself, but wherever he went he had the train reservations made.   

**Q:**  Where did Sawangchemmo stay in Bombay?   

**A:**  He might have stayed in a hotel.   

**Q:**  When Sawangchemmo was in India, did he receive letters from Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, he received letters.   

**Q:**  Who sent the letters?   

**A:**  His older wife sent the letters.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was no post, so how did he receive letters?   

**A:**  There was the post system. The letter was sent from Lhasa to Gyantse and from Gyantse they sent the letter through the British post system.   

**Q:**  Did he receive information from Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, he got the news that Dingja Depön and Samdru Phodrang [Tib. bsam grup pho brang] had been demoted.   

**Q:**  When he received that news, what did he say?   

**A:**  He didn't say anything. I am telling you the truth. On the way to Tibet he went to Norbu Tsokyil and to Phari. In Phari, Lukhangwa welcomed him. At that time, I felt very cold and I almost got ill. Before we left from Norbu Tsokyil, I had asked the servant Thondrub how would the weather be and he said the weather would be very good. So I didn't take my heavy gown/robe [Tib. ཟླ་གམ], coat, and my boots. The muleteers had left already and avalanches were starting so I felt very cold. They asked what happened, and I told them that Thöndrub said that the weather would be nice.   

**Q:**  At that time, Sawangchemmo didn't get the demotion letter?   

**A:**  No, he didn't receive the demotion edict at that time.   

**Q:**  He didn't even receive some internal information [Tib. ནང་གནས] saying that he was going to get demoted, right?   

**A:**  He didn't receive any. When we reached Phari, we were also ill so Sawangchemmo told us to stay in Phari and he went to see his friend in Bhutan who was the leader of Paro [Tib. pa kro ? dpon slob]. He didn't stay long and came back after a few days. I think the Paro leader was a relative of the king. He said that when he arrived at Paro, they put precious gem ornaments on his horse and they told him, "You Precious Stone! Please don't be inattentive." [Tib. ནོར་བུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། ཐུགས་མ་ཡེངས] Then he came back and he established the telephone and telegram in Lhasa. At that time they were using it, but it was not so good. Then we reached Gyantse.   

**Q:**  Who established the telephone and telegram?   

**A:**  That was at the time when Sawangchemmo was in the Kashag.   

**Q:**  When did they set up the telephone and telegram?   

**A:**  That was in 1923-1924. When we came to Gyantse, there was an English school and Mr. Ludlow received him. The school was located in Gyantse Shokdrub. There was a good house and there were 40-50 students with a few teachers. He stayed in the Nyishabpa [Tib. ཉི་ཞབས་པ] House.   

**Q:**  He didn't stay in Shokdrub House, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he didn't. Then he was invited for the dinner by the Gyantse Regiment which was the British Regiment. At that time, he was the shape so the dzongpön of Gyantse came to receive him. Then we reached Chushul and he stayed in the Takar [Tib. རྟ་དཀར] Estate which belonged to Tsarong. At that time, he received the demotion edict.   

**Q:**  After he reached Chushul, did he receive the edict or was the edict already there in Chushul waiting?   

**A:**  On the day we reached Chushul, the edict was handed to Sawangchemmo by the Chushul dzongpön.   

**Q:**  So the edict was in the dzongpön's hand, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In Chushul, there was a Dzong, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a dzong and gembo who were in charge of collecting taxes.   

**Q:**  They had the edict, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then they handed over the edict. He read the edict and I also read it.   

**Q:**  What did he say after reading the edict?   

**A:**  He didn't say anything. When he read the edict, he checked the seal very carefully. He said that the Dalai Lama taught him how to check seals. The 13th Dalai Lama was very detailed in those things. In the past, when the Dalai Lama was fond of him, even the snacks [Tib. ཞལ་ཏོག] like apples were sent from Norbulinga. When the snacks were sent from Norbulinga, they were wrapped in colored cloth and sealed with a seal. When they sealed the snack wrapped in cloth, they had to put a paper on the cloth and seal it. If they didn't put the seal on the cloth, then the Dalai Lama would scold them because the cloth would become useless. The Dalai Lama was very good at doing economic affairs. At that time, the Dalai Lama was very fond of Tsarong. Even my sister could get her horse from the stable in Norbulinga. There was a stable boy of Tsarong named Bagdro [Tib. བག་གྲོ], and he would go to get the horse called Kelsang from Norbulinga when my sister would go to watch the opera in there. On the stage in Norbulinga, Tsarong was allowed to put chairs in the tent and we would put up two tents. One tent was for Sawamgchemmo and the other was for the family members. When the Dalai Lama sent the snacks from the Dalai Lama's room, the other people were jealous.   

**Q:**  When they sent the snacks from the Dalai Lama, should you have stood up when you received it?   

**A:**  No, the snack would be brought by the stable boys [Tib. ཆིབས་གྱོག].   

**Q:**  Did they sent the snacks to the tent in Norbulinga?   

**A:**  No, the snacks were sent to Tsarong's house. When we reached Chushul, as I said, the edict said, "Nowadays the situation is peaceful and calm in the country, so there is no need two have both the Senior and the Junior Commanders-in-Chief [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཆེ་བ་དང་ཆུང་བ]. Therefore, the Junior Commander Drumpa [Tib. བྲུམ་པ] can take the responsibility alone. So when you come to Lhasa, you can come to the Kashag but you don't need to work as the Commander." That was a pleasant sounding [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] letter. He didn't say anything. Until the Chinese arrived, the letter was there and I used to read it sometimes.   

**Q:**  Did his wife and children say something on that?   

**A:**  No, they didn't say anything.   

**Q:**  Even if Sawangchemmo didn't say anything, the servants and children might have said something, right?   

**A:**  When Sawangchemmo didn't say anything, nobody dared to say anything because it was a government affair. The wives were afraid of him. When he gave advice he would give very good advice like saying now it is time to do this and do that. For example, he told Taring that it was the time to request space and build a house [for you]. He never said things like, "I did this and that." Even when people told him, "People like Pandatsang don't like you," he still didn't say anything.   

**Q:**  Why didn't Pandatsang like Tsarong? What was the reason?   

**A:**  He would say, "There is no reason for doing that." There were some people saying that Pandatsang didn't like Tsarong.   

**Q:**  What was the reason?   

**A:**  They didn't have any reason. The people who were saying something were saying it out of jealously to the Tsarong. He didn't respond and he didn't have any doubt. It was very strange. When people were saying something about Künphel and when he came to Tsarong house, Tsarong would talk with him as if there was nothing.   

**Q:**  Did Künphel la come to Tsarong?   

**A:**  Yes, he came twice or three times.   

**Q:**  Did he come after Sawangchemmo got demoted?   

**A:**  Yes, he came. Sawangchemmo's most favorite person was the oracle of Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས་ཆོས་རྗེ] who would also go to visit the Dalai Lama often. When the oracle would come, they would talk about 4-5 hours, I am not sure whether they were talking about politics, and the servants just had to serve them tea.   

**Q:**  After Sawangchemmo was demoted from Commander-in-Chief, how long did he stay as the kalön until he was demoted from kalön?   

**A:**  When I went as a bride to Taring when I was 25 years old, at that time he was a kalön.   

**Q:**  After that who became the Commander-in-Chief?   

**A:**  The Junior Commander Drumpa became the commander.   

**Q:**  After that did Lungshar [Tib. ལུང་ཤར] become Commander-in-Chief?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, did Lungshar also become the Advisor-Commander-in-Chief [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་འཚོ་འཛིན]?   

**A:**  Lungshar became the Chief Commander.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Drumpa also the Commander-in-Chief?   

**A:**  Yes, it was the time of when Drumpa was the commander, because Drumpa was not that capable a person and he was not in good health. He was related to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I was told that Drumpa was smoking opium, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the Dalai Lama sent Drumpa to the armory in the Trapchi Office, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then I heard that after a while Drumpa was fired from the Commander-in-Chief post, right?   

**A:**  Drumpa didn't get demoted from the Commander-in-Chief post, but he had to remove himself from the post because he was smoking opium. I don't remember who was the next Commander-in-Chief after Drumpa.   

**Q:**  After Tsarong was demoted from Commander-in-Chief, how long did he stay as a kalön?   

**A:**  He stayed for two or three years.   

**Q:**  During that time what did he do?   

**A:**  At that time he only had to go to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  At that time, did he go to visit the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  When did he stop visiting the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  After he came back from India, he had one private audience with the Dalai Lama. After that, probably, he didn't have a private audience.   

**Q:**  He never had audiences with the Dalai Lama after that, right?   

**A:**  I don't remember that. Just before the Dalai Lama passed away, he went to ask for leave of absence to go to visit his estates. At that time he had a private audience with the Dalai Lama; all of the family went together for the private audience with the Dalai Lama. Before that, he had many audiences with the Dalai Lama because he had to go see him every day and he also took Dündul la with him. He was very dear to the Dalai Lama. There wasn't any person as close to the Dalai Lama as Tsarong. No matter what people say, he didn't have any change in his faith towards the Dalai Lama and he said the Dalai Lama was his root guru. He knew that the Dalai Lama was an extraordinary and magnificent figure.   

**Q:**  After 1925, who became the most powerful people and who had the Dalai Lama's ear?   

**A:**  Probably the Dalai Lama treated Lungshar nicely. After that Künphel la came. Before that, there were the favorites like Kanden la [Tib. སྐལ་ལྡན་ལགས] and Namdrol la [Tib. རྣམ་གྲོལ་ལ] but those people didn't have much power in politics; and they were just backing some people [Tib. འགོ་འདྲེན]. On political and military matters, after Tsarong, Künphel la became powerful. At the time of Künphel la, the Dalai Lama passed away.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama passed away, Tsarong Sawangchemmo was staying outside and he was working in the Trapchi office, right?   

**A:**  That was after that.   

**Q:**  No, it was not after that. At that time, when Tsarong asked leave for going to the estate, wasn't he working in Trapchi?   

**A:**  I think you are right.   

**Q:**  Tsarong asked leave for going to his estate and his wife was waiting at Kyentsel Luding and the belongings were sent to Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང]. Tsarong didn't dare to ask for leave right away. At that time, the Dalai Lama, Künphel and Tsarong were having thukpa together. Künphel la said that he was going to attend the morning tea ceremony [Tib. དྲུང་ཇ] and Künphel la threw his napkin onto the Dalai Lama's lap, did you hear about this?   

**A:**  At that time, Sawangchemmo had an audience with the Dalai Lama, but I don't know what happened during the audience. Whenever he had an audience with the Dalai Lama it would take a long time. The other people wanted the Dalai Lama to confiscate Tsarong's property and make us into beggars.   

**Q:**  Who wanted to do that?   

**A:**  The people who didn't like Tsarong.   

**Q:**  Who were the people who didn't like Tsarong?   

**A:**  It might be Drumpa, but there wasn't any reason for him doing that. In 1925, when Tsarong was not there, people were saying that Drumpa told the Dalai Lama that Tsarong's property should be confiscated and the place where he lived was much better and than Norbulinga and Tsarong was trying to take over the power of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Some of them were saying that Tsarong was getting salary from Nepal, right?   

**A:**  I didn't hear that.   

**Q:**  They were saying that Tsarong was taking salary from Nepal and he had a lot of relations with foreign countries.   

**A:**  Yes, those were made up stories. Anyway, on policy and political power, the Dalai Lama had to demote him. But between Tsarong and the Dalai Lama, they never lost the close relations and trust with each other. Tsarong Dasang Dramdrü didn't lose his faith towards the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  At the time when the Dalai Lama passed away, he was at his estate, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he went to his estate for a year.   

**Q:**  At that time, he went to the Tsarong estate?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that he went on a pilgrimage to Lhoka [Tib. ལྷོ་གནས], right?   

**A:**  Yes, he went for a pilgrimage, but that happened at a different time. When he went on pilgrimage he took Betty la with him. He also went to Sambo's estate.   

**Q:**  It didn't happen at a different time; it happened continuously.   

**A:**  Yes. When he went to Lhoka, Betty la was there.   

**Q:**  After that, he was working in Trapchi continuously, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and he also did a lot of business for the Tsarong family.   

**Q:**  Did he give out a lot of loans?   

**A:**  He didn't make loans, but he did a lot of business. He gave advice to people saying, "You shouldn't give loans because it is not good to give loans to relative and friends. If they ask you for a loan, it is better to say no. When you say no, they might get angry once. In some cases, they ask for loans and after that when we pursue them to repay the loans, they get angry." He also told us, "We should not invite an opera group [to perform privately] because the groups we didn't invite will get angry, saying that we didn't invite them."   

