# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0045.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1909  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Mrs. Taring [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང] was a famous Tibetan aristocrat married to Taring Dzasa. In this interview, she talks about her experiences and general events during the 1950s.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0045_07/H_0045_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Mola, what I wanted to ask you is, after the implementation of the 17-Point Agreement, the Tibetan government and the Chinese came to a situation where they had sort of decided to work together. So for 8 or 9 years it stayed like that and also many offices were opened. Finally, it didn't work out. So what was the main reason .   

**A:**  Ola, we all knew that ever since the beginning, Tibetans were Tibetans and Chinese were Chinese and the Tibetans had never been clearly [Tib. གཙང་མ] under the Chinese. Moreover, since 1912, since the Dalai Lama returned to Tibet from India, our country had been independent. So while this situation prevailed, what we did not do was to make relations with other countries. And as far as our independence was concerned, we just thought we were independent and did not send representatives to other countries, or join the United Nations. We were [independent] for about 50 years under the 13th Dalai Lama. In the meantime a lot of things took place in China. Under the leadership of Chairman Mao, the Chinese were unified. So they were united and then they came to invade(se = eat) Tibet. The Chinese were saying that Tibet was under them and so was Taiwan and so they would liberate Taiwan and then Tibet. So there was a lot of apprehension in Tibet, but by then it was getting too late. So when the Chinese said that they were going to "invade" [Tib. བཙན་འཛུལ], our government did whatever was possible and sent many representatives to America, England, India; to about 5 large countries and said, "Help us, the Chinese are saying that they are going to invade, we Tibetans are separate and we do not agree with the forceful actions of the Chinese. However, no one helped, right? And since no one was helping, to tell you very concisely, there was nothing else to do. What we were hoping for was that maybe they were first going to liberate Taiwan. However that was stopped by America and so they came to Tibet. When they came, we had no wish whatsoever to be under the Chinese. However since they invaded and forced their way, there was nothing we could do. Chamdo was lost and so was everything else and so it had come to the point of negotiations. Since Ngabö lost the war and since he was the Doji and the one who was staying at the border, he was arrested and taken down. The Dalai Lama appointed that very person who was there close by and so we said that we were going to negotiate, just negotiate. Mainly, it was Ngabö, but via Chamdo, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Depön and Thubden Lengmön went, or something like that. So since they invaded, the Dalai Lama could not stay in Tibet and moved to Tromo. The government was at Tromo. From there, two persons were sent. Those were Lhautara and Künsangtse Dzasa. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Mindrubu had gone to talk earlier so they could have told them to go, but they did not. They sort of showed their anger, implying that the two did not go before. So new representatives were sent, though it was fine, from my perspective, for the other two [Shakabpa and Künsangtse] to have gone. So they [government] were sort of angry at them, implying that they did not go when they were told to go, and so new ones were sent. So the 17-Point Agreement was signed. We had no wish whatsoever for this, but we had to. Then Zhang Jingwu came via India. He brought the Dalai Lama and came to Lhasa. Via land many soldiers with their leaders came and Tibet was filled. So while we were working, we had no belief in the Chinese, right? But, as I told you earlier, they used a tactful [Tib. མཁས་པོ] policy, saying that they were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> and that they were not going to take a needle or a string [from Tibetans]. Even if our people spat at the Chinese, they would take it. They said that they came to serve Tibet and that when they had accomplished their task, then they were going to leave. So in saying this, they fooled us. The Tibetans thought that maybe what they were saying was true and things would continue. Then in 1954, the Dalai Lama was taken down to China. The Dalai Lama was there as was the Panchen Lama, although the Panchen Lama had nothing to do with Tibet-- so that the Dalai Lama and the kalön would handle things. So they talked and talked and it was decided to start the Tibet Autonomous Region. Upon return, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was started. So the Tibetans, their hope of sorts, grew. No foreign countries were helping and so, what shall I say, if the Chinese were somewhat good, then it just might not be so bad to begin the Tibet Autonomous Region under them. So, as I saw it, they did have a strong belief in that. The reason being that they fooled the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་ཞབས] A Tibetan government official.">shungshab</a> and even treated the shungshab like they were somebody special. For example, when the Dalai Lama was in Beijing, the kalön and other officials, when they were sick, they would say - "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> and above can go to Beijing Hospital and 4th rank, even though it is the same treatment, you cannot go here. In our Communist Party, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> and Theiji and above can go to the Beijing Hospital, and those below the 4th rank will have to go to People's Hospital." So they would say these things. They tricked us - it felt that they were being very nice. So the government was thinking, "Maybe it won't be so bad, maybe it won't be too bad." So upon returning, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region began. So even when this was started, there was great hope that things may not be so bad. However, this was not shared by all. Some felt that the Chinese might not do so badly, and that some of our old traditions could be done away with. On the other hand, the likes of the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> did not at all believe that. And so <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> had [to resign] because the Chinese forcefully wanted things in the 17-Point Agreement like the army being absorbed. So if the Kashag talked about these things, then it was not alright at all. And since it was not all right, the Chinese, Zhang Dai biao, banged fists on the table and the two sitsab had to leave, right? And so each one was not trusting the other and if the Chinese continued their diplomatic way, then things may have continued. But daily [they] made things worse and worse. For example, when the Dalai Lama just returned, the Chinese leaders used to get out of their cars outside Norbulinga. Then wherever the Dalai Lama went, the army used to go in procession, showing a lot of respect. Then things got worse, and they used to drive right up to the palace and their power got stronger and stronger. And since things were not getting well at all, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> revolt started. The real reason was that it was the fault of the Chinese. They were thinking of destroying the Buddhist faith and so for us Tibetans the destruction of the Buddhist faith was not at all acceptable. On the other hand, they were saying that one could not keep guns and they were saying to hand them in. Secondly, they were so against religion. They were insulting the religion, saying that Gautama Buddha was a liar and a cheat who fooled people.   

**Q:**  So they were saying such things, but in the 17-Point Agreement they had said that there would be freedom of religion.   

**A:**  Yes, they said this, but it was not consistent . The Tibetans were doing their best to stick to the terms of the 17-Point Agreement, but they were not listening from the Chinese side and making things worse. Very much so! So since they were doing this, the revolt began in Kham. In 1956, the Dalai Lama went to India for the Buddha Jayanti. At that time, those who were with the Dalai Lama out of desperation told Nehru about the difficulties and that they did not want to return. So at that time Zhou Enlai was there, and he said that everything was all right and that Tibetans could do what they wished. And it seemed that he made a lot of promises and so because of this, Nehru also told [the Dalai Lama] to return. At that time, Ngabö was also among the kalön. They now had to discuss whether the Dalai Lama was going to stay in India or return.   

**Q:**  They must have had a lot of meetings.   

**A:**  Yes, there were a lot, and Ngabö is said to have said, "Now, decide. If you want to return, then return. If not, then I will sacrifice all my children and my wife and I will also stay." So it was very difficult and they could not decide. So it was said that the Dalai Lama did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery in front of Shri Devi [Tib. ལྷ་མོ]. Usually, he would do the senriy on important matters. The senriy said to return. So they returned. In India, I think he [Ngabö] had a very difficult time. Ngabö himself told me he had such a difficult time and that he had never had a more difficult time than this. We met him at a dinner and he said that he never had a more difficult time than the work in India. However, having gone there, the situation was not getting any better, but worse.   

**Q:**  After the meeting with Zhou Enlai, it was said that the democratic reforms would be postponed, right?.   

**A:**  The democratic reforms, even Chairman Mao was saying - nothing was going to happen. You could do the reforms after 3 years and if not then, then 3 years later and then another 3 years and so on until it was the right time to do democratic reforms. Mao was said to have asked Lhalu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a>; "If there are democratic reforms, are you afraid"? He told me he replied that he was indeed afraid. Mao replied, "There is no need to fear because there will come a time for reforms and then you can do it. There will come a time when you feel you want to do the reforms and it's best that it is done then. Don't worry about it, the reforms can begin anytime." However, since Tibetans were very religious it seemed that they [Chinese] felt that if they destroyed religion then the Tibetan people could be shaped.   

**Q:**  Actually, after speaking with Zhou Enlai in India, things should have improved after [the Dalai Lama] returned, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it should have, but it did not. Now what was happening was that many lamas were and they were against religion. Now what was at stake was the Dalai Lama. So the Tibetan people were afraid. There were various lamas who disappeared.   

**Q:**  Which Lamas disappeared?   

**A:**  I don't know their names, but they were invited some place and their whereabouts became unknown. I used to know, but after so many years, I have forgotten. It had now come to the time that the Dalai Lama might be taken some place. The Khambas were to start a big battle, but at that time it was the occasion of the Dalai Lama's examination for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> degree [Tib. grwa skor mtsan bzhes] He had to go to all the three monasteries. So until this ceremony was over, they [Khambas] kept things quiet. The Khambas had fought and did kill a lot of Chinese, but we knew how things had to turn out. The Chinese were more powerful and whoever was helping, whether it was the Americans or anybody, when it really was time to help then there was nobody. So while such a situation prevailed, then they said that they wanted to invite the Dalai Lama to a show. So everybody was suspicious. Then they said not to bring many servants, only Gusung Depön, and don't bring soldiers like usual, and things that made people suspicious. And so from that day the uprising began. The people thought that they might take the Dalai Lama and then the revolt began. So before this the Chinese were saying that the government and China should be united and fight against the Khambas. So the Kashag was acting like they were not with the Khambas, and that the Khambas -- although Tibetans -- didn't listen to us and they had revolted and that the government was not involved in this. So if that was the case, then they were saying that they should unite the soldiers. The [Tibetan] government was saying that it would be useless to send soldiers because if they went there [against the Khambas' side], it would be too bad. Actually, it was not possible for the government and the Khambas not to have any relations because we are the same. But when one looks from the outside, that was what we were saying. So because of this, the representative Zhang Dai biao and the Political Commissar Tan Zhengwei and others were saying that the Kashag was not doing things properly. What they were saying was that if we didn't unite and do things nicely, then it was the Tibetans who were going to lose. They were definitely going to fire cannons. Once that began, then it would all be over. They said they would destroy all the monasteries, which they did.   

**Q:**  So they were saying this during the meetings?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that. It was about a week before the cannons were fired. I had to go to the meetings quite often.   

**Q:**  Was this [meetings] of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region?   

**A:**  It was the Military Region Headquarters [Ch. jun qu] of the Communist party of China. The leaders were saying that. Their leader was Zhang Jingwu and there were many other commanders under him. They were saying so.   

**Q:**  Now, at which meeting were they saying this?   

**A:**  Yes, that's it. When they told us to come to the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region meetings, we would go. Then when they said it was the Women's Association, then there were meetings in the large hall. They were saying the same thing in the Youth League meeting hall and the Women's Association meeting hall too. Whatever meetings there were, they were saying you either work together or we will destroy [Tib. གཏོར] you. If the government doesn't advise the Khambas well and the Kashag acts two-headed, then we will definitely destroy you. We will destroy the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>, Potala and the monasteries if you do not advise the Khambas. So when they started firing then there was nothing for us to do.   

**Q:**  I also wanted to ask you about the meetings. Last time we had a short conversation on Surkhang Sawangchemmo. I think it was at a meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

**A:**  Yes, it was.   

**Q:**  At that time Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> did not speak and left. So I wanted to ask you about this and later what were they saying about Surkhang Sawangchemmo?   

**A:**  Yes, he left, he definitely did. They said that this fellow called Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was a bad man, that he did not have loyalty towards the People's Republic of China. He didn't give a speech and he was one of the main persons in the Kashag and when nobody paid attention to what was said, whom it really boiled down to was Surkhang. So they even told Surkhang Lhajam that she was better than Sawangchemmo. They said that. There was nothing for us to do but keep quiet. Most kept quiet.   

**Q:**  Yes, so that's what I wanted to ask you. For example, in detail, where did the meetings take place, who came, who talked first and who did not and how were decisions finalized? Can you give me an example?   

**A:**  Yes, for example, after the Chinese came they said that they had liberated us but the Kashag and the Chinese never united. It was, however the 17-Point Agreement and the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region that was agreed upon, but the Kashag, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung, the Tsikhang - they were all continuing like before, but not with the Chinese, although the Chinese wanted these to get united.   

**Q:**  In the 17-Point Agreement they were saying that all these would remain as before, weren't they?   

**A:**  In the 17-Point Agreement there was no talk about different offices but only that the statues of the Dalai Lama would remain.   

**Q:**  And the monastic estates [question not finished]   

**A:**  The monasteries would remain as before and that there would be freedom of religion. The military Region would be absorbed. As far as the reforms were concerned, it would be done according to the wishes of the people and not done immediately.   

**Q:**  If there was to be a Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region meeting, where was it held?   

**A:**  The Tibet Autonomous Region had its own meeting hall. They had many places.   

**Q:**  Mostly where was it held?   

**A:**  At the Tibet Autonomous Region, in front of the Shöl. Today there has been a lot of construction and change. It has been about 30 years, right? At that time, they built a huge house called the Tibet Autonomous Region. The meeting hall was very big. That big hall was used for dances and a lot of people were there. The Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region met in various rooms upstairs. The Chinese leaders came and we met. They said we were having a discussion meeting [Tib. བཞུགས་མོལ་ཚོགས་འདུ]. The minutes were written by someone appointed. Most of the talking was somehow done by the Chinese. Most of us keep quiet, but the kalön, for example, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] The name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families.">Samdru Phodrang</a>, Shasur, Ramba-most of the talking was done by the senior kalön [Tib. ཁྲི་པ] and since Surkhang was the senior kalön, he had to talk. The Chinese always said that nothing at all was being done at that time. That the Khambas were doing such and such things, so are you going to think nicely or not? That the Kashag better think properly and that if there is a war we will fire cannons, then you all are going to be the losers. The Kashag was saying - "We are telling them [the Khambas], we are doing this." At that time, Kungö Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] and all were sent to talk with the Khambas to make it look like they [the Kashag] were talking. Even if they did, our concerns were probably the same [Khambas and Kashag] so it would be useless. In the presence of the Chinese, they had to behave like they were not one with the Khambas so they did behave in that fashion. But our concerns [with the Khambas} were the same. So they said that they were going to advise the Khambas and Kungö Samjo and <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> were sent.   

**Q:**  So would the Chinese leaders talk first, like saying that today's meeting was about this?   

**A:**  Yes, they would. They would speak and from the Kashag, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang would say his piece. So if the others did not have to talk then that was it and they would just listen. So for the meetings they would send a notice to attend.   

