# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0045.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** July 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1909  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Mrs. Taring [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང] was a famous Tibetan aristocrat married to Taring Dzasa. In this interview, she talks in detail about the work she did with the Women's Association during the 1950s, including several trips to Beijing.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0045_08/H_0045_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  [Note: The first 3 questions and answers are missing from the tape.] What I want to ask you is roughly where were you from 1950 to 1959 and what did you do during this period?   

**A:**  You mean after the Chinese came?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  You know, Ola [younger relative], your grandmother has a lot of stories to tell you. You want me to give you a detailed account or a brief one?   

**Q:**  Let's start of with a brief one and then I will ask you questions.   

**A:**  Before the Chinese came, I was working at home. When you all were born and young children, I was doing some work, some business work. The reason for this work is that I had two daughters going to school and we needed to have money to pay for school fees. In the past, I went to Mumbai with Rani Sahib and I bought diamond and pearls. At that time your grandfather also sent money with me, so I had a lot of things to do [for Tsarong]. At that time, I bought a large diamond for Tsarong and it was famous as the Tsarong diamond. I wonder where it is today. Your father probably knows. For my children's school fees, just before the Chinese came, I bought a lot of leather. From India we bought the leather for making shoes. This leather was taken to Tibet and a handsome profit was made. I also bought a lot of cigarettes and sent them [for sale] to Sadham. We had a servant, Norgye, and a carpenter's son, Phubu. They knew nothing, but I and my late husband instructed them and sent them. The business was quite good. [Note: The section above this is missing from the tape.] So in 1950 it was said that the Chinese were coming. My late husband was appointed as an English interpreter for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Mindrubug [Tib. སྨིན་དྲུག་སྦུག] who were to go by sea to talk with the Chinese. Just before he left, he telegrammed me from Delhi, saying "We are about to go to China, come immediately." So I left. In the old days it took about 20 days and I arrived in Delhi on the 15th of September. Pola [her husband Taring] was still there. They were ready to go, but India was obstructing their visit so they went to the Chinese embassy quite often and according to protocol they gave them a dinner. I attended it too. So they couldn't leave. The Chinese were saying that they had only one agenda, so whether we went to Beijing or talked here or anywhere it was the same. So while we were waiting at Delhi, we received a telegram that Chamdo had been taken. After that, as you will hear from other sources as well, the Dalai Lama took over the religious and political reins of Tibet when he was 17 years old. Then the Dalai Lama moved his capital to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> temporarily. Then Shakabpa and Mindrubug, who were the main persons, and Pola, who was a staff, and me were asked to return to Tromo. So they could not go [to China], and Ngabö was captured and taken. He acted as the chief negotiator from the government's side. So from Tromo [actually Lhasa], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Depön was sent and what's the name of the Tsidrung?   

**Q:**  Thubten Lengmön.   

**A:**  Thubten Lengmön, and via India by sea Lhautara and Kusangtse Dzasa were sent. The mission headed by Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> ended. Well, they talked in China, so that I don't need to tell you about, right? So the 17-Point Agreement was implemented, and it was done by force. Whether it was done properly or not, the making of seals and a lot of talk - so if you look at Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>'s book it is clearly explained. After the 17-Point Agreement, the situation arose where the Dalai Lama had to go to Tibet. The Chinese representative, Zhang Dai biao came via sea and went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> to meet the Dalai Lama. The two went together. Ngabö slowly came by land and so a situation arose where one had to work within the terms of the 17-Point Agreement. So during this time, Pola and myself were in Kalimpong. Ngödrup Wangmo la [Tib. དངོས་གྲུབ་དབང་མོ་ལགས] and Yangjen Drölkar la [Tib. དབྱངས་ཅན་སྒྲོལ་དཀར་ལགས] la were in school since they were young.   

**Q:**  So this is around 1951, correct?   

**A:**  Yes, it was becoming 1951. So Betty-la also had one, two or three children, Tenzin Norbu [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་ནོར་བུ] was not yet born. So we were in Kalimpong with all our belongings - when the Dalai Lama left for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a>, most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> brought their things out to Kalimpong. So when we went back, we left most of our belongings with the representative at Phari. However, we took a lot of the things back, like silverware, boxes and other things. When Pola and myself were in Kalimpong, Taktse [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར] Rimpoche was saying, "It is no use going back, would you two like to come with me to America?" So Pola asked, "What do you want to do? It would be nice to go with Taktse Rimpoche." I replied, "Whatever the case may be, the Dalai Lama has already returned. I can't leave my family, children and relatives so I'm not going. Your parents are there and you can't just leave. So no matter what, let's go back." So we decided to return. When we got there, the Chinese had arrived and were already there. So before the Chinese came I was doing some business at home. I used to get the capital from Tsarong Pola (Tsarong Dzasa). So we arrived and there were a lot of Chinese there. Zhang Daibiao (Jingwu) had arrived, so too had Alu Buzhang. Many kudrak as well as Chinese invited us to dine and many were coming. So during this time a lot of Chinese soldiers had arrived, about a few thousand, and they were staying at the places where the government officials used to have picnics; places like Trungjilinga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] and Tsidrung Lingka. They were packed with Chinese who stayed on these places. A lot of Chinese women students had come at that time. The Chinese military officers of the Military Headquarters [Ch. junqu] said that the younger soldiers needed to be taught Tibetan and we needed teachers from the government. [They wanted] A teacher for the men and another for the women, a lady [Tib. ལྕམ] who could teach. So from the women's side, five of us ladies were sent: Thangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད], myself, Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] daughter Yangjen la [Tib. དབྱངས་ཅན་ལགས], and Samling Tsepe la [Tib. བསམ་གླིང་ཚེ་དཔལ་ལགས]. From among the men, the Kashag sent Kapshö Thöndrub [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་དོན་གྲུབ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Jampa Phuntso [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Rimpoche Jigme [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས], and the monk Jisö Gusho Kungala [Tib. སྐུ་གཞོགས་ཀུན་དགའ་ལགས]. So the government sent about twelve of us. [Ngodrub Wangmola says: Se Shiga Tsenam la [Tib. ཟས་གཞིས་ཀ་ཚེ་རྣམ་ལགས] was also there.   

**A:**  That was a little later, they were not sent by the government. So government also told me to go. The Kashag gave us a brief letter. Before that, we used to say, "We haven't received a letter from the Kashag, so without their orders we will not come." So at that time, a nice couple educated at Yale University by the name of Professors Li Jiaoshou and Yu Jiaoshou came. The two used to come and invite us. And so at Trungji Linga we started a school and so I taught there for two years. When I used to teach the students, I used to teach them with much care. I used to be very kind to them. They were only students and I felt very compassionate towards them. They used to call me teacher (Tib. གེན་ལ [Tib. རྒན་ལགས]) and they liked me a lot.   

**Q:**  So you were teaching the students. Were they all from the military?   

**A:**  At the first school that was started, all the students were soldiers. At that time there were no other students. After the soldiers were taught, then later another school was started at Trungji Linga which was different in nature. In this school there were Tibetans and others. The first school was exclusively soldiers. Both the men and women soldiers used to like me a lot. I must have taught about 700 students.   

**Q:**  At this particular time, it seemed that the Chinese were behaving in a mild way. Some say that even if you hit them they wouldn't react. Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes. When they first came they were diplomatic. Yes, I have seen it. You may have read my book. When Pola and myself were going near Künsangtse and the Shatre Samba bridge [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲའི་ཟམ་པ], two Chinese armed with guns and riding ponies were approaching. A monk knotted his shawl and struck them. Although the horses went sideways and they stumbled, they just went on their way. The reason is that they had a policy to be gracious [Tib. བྱམས་པོ]. So in this way I taught at the school for two years. Then the political situation started changing and it was said that the Women's Association should begin. So all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> ladies, mainly the Dalai Lama's elder sister Tsering Drolmala [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལགས], the wives of the kalön and Tsarong, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, Ngabö, Surkhang, Shasur and the other ladies [Tib. ལྕམ], about 50 to 60, were recruited by the Chinese and dined. They said that the association must be formed.   

**Q:**  Did they say that you had to form the association during a party or were they already saying such things before?   

**A:**  On the day of the meeting they dined us. They told us to come to the meeting just to discuss this. So they said that the organization must begin. So we said that until now no such thing as a Women's Association had been formed and for this reason we had to first request the Dalai Lama and the Kashag and so we could not unilaterally agree to form one. So we would request it of the Dalai Lama and let them know. Zhang Dai biao had a wife by the name of Yanggang and the wives of the other military leaders were also there. They told us, yes, ask the Dalai Lama and then we can have a meeting later. So the Lhajam went to ask Kashag for permission and the Kashag said it was alright to start one. So after that we had a meeting and we had to form an organization. During this time a meeting was called at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> House to discuss who should be the Chairman [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན], the Vice [Tib. གཞོན་པ] Chairman and the committee members, what the Chinese uyön of the organization. So the Chairman was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Lhajam, then there were 4 or 5 Vice Chairs: <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, Ngabö, etc. At this time your grandmother said her health was not good and she couldn't accept the position. So I supported her saying that my sister was in ill health and came down sick suddenly when she had her gallstone pains. So they excused her from the chair status and said that she could remain as an uyön and that it was fine if she could not come to meetings all the time. They always gave this sweet talk. So they appointed me as a Vice Director [Ch. zhu ren, Tib. གཞོན་པ] along with Tangme also the General Secretary [Ch. mi shu zhang, Tib. དྲུང་ཆེ]. So the women's league began and while I was working in this association, in 1954, the Dalai Lama went to China and Pola went among the entourage. So I said if he went, I would like to go. The Chinese said it was okay and so did the Kashag. I stayed a year. When we went, Ngodrub Wangmo was a month pregnant with Tenzin Wangdü [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་དབང་འདུས]. She said she wanted to go, so we took her and stayed exactly a year. Then after Tenzin Wangdü was born I stayed on at the Dalai Office [Ch. ban shi chu] in Beijing learning Chinese. The Chinese woman called Gyamo Achala [rgya mo a lcag lags] was there - while Pola went with the Dalai Lama to Dongbei. When the Dalai Lama returned, Tenzin Wangdü was hardly even a month old and since we couldn't travel she stayed behind and Pola and myself came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  You were speaking about the Women's Association. Now there was also a Youth League, how did that begin?   

**A:**  In exactly the same fashion.   

**Q:**  Where did they meet?   

**A:**  They met in Alo Chöndze's house. There was a place where horses were shoed. It was near that. Mrs. Tangme and I had to go. They said that the women and the youth should have good relations and so I was also in the youth group. And so the Women's Association's work began, going to meetings, etc. In 1954 when the Dalai Lama went to China it was agreed that an Autonomous Region would begin.   

**Q:**  Yes, in China, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region (PCTAR).   

**A:**  Yes, at first it was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a>, then later the real one [would] start. When Chen Yi came there was a grand ceremony. By the time he arrived, the [motor] roads [to inland China] were more or less completed. When we left for China [in 1954] the roads were horrible. You know there is a video put out from London that took it from my book and it was absolutely correct. When we went down towards Kongpo, before we reached Tramo [Tib. སྤྲ་རྨོག] we went by horse. The roads were so dangerous with rocks falling and horses and mules falling, some animals had their stomachs burst from impact. Huge boulders used to roll and my daughter and I used to meet the Dalai Lama quite often on the road. From Tramo, there was a motorable road. At first Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> put us in a lorry, he was the one who made arrangements on the road. I remember this very clearly, and I later found out we were entitled since Ngodrub Wangmola was a uyön and I was the Vice Director and the General Secretary. Ngodrub Wangmo la says: I was not an uyön. Laughs.   

**A:**  What! No, you were not. You must have been an uyön. She says she was not a uyön. We were together, so I'm telling my story, right?   

**Q:**  Agreed.   

**A:**  So on the way from Tramo, Pola [Taring] and I were put in a small car since the lorry shook too much and my daughter was pregnant. So we arrived at Chamdo. Then what happened? From Chamdo we were together with the Dalai Lama up to Chengdu via <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> over the Erlang Shan [Tib. ཨེར་ལང་ཤན] Pass, through the country Lan Shezi. There were a lot of welcome parties in these areas and then we reached Chengdu. From there, the entourage with the Dalai Lama, all those 4th rank and above officials took a plane via Xi'an. I couldn't go, since Ngodrub Wangmola couldn't be left to herself. While there she wanted to have some ice cream and so we had some. We must have eaten some real bad ice cream for she got sick and almost had a miscarriage, so we called the doctor. The doctor said that we had to stay. I said we would not stay and then after some discussion we decided to go. There was this Chinese called Wang Chuzhang who said, "Oh! don't worry now, since the Dalai Lama has left, we will take you in a good small Russian vehicle." In the beginning, the two of us were staying at the higher ranking guest houses where the Dalai Lama and the 4th rank officials were staying. There was another guest house where the fifth rank officials and the servants stayed and they were making the arrangement for the vehicles. When we went there - I swear by the three jewels that these guys were no good - Kungö Drunyichemmo Angula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] and Depön Tashi Berala were in charge of arrangements. My daughter was sick and they never even said, "Oh, why don't you come in this car." Especially Kungö Tashi Berala who was a colleague of , the late Depön. He never even asked how she was keeping. All he did was talk to about her husband and she cried a lot and as a result aggravated her sickness. So when we went to the guest house, all the younger <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, since the Dalai Lama had already left, had already occupied the cars and and I, nobody gave us any car. Li Chuzhang [Li Zuomin] couldn't do anything. Since he knew Tibetan, he said, "It will come now, it will come now." And you know where we were sent? We ended up with the elder sister of Gyawa Karmapa [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཀར་མ་པ] whose husband was a chandzö. What a jeep -the four of us ended up with -a jeep with no cushions at all. Ngodrub Wangmola was bouncing all over. Norgye was with us- our servant - he held the pillow. So we had no choice but to go. Then we all left and arrived at a field where everything had to be done in order. We all had numbers for the next day where we had to know which vehicle went after which one since there were almost 40 trucks and about 30 odd smaller cars . Ngodrub Wangmola was sick and the two of us were in an old jeep. Drunyichemmo and the others didn't even bother to ask how we were keeping. Kungö Maya, his wife and Kungö Phala, the middle one used to ask how we were, saying she had a rubber cushion, and could she offer that to us. I will never forget that. Then when we went and came to the plains and there was an ambulance. They said, "There is a sick one here, where is she?" They came for Ngodrub Wangmola's sake, you know. It was so nice. There were 2 doctors who both spoke English. So it was great. They asked me if I was the mother of the sick one. "Yes," I replied. "You may come also," they said. So it was very comfortable. She was carrying Tenzin Wangdüla. So we went through Baoji. You have to travel for 7 days before one got to Chengdu. As soon as we got to some village, other doctors would come and since it was hot they got us a fan, and some ladies came to sit with us. Then when we got to Xi'an she was getting better. So we thanked the doctors and we stayed at the Guest House and got better. Then we went to hot springs in this area and there were many pomegranates. Then we went by train to Beijing where we stayed for about a year. I stayed at Beijing while the Dalai Lama was traveling about. For the National Day [Ch. shi yi] we were at a small guest house with the 4th rank officials and there was a large hotel called Beijing Hotel [Ch. bei jing fan dian] where the kalön were staying. Then while staying like this, Ngodrub Wangmola did that [gave birth probably] at Beijing.   

**Q:**  While at Beijing, did you have to attend some meetings?   

**A:**  During this period I did not have any work. However, I was the Vice Director so when there was a luncheon I ended up in table number 3. The Dalai Lama, his tutors and the Chinese leaders were on Table #1; the kalön at table #2. At table #3 the Dalai Lama's mother and we sat. I had a rank in the Women's Association so that always landed me in table #3.   

**Q:**  During the luncheon were there speeches?   

**A:**  The Chinese leaders and the Dalai Lama spoke. There was an abundance of food and there were about 60/70 tables. Outside they wrote what was on the table like the names of the guests. Ngodrub Wangmola would be in the outer table, whatever number it was 40,50,60, etc. The Dalai Lama's mother, Gyeyum Chemmo [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡུམ་ཆེན་མོ], Tsering Drolmala, Ngabö Lhajam, myself and such types always ended up in table #3. Then in the evenings we went to see shows. To make it short, the Dalai Lama returned and Ngodrub Wangmola stayed behind. We spent the New Year in Beijing and it was just as big as Lhasa, with the monk official kitchen staff of the Dalai Lama [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ] making the cookies like mugthung [Tib. སྨུག་ཐུང], bulu [Tib. སྦུ་བླུག], and all sorts. Then we returned via Chongqing, Nanjing. Then Chengdu and up to Tibet. The day the Dalai Lama arrived at Lhasa a bridge collapsed. It was repaired immediately and the Dalai Lama's personal items were delivered. Then in Lhasa we had to work regularly at the Women's Association. In 1956 when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> started the first plane, with Chen Yi, Zhang Jingwu, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Lhajam, and myself took off from Nagchuka too ... at that time I was helping Yabshi Lhajam and stayed for a while. Yangjenla was with me.   

**Q:**  Why did Lhajam go?   

**A:**  She was the Director of the Women's Association. She had to go a deliver a speech at the National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་འདུ].   

**Q:**  What was the celebration about?   

**A:**  It was the National Congress, which meets every year. So the women had to go and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Lhajam went.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  In 1956. Then in 1957, we had the National Women's Association meeting. One delegation member had to go and I went as the leader. There were also the ladies Samling, Draktong [Tib. བྲག་གདོང], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] The name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families.">Samdru Phodrang</a>, and Tsering Chödrön la [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ཆོས་སྒྲོན་ལགས]. At that time it was so hot and the meeting was postponed. Also Tsarong Mola was seriously sick. I said I didn't want to go, but they said nothing would happen. Just now she was not so bad, but if she got worse, they said, we could always fly from Beijing to Lhasa. That's what they said and I had to go. At that time the Dalai Lama was in India. Since the meeting was postponed they said we could tour wherever we liked in Beijing. I said I had already seen Beijing when the Dalai Lama was there, but I would like to go to Dongbei so please make preparations. So they made the preparations and I went to Mongolia, and Yianbian Korea. It went very well. Where was it- when I was in Dongbei I received a telegram that Tsarong Mola passed away, so I was not able to see her. I went to Beijing 3 times. Then in 1958, 1959 while we were working at the Women's Association, the uprising took place, and then I escaped. The Chinese were sending me a lot of letters saying I must come. Even Ngabö Lhajam send me a lot of letters. However, I thought it was better to die than to go to the Chinese and I escaped alone.   

**Q:**  What I'll do is listen to the tape and then ask you more detailed questions.   

**A:**  Then I came to India and at that time you were little, about 9 or 10. You used to say Mola, Mola - you were cute. You used to come to my bedroom, do you remember - I had an English Marie biscuit tin and we ate together. We ate biscuits in the morning and you tried making the bed, you were so cute. You used to say, "Mola, shall I take the jeep out of the garage?" Please ask your father- I used to say. Then I stayed with your aunt Tess-la's and Kungö Samjola came and said, "Please teach English for those of us who came from Tibet, I'm finding great difficulties." So I said- "Sure, find me a place and I'll come." I started with 20 students and later it grew to over 100. So while the school was going well, Pola had arrived first. At the time of the escape we were separated, did you know? Pola was at a meeting at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and I was at home. Then I went down to Norbulinga and though I thought of going home to the children. I couldn't since there was shooting. Then I went to Drepung and, oh, there is a long story. I have it written in my book. When the big guns were firing I left Lhasa with Tashi, the servant. A very good man, without him I could not have escaped. Then I came to India through Bhutan. I had a lot of difficulties on the road. Aunt [Paljor's aunt] Tessla's husband Kumar Sahib were very kind and took me to Bhutan and came to meet me at Phüntsoling [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང]. So, if I were to tell you in detail there are so many things to relate.   

**Q:**  As you know I"m planning to write a social and political history next year and so I wanted to ask you a few things about that, from 1951-59. For example, around 1951, what were the youth thinking at that time? During the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> time the government was quite conservative with many things forbidden. So since the youth were interested in change, did they like the reforms that the Chinese were doing?   

**A:**  The Chinese came to Tibet and I have already related how the Women's Association began. Likewise the youth simultaneously organized. However, the way I saw it everyone was afraid [Tib. ཞེད་ཧུར་ཧུར] - word - wondering what the Chinese could be up to. Everyone was afraid and no one really thought they would do great things. However, since the government accepted the 17-Point Agreement we had to do some work. We couldn't say we didn't know; we wouldn't do it, so we said to the government- "The Chinese are saying these things, so is it all right to start the organization?" The government said that it had to be done since we had already made the treaty. Therefore, the women and youth organizations first began under fear. Then the Chinese were too clever/diplomatic, gave some titles, entertained with delicious food and then we thought that the 17-Point Agreement may not be too bad. Changing the old system, maybe they thought that the Chinese might not be too bad, I think they may have been thinking in this way. When we were first teachers and began sitting down and working together, Shölkang Jedrungla [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང་ལགས] was there. Hardly anybody trusted the Chinese, but it [trust] gradually developed. The development of the Youth League mirrored that of the Women's. Even in the Women's there were many who liked the Chinese ways. Likewise, in Youth League, particularly there was Shölkang Jedrungla, Surkhang Jedrungla and others. Surkhang and the like were from rich families and I didn't think Surkhang Jedrung liked the Chinese very much. Shölkang Jedrung used to go straight to do the work and seemed to like working with the Chinese. Likewise, there were some like Tangme who thought by getting rid of the old system, it just might work out fine. However later everybody changed their minds about the Chinese. I don't know if Shölkang Jedrungla changed his mind. Even in the women's, there were Samling and others. They didn't change their mind. Take my case. I was thinking that if I said I didn't know, I couldn't do it, then it reflected on our (Tibetan) incompetence [Tib. ཐབས་སྐྱོ་པོ]. My attitude was that we can do this, we will do this, anything. Even if <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> ladies had to do construction work, I used to say okay, I'd bring them. If the Chinese said that they didn't want to come, I used to organize the teaching of scriptures like the famous letter written by Nagarjuna [Tib. བཤེས་སྤྲིངས]. So they would come to the meetings. Many didn't come to the meetings and so the General Secretary used to ask what's happened? So I made a group to learn scriptures and called the lamas. It worked out well, we had examinations. However, there were the Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] and Samling types who were against this, saying, "This Vice Director organized and taught religion and we need to learn politics. Religion should be taught at the monasteries but not in the offices." But, I didn't care at all. And on the question of elderly kudrak ladies hauling carrying baskets, I used to say, "You don't have to carry baskets at all. The younger ones, yes, they have to. I sent notices to you, but I don't want you to come. If there was a reception, a party, a celebration or a meeting- come, wear nice clothes and have a good time. Otherwise don't ever do that ." Shasur <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a>, when he was here (India) said, "You really did a virtuous deed to my wife." She then stayed at home, relaxing and saying her prayers. Otherwise she used to fear not going when they said to come. If she went then they had to carry baskets and all kinds of other things.   

**Q:**  Why did you have to carry baskets?   

**A:**  The Women's Association members had to dig and plant trees. The older ones, didn't do it. The younger ones - you had to do it.   

**Q:**  You couldn't hire someone?   

**A:**  No way!   

**Q:**  Why? It was not permitted?   

**A:**  Never.   

**A:**  Ngodrub Wangmola said, "No, they had to make reforms."   

**Q:**  Oh, so you had to do it by yourself.   

**A:**  Yes. For example, I told the old ladies like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, Shasur, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Lhajam and others, "Don't ever carry those baskets. Even I would never carry one." I used to keep a list saying, "Come here, go there," etc., but I never carried a basket.   

**Q:**  Then who had to carry them, the younger ones?   

**A:**  All the younger ones had to- whoever came. Each one was assigned a number of trees to plant. If they didn't come then that was it. There was this Chinese women, Zhu Lizeng who used to exclaim, "Ah, they are not coming!" I used to say, "Oh, they won't come, why should they, they're old, they have to say their prayers. This is the local custom. Leave them be. We don't need them. We'll call them at the meetings. Let the younger ones do it!" "Okay," she used to say . She was a very agreeable person.   

**Q:**  Likewise, what other work was there to be done, like planting trees and what?   

**A:**  We had to plant trees, have meetings, and later when the Khambas resisted, they would say - go to visit this place and that village, go to meetings, whatever had to be done.   

**Q:**  Why? To try and stop the resistance?   

**A:**  Yes. They were telling our government that the Khambas were really misbehaving and the Tibetan government's military and us should be united and get rid of the Khambas. If they keep on like this, they would say, we will destroy the monasteries. The Kashag was saying that we couldn't join forces because if we did, they would not listen to us. The soldiers would also revolt against us. So when we heard that something had happened, like a person was killed or something happened to a soldier, etc., then there were a lot of discussions among the women's members. Then we had to go to the meetings. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang boycotted, we had to go. They would say, "Come for a meeting at the TAR." When there was food they served delicious meals, but we had to go.   

**Q:**  Regarding the Khambas, the Women's Association had meetings to discuss what?   

**A:**  Then the officers like the Political Commissar Tan Zhengwei and other leaders would come and say, now [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  In the meetings, how did you meet?   

**A:**  They would say, "Today we are going to have a meeting." We had our own meeting rooms at the hall. There was a leader for the meeting. He would say- "All you directors have assembled and the Kashag is not at all doing things in the correct manner. They don't listen, so what are you going to do? What is your opinion?" Everybody would keep quiet. Nobody would say a word-only listen. So many were there, Surkhang Lhajam, etc. They all kept quiet. So he would say- "Surkhang Lhajam, you are much better, since Surkhang Wangchen Gelek [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] is useless," and he had a lot of things to say while he was so worked up. So we just listened. If they told us we had to do this or we had to go somewhere -then it must be done. If they said - go to Nyemo and visit, then we had to go. Since I was the General Secretary, I asked people to do things and they left me alone.   

**Q:**  What's there to visit in Nyemo?   

**A:**  There are places where the Chinese were fighting and there were the wounded. So we went to visit the wounded soldiers. Not Tibetan soldiers, but Chinese.   

**Q:**  So that's both the youth and the women's associations?   

**A:**  Yes, myself and Shölkang Jedrungla went quite often to the one at Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག]. They brought a lot of soldiers there. When we went to visit them, they were all kids, 16-20 years old. So we consoled them, made the rounds, gave them some sweets and stuff. So until the uprising, I was the Women's Vice Director and also the uyön of the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཙོགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང་གི་ཨུ་ཡོན]. I had something like 3 titles and a salary of around 300 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> In 1957, I went to the National Women's Assembly [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་བུད་མེད་ཚོགས་ཆེན]. After that, they gave you some time to go and visit where ever you wanted, some nice places. We went to a beautiful place, what's the name, it's like Mumbai, I forget. We had a meeting and then we had to make a summary report. But they never quite agreed with it. I made the speech for the leader. Of course if I really fought with them then they would kill me, right? I showed it to them [the speech] but they wouldn't make many changes. At that time, I don't know why, but they were so suspicious of me. They were not being nice at all. They were so suspecting. When I was in Lhasa, there was this lady director called Xu Zhuren who was a very nice lady and was very fond of me. She used to say, "You have to come and lead the meetings." I said that my sister was sick. She said it didn't matter and that I could come immediately by plane. I think she was really telling me things from her heart. Later, I don't know what report they had on me, but when I got to Beijing, her attitude completely changed. She was not friendly like when we were in Lhasa. They were suspicious of me - maybe they thought that it was a mistake to make me the leader. But it was too late by then, everything had to move along. So the meetings were awkward, not happy, suspicious like. So we used to get into a lot of arguments. There were the representative of the labor workers also [Tib. ལས་རྩོལ་འཐུས་མེ]. When we met we did not agree. We had a lot of arguments and I argued openly. The construction workers had their representatives. So we had to meet and do that. [discuss] I used to say, "The Chinese Communist party says that there are no differences [classes], but the way I look at it there are a lot of differences. The poor people's houses are poor and their food is also poor and the better off, their food and places to stay are very good. If you go to a place you go by car and for entertainment you go to the movies. So there are a lot of differences between the people and the leaders, so what is this?" So they didn't like that at all. I didn't get scared and I would make them suffer [Tib. སྐྱག་པ་ཤོར་ཤོར་བཟོ]. So at that time, they really didn't desire to bring me. There was Zhude's wife, she used to treat me kindly. She reminded me of Lhalu Lhajam, giving all kinds of goodies everywhere when we went to the meetings. Some were really rude [Tib. སྤྱོད་རུ་ཚ་པོ]. Then they were talking. What was it, something about a hundred flowers blooming. The meeting was at the time when all the intellectuals revolted and were badly treated. It was about two revolters. Wang, something. Ones who earlier went to the school in the U.S. Then at the meetings, the women scolded them a lot and then they met the next day to see if they had a change of heart and they used to say yes-some did. I was assigned an interpreter, one of my students, a very nice girl. It was very difficult, especially looking at their faces, when they showed a different attitude. And I used to think that it would have been better if I had not come. They didn't like it. The reason was what they were doing and what I was doing was very different. I was not forceful enough which they wanted me to be. However, obviously I couldn't talk back strongly. I wouldn't be able to keep my sanity. But they were not happy and it was difficult going to the meetings. So when we had to make the summary reports, we argued while making them. The construction workers and us always confronted each other. Behind the labor workers, was Samling. However, it was a pleasant tour. We went all over China, to Mongolia, Korea. The food was excellent. My sister used to say she was my aide and wherever I went they had appointed a Chinese servant [Tib. ཞབས་ཕྱི] for me who was also to spy on me. I and a director colleague, a Chinese woman, she and I went together. Wherever I went, even shopping, the Chinese servant would go and pay the bill and do everything. Actually, she was like a spy. Every place we went the mayor [Ch. shi zhang] would call a meeting as soon as we arrived. Then a speech had to be given. Since I was the chair, I had to prepare it. When I reached Dongbei, my sister passed away. My colleague that night received a telegram. The night before we were traveling in a excellent train and I wanted to have a good sleep that night. However, I just could not sleep. I dreamed of Tsarong House and so many people were going in and out with scarves. It was a bad dream and I thought that my sister may have passed away. So the next day the Women's Association arrived to welcome us. They said, "Today our Group Leader [Ch. tuan zhang] has a telegram." I put the telegram in my dress pouch. My Chinese colleague said that she would read it for me. I said I knew the contents and so I didn't want to read it. I had my duty to address the gathering. As soon as I got there the mayor of the county would tell me about everything. That evening there was a dinner and in the evening the Tuanzhang had to give a speech. So I gave the address, saying all the good things, obviously we only said good things and not the bad ones - since we had not come to argue with them . Then dinner was served and then we would sing songs and do the opera and dance. That evening I didn't sing. When I got back to my room which we shared, I asked my colleague to read the cable. "Yes," she said it was bad news, "your sister has passed away." So I cried that night. The next day I thought there was nothing that could be done and I tried to put on a good face. I kept the telegram in my dress pouch that whole day. We were shown factories, the old banks where they showed how the Japanese used gold and said "We the Communist Party have no need for gold." They said - "Look how their managers used to live, with glasses, they have no faith. We are not like that". So like that,for a period of 8 years, I did a lot of work for the Chinese.   

