# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0045.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Rajpur, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche, Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Taring, Rinchen Drolma [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང, རིན་ཆེན་སྒྲོལ་མ]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1909  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Mrs. Taring [Tib. འཕྲེང་རིང] was a famous Tibetan aristocrat married to Taring Dzasa. In this interview, she discusses life after her marriage to Taring, her husband going for training to use machine guns in Gyantse, and his positions after his return to Lhasa. The interviewee also discusses the life and promotions of Ngabö. She also talks about thinking that the reincarnation of the 13th Dalai Lama might be born to her, and then in detail about how Taring built their house in Lhasa.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0045_03/H_0045_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  He [her husband] moved to Gyantse, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In Gyantse, he learned how to use machine guns and he seemed to be enjoying himself. During the daytime, they went to learn the machine guns and in the evening we gathered at the place called Shogdrub [Tib. ཤོག་སྒྲུབ] in Gyantse. At that time, Yuthok Jola [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས] [brother], his excellency kungö Rai Bahadur, and the [Indian] Babus got together and we danced. At that time, the mother of Ngabö's wife who was related to you, Rimpoche, and who used to be the wife of the late Jidzong, she came to Gyantse. This was because she loved Yuthok Gandrön [Tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] much more than her husband, even though she was much older than Yuthok. At that time she was pregnant. She was also the mother of the Yuthok's sons Jigme [Tib. འཇིག་མེད] and Rinzin Tseden [Tib. རིག་འཛིན་ཚེ་བརྟན] who is the husband of Kula [the Princess of Sikkim].   

**Q:**  Was she the mother of Jigmela and Rinzin Tseden?   

**A:**  Yes. She also gave birth to a daughter, but she died. After that, Yuthok took Dündül la's [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་ལགས] mother Dorje Yudrön [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན] as his wife. That's how it was. At the time, while we were enjoying ourselves in the daytime, they went to learn the machine guns. The wife of Yuthok Gandrön was pregnant and it was almost her due date. Even when she was supposed to give birth on the next day, on that night we were still dancing. Yuthok Kungö was very good at dancing.   

**Q:**  You mean to say Yuthok Gandrön?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, Donyö [Tib. དོན་ཡོད] would also say jack in the box and he [Yuthok] would dance. On the next day, Kungö [my husband] and we were staying in the house in the regiment which used to be the house where the Sirs would live. It was an apartment with an attached bathroom. At that time I was reading scriptures and learning typing and Drolma was cooking. In the morning my brother came and I told him, "You put too much hair oil on and there is oil even on your face." He said, "I was so busy because my wife gave birth last night and she is fine." We thought that there was no problem. but then the steward came and he was saying that something happened to Kungö's wife and I came here to call Kungö. When I went there, they were practicing to reassemble the machine guns [Tib. སྐམ་སྒྲིག] in the living room with the military officers. I went there very quickly and I told Jola that the steward had came and he was saying that something happened to your wife. So he took the Gyantse doctor and when they reached there his wife was already dead. At that time, Jola [Yuthok] brought Jigmela and Rinzin Tsedenla and Surkhang Dikyila [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་བདེ་སྐྱིད་ལགས]. They all were small. Jola was very worried and he was saying, "I am going to jump into the river." At that time they were almost finishing their training. There was only one month left before they were to go to Lhasa. At that time, he received many government edicts. The 13th Dalai Lama was very worried and the Dalai Lama liked him a lot so Jola had to go to Lhasa and the children stayed in Gyantse and the small child was kept by Yuthok. Two of the sons and Dekyila stayed with Kyidu because they were related to each other. Then we all departed for Lhasa and when we reached Shundongkar [Tib. ཤུན་གདོང་དཀར], a chibyog of the Dalai Lama came there and from Kyentsel Luding we went to our own house and the Kungös and the soldiers went directly to Norbulinga. At that time, I heard that the 13th Dalai Lama, wearing a hat called Josha [Tib. ཇོ་ཞྭ],welcomed them to Norbulinga. When Kungö [husband] was in Gyantse, he had asked the Kashag for salary and the Kashag had said the salary would be as same as a rupön in the Bodyguard Regiment. That salary was not high. Only 13 dotse in a year. After that, my late father (in-law) got old, so he said, "If my son goes to Lhasa that will be very good. I am having a hard time going there every year." Then we made a report requesting that the son replace the father's position [Tib. ཡབ་སྲས་གོ་བརྗེས] and the government agreed with this. At that time, Kungö was the personal attendant of the 13th Dalai Lama and my late father told Kungö that, "You don't have to go to visit the [kalöns]." Probably, it is okay to submit the request to become a lay official and will get the fourth rank [Tib. རིམ་བཞི] right away." But Kungö was thinking that he was young and it was better for him to join the lay official segment going step by step, so he became a senampa on the 8th of the 3rd Tibetan month [Tib. བརྒྱད་གཏོར] in that year. The government had established a new regiment called Drongdrag which was specially recruited from the well-to-do families. At that time, Yuthok was the depön and Kungö was appointed as his partner at the rank of acting depön [Tib. མདའ་ཚབ].   

**Q:**  You mean to say the Drongdrag Regiment?   

**A:**  Yes. They had set up the Drongdrag Regiment in Trapchi. When they first set up the Drongdrag Regiment, Kungö stayed in the place called Yamön for a while. As I told you, at that time Horkhang [Tib. ཧོར་ཁང] Ngawang Jigme [Tib. ངག་དབང་འཇིག་མེད] was recruited as an ordinary soldier in that regiment.   

**Q:**  You didn't tell me about Horkhang Ngawang Jigme joining the Drongdrag Regiment.   

**A:**  At that time, when Kungö was in the Drongdrag Regiment they were doing military conscription. They were constructing the new regiment in Trapchi, so until the construction was finished, they [government] gave them a place to stay in Yamön. So Horkang Ngawang Jigme was conscripted at that time and he stayed with Kungö. After that, Ngawang Jigme was appointed as a rupön. I also told you about Ngabö's bride, right.   

**Q:**  Yes, you told me about that.   

**A:**  When he came to the Drongdrag Regiment, he came to Yuthok frequently so then they [Ngabö's wife] [and Yuthok] got together. After a few years, the Dalai Lama passed away.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama died after two years?   

**A:**  At that time, Kungö was appointed as the depön of the Drongdrag Regiment and had to go to perform the ceremony and seek the audience for getting a new appointment as a depön [Tib. གསར་མཇལ], but since the Dalai Lama had died, he didn't get the chance to perform the ceremony.   

**Q:**  Kungö didn't get the chance to do the ceremony?   

**A:**  Yes. Then Yuthok was transferred to the Bodyguard Regiment of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  How long did Horkang Ngawang Jigme work as the rupön in the regiment?   

**A:**  He worked as a rupön until he went to Ngabö. He went to Ngabö while he was a rupön.   

**Q:**  Then he became a senampa, right?   

**A:**  He requested to become a senampa.   

**Q:**  He became a senampa because he came to Ngabö, right?   

**A:**  He requested to be appointed as a government official. They had to report to the government about who was the father of Ngawang Jigme because his mother was the nun from the Horkhang family. So he was said to be the son of the Künsangtse Kalön Lama [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ་བཀའ་བློན་བླ་མ]. They couldn't just say that, so they said that he was the son of Künsangtse Shape.   

**Q:**  Who was Künsangtse Shape?   

**A:**  He was the father of the Künsangtse Tsipön.   

**Q:**  Actually, he was the son of the Kalön Lama right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, Künsangtse Kalön Lama had already died, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Kalön Lama and the father had died. Then Ngabö Ngawang Jigme worked at the Sherpang Office and after that he became a tsipön.   

**Q:**  He got that promotion very quickly, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that's how it was. I am telling this according to my life story.   

**Q:**  Taring Kungö got the promotion from acting depön to full depön of the Drongdrag Regiment and he didn't get chance to hold the ceremony because 13th Dalai Lama died. Then after that, the Drongdrag Regiment disintegrated, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after the 13th Dalai Lama died, the regiment disintegrated.   

**Q:**  Do you remember when the Drongdrag Regiment disintegrated?   

**A:**  Yes, I remember.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  I was not in the regiment but Kungö [my husband] told me that everyone ran away one after another. They tried to stop them, but they were not able to. When Kujar was ruined, everyone wanted to have the regiment disintegrate. In the meantime, Kungö was sent to receive the government's guns and ammunition that had been imported from India, so we all went to India. After returning from India, Kungö was obliged to take the ceremonial test for all new lay officials, the drungkor tsegyug [Tib. དྲུང་ཁོར་རྩལ་རྒྱུགས]. This ceremonial test was given once every 12 years [with bow, spear and the gun] for all Tibetan lay officials who had not previously taken it.   

**Q:**  What kind of tests did they take in the drungkor tsegyug?   

**A:**  First, the Tsikhang checked the names of the officials who hadn't taken the test. Officials had to compete in martial arts. The Tsikhang kept the names of the officials who had already taken the test. They would give the test when there were 30 or 40 lay official who had not taken the test.   

**Q:**  So the test did not take place every year, right?   

**A:**  No. The test would be given once every 9 or 10 years.   

**Q:**  In the test, what did they have to do? I thought they had to shoot arrows, guns and use spears, right?   

**A:**  That test was very good and all the sons of aristocrats enjoyed it. All of them would look very stylish on their horses with their clothes and hats. I was very attentive to Kungö's clothing. When he was in the army, I used to iron his clothes and polish his belt and shoes. At that time, I didn't have any other duties. Kungö did not pay attention to his clothing, but I was attentive to Kungö's clothing and horse. I was very attentive to Kungö's riding equipment like the saddle and other tack. Kungö, however, paid a lot of attention to training for the ceremonial test. I was attentive to Kungö having good clothing among the senampa and I hoped that he would get the first place in the contest. He didn't come in first in the long distance arrow shooting, the gyangma [Tib. རྒྱང་མ]. He got second or the third place. Surkhang Lhawang Tobgye [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་ལྷ་དབང་སྟོབ་རྒྱལ] got first place.   

**Q:**  Something happened?   

**A:**  The person who gave points on the gyangma could have made the difference. I think there was some trickery going on. I expected that Kungö would get first place.   

**Q:**  Why? Was Kungö very skillful in archery?   

**A:**  Yes, because he had been doing a lot of exercise since he was small. At that time he was young, smart and strong and he had a good horse.   

**Q:**  How many kind of tests were there?   

**A:**  There was the gyangma, and there was shooting arrows, guns and spears from horseback at targets while their horse was galloping.   

**Q:**  While shooting arrows from horseback, the horse was galloping, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the horse was galloping through a depression in the ground. We asked for a horse from Ragashag [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] and we got a good horse from the horses he used for the ancient cavalry [Tib. རྟ་པ] display during the Mönlam Festival every year.   

**Q:**  Was a lot of training required for the test?   

**A:**  Yes. You needed to practice a lot. At the time that Kungö was practicing, the Laja [Tib. བླ་ཕྱག] had a problem when the Jokhang caught fire. [185] It was the time when the Dalai Lama liked Kungö a lot so we didn't need to spend much [for getting the position of Laja?] because we were among the people who had served him from the early times. So probably, in the beginning, he had promised him a lot. I was not there at that time. After that, Kungö was appointed as the head of the laja. He was very lucky in work and obtained the rank of dzasa [Tib. ཛ་སག] for his accomplishment in building the new palace (Tib. Tagten Mingyu [རྟག་བརྟན་མི་འགྱུར]). He got transferred from the Laja.   

**Q:**  There was no rank like dzasa and laja together, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Kungö was also saying that he wanted to ask for leave because the Laja was a good position [having good income]. He had been saying that for 7 or 8 years while he was working on the construction of the palace.   

**Q:**  He got automatically promoted to dzasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The replacement of the Laja was Lheding [Tib. ལྷ་ལྡིང] who now lives in Bhutan. That's how we stayed [in Lhasa] until the Chinese came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  You are trying to conclude your comments?   

**A:**  I need to tell you about what the Chinese did, otherwise it is like being finished talking.   

**Q:**  A lot of things happened after the 13th Dalai Lama passed a way. For example, the Regent Reting came, so what about the events surrounding the [fall of] Lungshar incident?   

**A:**  I don't need to tell you about that.   

**Q:**  At that time, in Lhasa among the wives of [aristocrats], they were talking lot of gossip and also they were saying their own opinions, right?   

**A:**  Kungö [husband] knew that I didn't like to gossip.   

**Q:**  Gossip is important. On the one hand, gossip is bad and on the other, it is good. In those days in Tibet there was no newspaper so gossip was important. If there were newspapers, then you would know all the common things. Even if we had a newspaper, if would have been the same as the Bhutanese newspaper which just had things that were pleasant sounding [Tib. འདྲ་ཆགས་པོ].   

**A:**  Quite a while after the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, Kungö and I got married. After the marriage we didn't have children for 6 or 7 years. It was hard for me to give birth and when I gave birth to Tsering Yangzom [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་དབྱང་འཛོམ] I had a very hard time. I didn't need children, but my husband wanted children. Therefore, what we did was to ask for divination by lamas and oracles. Other than this, if I didn't get pregnant there was nothing to do. We asked for divination to Tsakur Tshampa Rimpoche [Tib. ཚ་ཁུར་མཚམས་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] who was my late mother's root guru. Rimpoche said we should offer tea to the [monk's] prayer assembly and perform the ritual of reciting a hundred thousand Drolma [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ] prayers. He also gave us a protective talisman [Tib. སྲུང་བ] which was good for protecting old people and children from harm and women who want children. We received a favorable divination that said, "If you keep yourself clean, the protective deity will support you and you will get pregnant soon." My husband and I performed the monk's ritual and while I was wearing the protective talisman, I got pregnant. That was after the 13th Dalai Lama passed away. When I was pregnant with Ngodrub Wangmo [Tib. དངོས་གྲུབ་དབང་མོ] I had very good dreams where I saw rainbows in the sky and sunshine with the mantra of Kalachakra written vertically (Tib. ཎམཆུ་ཝངདེན [རྣམ་བཅུ་དབང་ལྡན]). And there was a pile of droma dresi in the kitchen." At that time, the Dingja [Tib. ལྡིང་ཆ] household was our neighbor so the wife of Dingja and I were gossip partners so I told her about my dream. The wife of Dingja was very nice and she said, "Usually, you are a kind woman and I, as your neighbor, also had a good dream, so you might be going to give birth to the Dalai Lama." [laughter] We were gossiping saying what would we do if I gave birth to the Dalai Lama. Kungö Dingja said, "If you gave birth to the Dalai Lama, nothing would happen but the personal attendants in charge of the Dalai Lama's clothing [Tib. the Simpön Khembo] would have to carry a yellow Bog [Tib. འབོག] [square cloth used for wrapping clothing or bedding] and wash the diapers." I told him, "it is better not to give birth to the Dalai Lama because I don't want to die because my merit would not be able to handle it [Tib. བསོད་བདེས་མ་འཆུན་པ]." That's how we gossiped. At that time all the women who were pregnant might have hoped to give birth to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  The women who were pregnant and who had good signs might have been hoping to give birth to the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the women who were pregnant and had good signs were hoping for that.   

**Q:**  At that time, the wife of Langdün [Tib. གླང་མདུན] was pregnant with Ditru [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག] [Rimpoche] and people were saying that a horse that was kept in Norbulinga ran to Langdün's House, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that things happened too.   

**Q:**  At that time, Senangse's [Tib. སྲས་ནང་སྲས] wife was pregnant with Ditru, right?   

**A:**  Yes, therefore, all the people were gossiping and arguing about the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. We were saying what would happen if we gave birth to the Dalai Lama. My husband, Kungö, was not ambitious. At the time of my due day, I gave birth to a baby girl. The next morning, Kungö Dingja came and he knew that I gave birth to a baby girl. He just covered his mouth and indicated there is nothing to talk about because I gave birth to a girl. If I had given birth to a boy then there would have been a lot of things to talk about. After one and a half years, I got pregnant again and we were hoping to give birth to baby boy but I gave birth to a baby girl, Yangchen [Tib. དབྱང་ཅན]. At that time, it was the Mouse Year when the Regent Reting went to Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས]. I couldn't go with my husband because I had to look after my two children. Otherwise wherever he went we always went together. At that time my husband went among the retinue. After that, since I had 2 daughters, I decided not to have any more children because I had a very hard time giving birth so I took off my protective talisman from my neck and I put it on my younger baby's neck because I heard that it would protect the baby from harm. Since I had taken off the protective talisman, even though I didn't do any birth control, I didn't get pregnant. That protective talisman was so powerful. After that when I lived separately with my daughters, I think that the protective deities would help them because it was a gifts from the Three Jewels. My daughter Yangchen had strong belief in the Goddess Tara.   

**Q:**  Then the 13th Dalai Lama's reincarnation came, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They were saying that the reincarnation was in the south or in the west and some of them were saying that 13th Dalai Lama's reincarnation was not coming, right?   

**A:**  No. People didn't say things like that. They were saying a great reincarnation was going to come and all people had a thought in unison. We were staying at Tsarong House. Tsarong house was very big and we were staying in a room on the first floor. Later, I requested to Sawangchemmo that we would like to build a small house like Dingja had and he agreed. So my husband drew a plan and we built a small house at the front of the Tsarong House. Tsarong told my husband, "You should apply for the space. If you don't apply now, later the space will be owned by someone else. The space was called "Flower Garden" [Tib. མེ་ཏོག་ལྡུམ་ར]." Then Kungö went to apply for the space.   

**Q:**  Where did you have go to apply for the space?   

**A:**  We had to submit an application.   

**Q:**  To whom did you have to submit it?   

**A:**  We had to submit the application to the government.   

**Q:**  You had to submit the application to the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  For requesting the space, you had to submit an application to the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes. That was at the time of Reting Regent. The area named "Flower Garden" belonged to the government.   

**Q:**  That space used to belong to Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང], right?   

**A:**  Yes. We had to get an approval letter [Tib. འགོ་མཆན] from the Kashag. My late father set up the leather house [Tib. ཀོ་ཁང] in that place. When he returned from India, he said we should make leather shoes there because in Tibet there were good resource for leather. When we did the construction, we used many loads of cement. My late father also brought the Muslim named Esma from India and they made guns in Trip [Tib. grip]. At that time, there were guns made in Trip. My late father was smart. After we got the approval note for that space, some people were saying, "Are you crazy? There are many thieves in that area" Sawangchemmo said that in the future that area will become the middle and there won't be any thieves. We planned to build up a wall around the place. In the year we build the wall, it was the time when in Reting they also finished construction and they were holding the opening ceremony. So Kungö had to go there to attend the ceremony.   

**Q:**  At that time, Reting was the regent, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, I was supposed to go, but I was looking after the construction and my late older sister Horkhang was ill and Sawangchemmo [Tsarong] also planned to go to Reting, but he had a sore on his leg so he couldn't go. He also couldn't go to see my older sister. I was building a big wall and my husband was not here and if I didn't go to look after my sister that wouldn't be right because she was my sister and all my relatives loved me a lot. For 73 days I looked after the construction during the daytime. I took a little nap and I was the only one who looked after my sister because at that time there was no hospital and no nurses. Everyone seemed to have awareness [during daytime] and Netö [Tib. སྣེ་སྟོད] Kungö said he was going to look after her during the night, but at night everybody fell asleep. At night, the babysitter for Phungyela [Tib. ཕུན་རྒྱལ་ལགས] called Tenzin [Tib. bstan 'zin] and I were serving my sister. I served my sister for 73 days and nights until she died. She didn't have pain. She got a fever and she had edema. She saw a doctor at Dekyilinga and so many rituals were performed that there was a pile of leather hides which were used for packing butter in the Horkhang courtyard. I did my best to serve her. One night I was siting near my sister and I put my head on her lap. When my sister died she was very young--she was only 42 or 43 years old. I told her, "I will bring you a cup of milk after awhile." She said, "Rinchen Dolmala, when are you going to give me the milk?" I said, "The milk is ready and Tenzin and I served her the milk and this was her last food." When I was sitting near her, I had a dream. In my dream I saw one monk coming and he was holding a black Russian watch and he was pushing the watch towards me. I woke up and saw Tenzinla standing there. We offered her the blessed pills [Tib. བྱིན་རྟེན] and after that she took a deep breath and she died. [375] Then we sent a message to Tsarong house and Sawangchemmo came along dragging his leg. He hadn't seen her for about 3 months. I was the one who served my sister and at that time, Pembarla [Tib. དཔལ་འབར་ལགས] and Tsering Yudron [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་གཡུ་སྒྲོན] were children. Pembarla could only feel sorrow. Otherwise, he couldn't do anything. At that time, my late sister was asking me, "People were saying Taring is doing a grand construction, but there were only two carpenters, so what are you doing." I told her, "We were just building the stable and we didn't start the main construction yet. I also sent a letter to Gyama to call a carpenter." Before my husband went to Reting, he drew the diagrams and we built the stable for keeping the equipment for the construction. After my husband returned from Reting, then we built the main house. When my husband drew the plans, he drew a very big house. I told him that we should build a small house and finally we decide to build a small house. At the time of the construction, I treated the masses very well. When we were doing construction, we paid 3 sho per day and three khe of tsamba per month. We gave very good quality of tea and porridge. And we bought good quality butter for the workers. I told the master craftsman that when we started this construction we recited 100,000 Droma Prayers and the Kangyur text [Tib. བཀའ་འགྱུར] and we performed the ritual for the Goddess Tara on the holy days; the 8th and 15th. We couldn't perform more rituals than that. The construction workers were called from Doptra [Tib. རྡོ་ཁྲ]. I said, "Please let them sleep as soon as it becomes dark and in the morning let them get up after daybreak." The master craftsman Chime Topgyal [Tib. 'chi med stop rgyal] said, "If we do that, it won't be okay because after it becomes dark, we have to send them to get pebbles. This is very important. Otherwise there won't be high labor productivity." I said, "There is nothing better than sleep, so let them sleep. They can go to collect the pebbles any time. The master said, "We have to make them get up at 2-3 a.m and go to collect pebbles." I said, "Please don't do that." So as a result, the work was stopped as soon as it became dark and they got up after daybreak. Then the master asked me, "If the workers get ill, do I have to cut their food and salary?" I told him, "I told you not to cut the salary of those who get ill." At that time, the Regent said to my husband, "I heard that your wife was eating porridge with the workers" When the workers went home they had saved some money and they did some shopping and took some things home. Some of the workers were able to save a good amount of money. At that time, we told the people, "It is not because we had too many things that we are doing the construction. We can't stay without doing this construction. Even birds need a nest. So we performed the rituals and did the construction and we acted in accordance with the karmic law of cause and effect." When we were doing the construction, we had a shortage of cash. At that time, Sawangchemmo went to Tsang. I was using the Tsarong family's money because it didn't work out if I didn't use that. I counted the money and I gave the money to the steward in charge of the construction. My husband appointed Doptra's doctor to look after the construction and we made an account book for every week. When we finished the construction, the calculation was finished at the same time. The doctor was very sincere and he didn't even dare to eat cookies. I told him you can eat cookies and don't worry about the construction. Doing construction is like handing the money from the right hand to the left hand. There is a proverb, "Look at the result of the construction and don't look at the result of the party." [Tib. ཨར་པོ་བརྒྱབ་པའི་རྗེས་ལ་ལྟོས། ཐུགས་སྤྲོ་བཏང་བའི་རྗེས་ལ་མ་ལྟོས]" One day when we did the calculation he said that 11 dotse was missing. He was swearing and said how did that happen? I told him don't worry about it. We can write it off, so there was no problem. Our servants were very good. The construction workers were very happy. There was one worker who was later in the regiment. He used to sing a song with the words, "After we finished building the palace, we are going back home." [Tib. བདག་ཅག་ཕོ་བྲང་བརྒྱབ་ནས་བདག་ཅག་ལོག་ནས་འགྲོ]. The lineage of Taring was the royal lineage of Sikkim so they were using the word palace and they called our household almost like a government (Tib. ཤུངཀྱང [གཞུང་རྐྱང]) and Kundon [Tib. སྐུ་འདུན] for our people [term used for the Dalai Lama] even though we didn't have anything. That's how we built the Taring House. For the expenses of the construction, my husband asked for a little bit of Chinese silver to the Political Officer of Sikkim [Tib. འབྲས་སྤྱི་བློན་ཆེན]. He gave [the permission pass to buy] 200 Chinese Silver bricks [Tib. རྒྱ་དངུལ་ས་ཕག] and from that we did business and we built the house. Otherwise we didn't have many estates. When they were building the stone wall and paying wages to the masons, one of them asked for 9 dotse less than was written in my notes so I thought that I should act according to karmic law. We were doing the construction out of luxury and the mason was working very hard and had to look after his wife and children. So I shouldn't make him suffer a loss and I paid him the 9 dotse. In my account book, every expense like how many bricks had been used, how many loan we took and how we paid out the money was listed. We repaid the loans and [Tsarong] finished the loan pledge and gave it to me. At first we took a loan and we did business with the Chinese silver and we paid off the loan. Later on everything was cleared. Even after we came here [Tsarong], Dündül la [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ] was asking me, "Do you still have to repay the loan to Tsarong." I told him, "I swear by the Three Jewels that I have repaid all the loans to Tsarong. I don't have anything left to be repaid. Finally, I sold my pearl headdress to Dzasa Rai Badhaur and I repaid the last loan to Tsarong. At that time, Sawangchemmo signed the document indicating that the loans were cleared and he gave the loan pledge document to me. Later it fell into Chinese hands."   

**Q:**  Dündül la told you about the loan even after you got here, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He asked me like that. Maybe he was going to write it off if I had to repay them. . Is that all you wanted to ask me?   

**Q:**  I think that is fine for the time being.   

**A:**  If I need to tell you more in the future I will tell you.   

**Q:**  It isn't finished yet. It is still incomplete. I will ask you later.   

**A:**  There are some things to tell about how I worked with the Chinese and about coming to India. You know all about this.   

**Q:**  But it is better to say this on tape.   

**A:**  If you have time, and if you want me to tell you, then I will.   

**Q:**  Before we end the conversation, tell me something really funny.   

**A:**  After we finished the construction, everything went very well. Before that, Kungö Dingja used to joke and once he said, "Why didn't you enjoy yourself and stay as a guest of Tsarong. You build such a big house and you had to prepare much furniture. You might have to use the floor cleaning cloth [Tib. རྡོག་ཕྱིས] for the cushions when you didn't have cushions." I told him that you will see. After we finished the construction, I called people from Lharigo [Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ་པ] to make the mattresses. We made 8 pairs of thick mattresses called Longtra [Tib. ?] which had brocade covers and made 8 smaller mattresses. We also made brocade rugs and pillows and made two pairs of cushions and back pillow that were used on thrones [Tib. ཁྲི་རྒྱབ་ཡོལ]. After I finished making all the furniture and mattresses, Kungö Dingja came and I told him, "Please come in. Did I tell them to bring the floor cleaning cloth for the cushions? He said, "Madam! No one will be able to handle you." The construction was not easy and we had to find many methods. The Taring household got separated from Sikkim in early times so they didn't have big estates. And we didn't have any trading business. Later, at the time Basiwath ??? who was the Political Officer [Tib. འབྲས་སྤྱི་བློན་ཆེན], he had the idea that if the aristocrats of the Tibetan Government became rich, then they might treat the miser more kindly. We were not the only ones. They also gave permits to many aristocrats to buy Chinese silver.   

**Q:**  Did they give them Chinese silver?   

**A:**  No, they gave them permits to buy it [in India].   

**Q:**  They gave permits and let you do business, right?   

**A:**  If they gave us a permit to buy silver, it was great. When we sold the Chinese silver to the traders, we made very good profit. They gave permits to many aristocrats like Trendong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང], Bönshö and Tsarong [Tib. ཚ་རོང]. All of them were doing business.   

**Q:**  Probably they were giving permits continuously. When I was small, I remember they were giving permits to Demo Labrang [Tib. དེ་མོ་བླ་བྲང] and they also gave me many permits to buy cloth.   

**A:**  They gave permits and they also gave permits to buy cloth. Kungö also asked for permits to buy cloth and round bricks of tea [Tib. ཇ་རིལ]. Later, we worked hard and repaid the loans and our household became quite well off and we didn't need to ask for help to other people and we were happy and people admired us.   

