# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0001.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** October 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 57  
**Date of Birth:** 1935  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན] was a monk official in the traditional Tibetan government who discusses in detail the political events that occurred in Lhasa in the 1950s. In this interview, he talks about the key players and the policy of the Chinese in the early 1950s. He also discusses how the Communist Chinese treated the Guomindang Chinese who were hiding in Tibet, how Jenkhentsisum had contacts with Phala, as well as the time when the Dalai Lama went to India in 1956.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0001_02/H_0001_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  From 1951 until 1954, many say that the policy of the Chinese was very calm/mild. They didn't even reply to those who teased them. Also, it had only been a few years since they defeated the Guomindang, and since they were quite young, they were quite dedicated Communists and were eager to help the people. They also felt that the socialist system was quite good. Therefore, from our side, some say that with the way they were going about their work, perhaps various aspects of the 17-Point Agreement might continue to hold true and maybe it might not be so bad after all. Some seem to have seen this, since the Chinese policy was "good." From your perspective, how was it?   

**A:**  This may have been the thought of some broad minded [Tib. བསམ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བ] people, but the real situation and what the Chinese were doing was that they were mobilizing the people, saying, "We are going to help you. We are not going to cause hardships [Tib. རྡབ་གསིག] and we are not going to rob from you. With whatever, we will help you, and you the people will be the owners of the country." The Chinese were coaching them. If they did well then the majority could be satisfied. Those who were poor could somewhat lift their heads up and if there were changes, maybe things would get better. Because of the positive things that the Chinese were saying, such thoughts were something that should have been in their minds, right? But, if I were to give you an example of the inborn character of the people, this happened. When the people heard that the Dalai Lama was going down to China [in 1954], about two months before the Dalai Lama left, every day in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> there was an endless stream of people seeking audiences. People just overflowed Norbulinga for audiences. That is one example. Then when the Dalai Lama was actually leaving for China, from the gates of Norbulinga to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>, to Lhasa, all the way to Kumbumthang [Tib. སྐུ་འབུམ་ཐང] where the journey was made in coracles, the people were just sprawled [Tib. ཉིལ] out. That distance is long, all the way from the Norbulinga gag (Secretariat). Some would seek an audience here, and while everyone was bowing, they would just run and go further down the line for a second audience. Then go to the back again. Finally, all the people from the gates to Norbulinga would just sprawl out until the time of going onto the boat. On this side of the river, the people were like a huge forest and there was a sea of people. One could not even see the white background land since the riverside was just full of people. The number of people who were crying was limitless. When the Dalai Lama passed by it was not like here in India. Then there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> bodyguards called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a>, who would whip people. So there was a lot of "fear and shyness [Tib. zhed snang 'tser snang]" (apprehension). The older women even posed a danger to their own lives, fainting and calling out, "Gyawa Rimpoche [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] (Dalai Lama)! Please don't stay for more than a year. Please come back immediately!" Uncharacteristically [Tib. gang yin 'di yin med p], they were shouting their requests. There were so many in tears. And when reaching the other shore, all the people on this side were just in tears. Some elderly women became unconscious and were said to be carried away. It was said that one even died, but I did not see it. When the Dalai Lama went down to China, the people just couldn't contain themselves. They had no other thoughts except that the Chinese would do something bad. No matter the good the Chinese said they were going to do, in the minds of the Tibetan people, there was not an inkling of hope that the Chinese would do something good. The Chinese came in 1950, then in 1951, 52, 53, 54, and the Dalai Lama went to China in 55, I think.   

**Q:**  Toward the end of 54 perhaps?   

**A:**  It was 54-55 right? So it had already been 4 or 5 years, right? During this period, as you have said, they were educating the people through a smooth policy. To the ears of the people, they were saying things like the people were the owners of the country. However, their thoughts were otherwise. And it was not just one or two people, but all. Everyone was in tears. The whole country. There was the feeling of hollowness even though it was only the Dalai Lama who left and everyone had not. The whole of Lhasa seemed to be at a loss from lack of nutrients. If something was shining with grease, it seemed like somebody just threw all the grease out and made it white. The whole character of Lhasa, this is what I witnessed. Deep emptiness. Then after this, the Dalai Lama came up and went to India for the Buddha Jayanti. When he went there, his invitation to India was to a foreign country and his invitation to China was also to a foreign country. They were inviting him in good faith. Even to China, though they had plans, at that time they were inviting him in good faith. The same was true of India. When the Dalai Lama went to India, all the Lhasans were in their best attire. Early on in the morning they burnt incense, and when the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ཀླུ་ལྡིང] It is considered respectful to welcome [tib. ཕེབས་བསུ] visiting high officials some ways outside of Lhasa, much as we in the U.S. would go to meet someone at the airport. Gyetse luding was the standard reception site for this. It was located on the main road west of Lhasa between Drepung and the Norbulinga palace.">Gyetse luding</a> (midway between Lhasa and Drepung) early in the morning, they took food in the tiffin and tea in their thermos, the vast field of Gyetse luding was completely packed with people. At the farewell reception at Gyetse luding, tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མ་འབྲས་སིལ] A special dish consisting of sweetened rice, melted butter and wild sweet potatoes (gro ma).">droma dresi</a> were served, and everyone stayed for a while. Then it was the end of the procession. However, even when the procession was over, everyone just sat around, very comfortably relaxed. It was not like the previous situation when the Dalai Lama went to China, when after the procession ended everyone just went home. No, now everyone just sat around, relaxed. Even when it was getting late and the people were returning home, there was a number of circles of people singing, dancing, singing the opera, and even playing the flute. And while people were leaving they would stop and dance in a circle dance [Tib. སྒོར་གཞས] and break out in laughter. This was the spontaneous expression of the people. The moment the Dalai Lama turned his face to India, they were relieved and thought it was the right thing. The moment the Dalai Lama turned his face to China, no matter how good the things the Chinese were saying, and even though in practice they were not making difficulties, the people still thought in that fashion. All the people thought in that fashion and no matter what the Chinese said or did not say, not for a single moment did they ever think that the Chinese were up to anything good. Even when they were saying good things, deep inside, their gut feeling was exactly that. From these two instances the people's selection was clear. In China they were inviting the Dalai Lama cordially, but there was that much fright and worry on the part of everyone, and then people were so happy when the Dalai Lama went to India. So from this, no matter what hard or smooth things the Chinese may have spoken, the spontaneous reaction of the people was that.   

**Q:**  Now, let's forget about the people for a while. What was the thinking of the officials and monasteries, since the Chinese were saying the estates were to remain the same? What was the thinking among the bigger <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and traders, since there was brisk trade at this time? For example, it is said that Drepung Monastery did not accept the petition of the People's Association. So from the actions of some of the officials, the 17-Point Agreement was signed. There was no foreign support, there wasn't anything else that could have been done. Therefore, some thought maybe it was not so bad. That it would probably last. I think most were probably thinking along these lines.   

**A:**  As I mentioned yesterday, among the ranking officials, as they were pondering the situation, whatever was done from the part of the government, no matter what the people said or did not say, the Kashag did not have a choice but to have an ongoing relationship with the Chinese. If they did not do that, then all the work would be tattered since they did not have any other means. So in any case [Tib. གང་ལྟར་ཡང], when the Chinese managed to make changes to the power of the government, then it was seen that the Tibetans could not remain and be happy under the policy of the Chinese. If one asked how the Tibetan political power was faring, then daily, the Chinese words were getting stronger and stronger. That was daily. Then when the Chinese were saying things in a big way, that this and that were not alright, like a business, the price was bargained and one had to do what they were told, since that was all the power we had. Seeing that it was all the power of our policy, from among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> there was, the main one, Drönyerchemmo Phala. Then Magji Jangjenloko Lodrö Kelsang [Tib. ལྕང་ཅན་བློ་ཁོག་བློ་གྲོས་སྐལ་བཟང] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Kelsang Ngawang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ངག་དབང], who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> in Magji Dzasa's shagtsang. He was formerly a Tsendrön and later became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and the director of the judicial branch for settling law cases [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ་དོ་དམ]. Depön Tashi Bera, Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Khenjung Gyentsenla, they were the people who sort of thought alike. They had similar perspectives on the Tibetan government as well as the Chinese. These people who spoke alike began to speak more frankly with each other and gradually confided in each other. Finally, those 6 people formed an extremely secret group [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག] and made a stable pledge of unity. That was the main one. The main person, like the head [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན] of the group, was Chemmo (Drönyerchemmo). They had decided to be united and sacrifice even their lives. They made a decision to come out with an alternative thinking. If the government did that, then the relationship between the government and the Chinese would be destroyed in one day. If that happened, then the only losers would be them. Let the government be as it was, like mending a clay pot. They just wouldn't reveal their hearts to the Kashag and the others, and wouldn't have any relations with them. So they made a stable pledge [Tib. དམ་བཅའ་བརྟན་པོ]. They thought, "Now what is there to do? Aside from the bind that the Kashag is in, based on the thinking of the Chinese, what kind of power and organization can we make?" That was their internal group. While this situation was going on, in Lhasa, there was supposedly a lot of Guomindang Chinese. However, when the People's Liberation Army came in their yellow military uniforms along with their staff, there were a lot of other ragtag [Tib. ཟ་རེ་ཟོ་རེ] Chinese who came along and occupied areas all over Tibetan land, and in every nook and cranny of Lhasa. They had stalls made from extending cloth from the walls of the houses with bamboo poles. In these stalls were shops, barbershops, restaurants, and food stalls. Most dealt with food items. Then there were picture frames, glass, and products brought from down there (China). These Chinese were spread all over Lhasa in every nook and cranny [Tib. སིང་སིང་ཡོད་ཚད]. One morning, in one swoop, all of them fell. The Chinese brought the vehicles at night and herded them all, and kicked them out of Lhasa. The next morning all the stalls were absolutely empty. No people and no things, except for the stall frames. Since the Chinese were determined and powerful, no matter how many people were there, they arranged things in sections and had the number of people noted so that the next morning, not a single Chinese was left. Like sweeping the floor, not one could be seen. After some time it was said that a lot of meetings were taking place at night in Yuthok between 2 and 3 in the morning. This meeting was attended only by (Communist) Party members. The leaders were Chinese, but there were many Tibetan Party members. Everything that was to be done was discussed in these Party meetings. What they were discussing in that meeting was that the Khambas and Amdos needed to be kicked out [Tib. ཕུད] to their own homeland since there were too many people there in Lhasa and the price of food was increasing. They needed to be kicked out just like the Guomindang Chinese were. The meeting was about that and they had a resolution.   

**Q:**  What year was this, around 1957?   

**A:**  I think it was around 1956. There were Tibetans in the Party who were going to the secret discussions. Some of these Party members would report exactly what happened to our side, so here we were hearing everything. They said that this was something that couldn't be left like that because the Guomindang who were kicked out were not at all armed. So sending the army and loading them up was like loading boxes, since there was so little difficulty. If they tried to practice the same thing with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>s, things would be more difficult because the Khambas and Amdos are naturally lovers of weapons. Though the quantity of weapons that one kept may be unknown, the handguns [Tib. ལག་མདའ] were always of exceptional quality and everyone kept one by custom. Besides, they were large in number with good weapons. We were not the same as the Chinese. Tibetans were living in their own land. So if they started making separations, the Khambas were sure to shoot. If they did the same thing with the Khambas and Amdos, it just wouldn't work. You knew the government officials were secretly meeting with the party members, so they were taking this responsibility and thinking hard about the best course of action. Among the Khambas, Andru Dzasa frequently met with Chemmo and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>. Then there was Atru Lama, a fat, strong Khamba (he later died in Kalimpong). Andru Dzasa was enquiring, "Kungö, what is the best course of action? What is the best course?" from both Namseling and mainly Chemmo, it seems. They and Chemmo them were meeting to decide the best course of action. They thought, "Oh! If they execute such a plan then it's just not right. Lhasa will definitely be in an uproar [Tib. འཁྲུག]. They might say we went to arrest the Khambas and the Amdos, and then they fired. No matter what the reason, Lhasa would be in chaos. If that's the case, then even the Dalai Lama's personal safety and politics would be mixed in war. Then all that would be left to do is send in the army to suppress them, and then it wouldn't be good at all. If Lhasa is unsettled, then it would be too much." So they thought and discussed, and said, "It would probably be better if the Khambas and the Amdos left Lhasa. If the 'able bodied [Tib. མི་ཧྲག་ཧྲག]' left, and the women and children were not sent. It would be better to take all the arms and not stay in the city, and just move to some open space. How would that be? And if an organization was started, how would that work out?" In this way, it was all from the advice of Chemmo and so I won't tell you since it would be redundant. Anyway, Andru Dzasa asked Chemmo and Namseling, and the advice of the two was, at first they were discussing back and forth, back and forth. So when they wondered which place they should go out to, they thought that the Northern Plains, Changthang, was a good place. That was the first plan. Because if they went to Changthang, it was empty and no matter how much they were attacked, they had plenty of places to withdraw to. The weather there was such that the Chinese would not come easily. If one considered their livelihood, there were plenty of good animals. Even if they came to very desolate areas of Changthang where there were no animals, there still was plenty of wildlife. So there would be no difficulty with food if guerrilla warfare was to take place. It is said that at first the decision was to go to Changthang. All of this about going to Changthang was related to me by Amdo Nyingpo [Tib. སྙིང་པོ], who was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> along with Andru and others. Later, he stayed at Dharamsala for about 3 or so years as the representative of the Amdo people in the Eastern Tibetan Organization [Tib. མདོ་སྨད་ཆོལ་ཁ]. Then, you know in India, there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>? All of their internal matters were consulted with Kungö Chemmo. The inner matters that Chemmo had with them, only they knew and the rest did not. They said, "Don't do that. If you go to the north, then you will not be able to make connections with those who are in India. We won't be able to distribute the government arms to them. Regarding arms, if we have to get help from a foreign country and if you are in the north, there will be problems of flight logistics. If you can do it somewhere in the south it would be very good, since airdrops from India would be much easier." This was the inner discussion of Kungö Chemmo and them. That was the reason why the southern area of Drigutang was chosen. Then all the things about needing arms is already related by Kungö Chemmo in his book, so there is no need for me to say anything about this.   

**Q:**  In the one that is in the library, right?   

**A:**  Yes in that, but what I have said is not in that because this Changthang thing was said by Abo Nyingpo. The matter about the Guomindang is what actually took place at that time. During that time we were living in Lhasa, right?   

**Q:**  What was the reason for sending all the Chinese down?   

**A:**  I don't really know, but they were saying that in Lhasa there were too many people. There were such large increases in purchases. It was increasing 100 percent. So they were saying that there were too many people and that it would be good for those who had come from far away to return. This is what they said was said.   

**Q:**  You did mention it a bit, but in 1954 in Kalimpong, the Dedön Tsogpa Association was started, right? I wanted to ask what their connection was with Tibet and the government workers. Then there were two People's Associations. What was their connection? And the People's Associations, it was said that Drönyerchemmo Phala knew everything. I wanted to ask you about these matters.   

**A:**  Dedön Tsogpa was the one that was headed by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  The inner matters of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> were consulted with Kungö Chemmo. How did I hear about this? Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> himself told me this. Shakabpa and Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen were the tsipön and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a>, right. Both of them said that. That from among the three, Kungö Lhasey Chemmo (Gyalo Thondup) agreed to deal with all matters relating to the USA. Shakabpa agreed to take up the matters with the Indian government. Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen took the responsibility of dealing inside Tibet. So they needed a way to make connections in Tibet, right? A station was required, right? That connection was the six people of Kungö Chemmo ('s clique). Like a working committee, the person who received the letters, made the replies, listened to talk, met people and spoke, was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla. Tseja Gyentsenla had a most reliable person named Tsidrung Tema Jokala [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ལྕོག་པ་ལགས], who was not part of the group of six. Gyentsenla kept him as his companion and he made whatever contacts were needed. Tema Jokala was a very eloquent person (laughs) and very perceptive. Gyentsenla used to send him as if it was his idea. The inner connections he would not reveal even to Tema Jokala, since the six had already made a pledge. So whatever connections from here, India, were done by Gyentsenla, and from there to the various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་པ] An association, organization, party.">tsogpa</a> and associations, they were done by Tema Jokala. So what Shakabpa said was that everything was consulted with Chemmo. He said that when all were gathered. So all of this has a verifiable source [Tib. ཁུངས་དག]. Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsenla had connections even with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and specially sent a messenger from Kalimpong to Amdo. I don't think he is living now. I think he is dead, but there was at the Tibetan Astrological Medical Institute, Mentsigang, a person by the name of Amdo Lodrö [Tib. བློ་གྲོས]. When Kungö Khenjung came here, I specifically went to see him and asked him that since he was responsible for connections in Tibet, how exactly it was done, who he met and what was said. He told me that he sent Amdo Lodrö and that Jamyang Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱང་བཞད་པ] was down there. Then there was his chandzö. What was his name? Something like Abo Lodrö or Aku Lodrö. With political matters, Jamyang Shepa was the main person. Anything to be said on politics was done through him and they thought that the government was asking these things. The government was like capital for a business (in other words, it was the main thing and they did it for that reason). Actually, the government, the Kashag, was sitting aside and it was not government work at all. It was their own thing, sacrificing themselves for the general good and making all of their own decisions. It was not something coached by the government. It was a work that the government knew nothing about. They were thinking that they were the wishes of the government. In the Amdo area, there was a big revolt later. I think the seed was from this. Then this made a big wave.   

**Q:**  Did you have all of this written down?   

**A:**  It was taped, then translated, and it's all at the Information Office.   

**Q:**  Last time you said that there was something at the Information Office, is this it?   

**A:**  That's a different file. Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen is a separate file. The ones that were asked of Kungö are in another file. Like that there are many files.   

**Q:**  So even the People's Association, that was the connection from the government's side? I mean drönyerchemmo.   

**A:**  The government was never—when government is said, the main one was the Kashag, so the government did not know at all. They came forth voluntarily, sacrificing everything, since there was something lacking from the government's side. What do I say, if the government just played it safe and just stood still, then like a house, if it got dented then there was no way to remove the dent. Leave the government to do its diplomatic maneuverings so that the tie does not break and slip. We will form something and if later it does not work and we have to lose our lives, then it will be just us and the government will not be in it. That was their pledge. When I asked <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Chemmo, this is what Chemmo said. He himself said it, most likely. It was either Shakabpa or Chemmo. And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s wife, Chö Kyila [Tib. ཆོས་སྐྱིད་ལགས], said that Namseling and Chemmo had good relations, and it seemed that the inner matters of these two were doing. Andru Dzasa was very close and laudable [Tib. བསྟོད་པོ] to Namseling. So when Andru Dzasa consulted Chemmo and Namseling, Lady Namseling always stood guard near the door. The guard was the lady since the servants were not confided in and Namseling would say not to send any servants in. So Lady Namseling stayed at the door. No one was allowed in, and she would serve tea or do the going and coming from the room. Otherwise, no one knew. That's how secretive it was.   

**Q:**  After the 17-Point Agreement, in 1955 or 56, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was started. Now this seems like it was not in the 17-Point Agreement and was some kind of separate government. How did the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region form and why was it formed? Sort of accepted?   

**A:**  On this, I don't have anything definite to say, since when I asked the various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a>, this was not one of the things that I heard about. Probably, if I were to speculate, in the 17-Point Agreement there was an agreement to implement a Military Administrative Committee. Later it was said that the democratic reforms were postponed. Anyway, the Military Administrative Committee was smoothed out. Even if they did not begin the Military Administrative Committee, they had to have something since they had to make some government structure, right? So I think they smoothed it out, how should I say it, so that it was not under a militant organization. They probably said that the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region sort of changed the look, but I can't say for sure.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to India in 1956, he stayed there for a while, right? And so there was some talk about staying in India or returning. What have you heard about this?   

**A:**  Regarding this, when Kungö Chemmo, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and others were gathered, they also spoke about this. So if the file in the Information Office is available, it is in it.   

**A:**  What was it about?   

**Q:**  1957, in India.   

**A:**  I see, about whether the Dalai Lama was to stay or go?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Probably, most of the ones who came as part of the entourage [Tib. ཆིབས་ཞབ], I think they said that the Dalai Lama should be taken [Tib. གདན་འདྲེན] back. I think they were the more powerful side. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> and some of those who came and thought in a similar manner as Jenkhentsisum said, "This time it's better to stay." It seemed that there were two ways of thinking and, as I mentioned yesterday, Ngabö was saying, "You are asking the Dalai Lama to stay, so what kind of confidence [Tib. གདེངས] do you have? What strong foreign backing [Tib. རོགས་རམ] do you have? If you really have such a guaranteed backing, then it doesn't matter what you want to think about doing. Without anything like that, if you just ask the Dalai Lama to stay, then later they will not even regard you as anything larger than a big businessmen. And then, after sometime, nothing will come of it. So without separating the head from the body, for the time being, it is best to stay where the people are." Those who came from there wanted the Dalai Lama to return, and even regarding the Chinese, slowly it [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Now when you say, those who came from there (Tibet), who are they?   

**A:**  In the entourage... [] These are the two tutors, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, Ngabö, Künsangtse. On that side are the Dalai Lama's personal attendants; in charge of offerings, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] One of the three monk attendants of the Dalai Lama. He was in charge of religious offerings/rituals.">Chöpön Khembo</a>, in charge of clothes, Simpön Khembo, in charge of food, Söpön Khembo who was also called the elder attendant, Pömpo Kudreba [Tib. དཔོན་པོ་སྐུ་བགྲེས་པ]. This is the Dalai Lama's mother and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> family. The one at his very side is Kungö Tarala. This is Kungö Pandela [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལགས] of Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Labrang who came as a servant, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གསོལ་དཔོན] A lama or abbot&#x27;s servant.">söpön</a> [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན], of Trijang Rimpoche. This they said was an Indian representative. This is Sera Jepa [Tib. བྱེས་པ] Geshe Thabkhela [Tib. ཐབས་མཁས་ལགས], he is presently in Tibet and is a famous educated man. This is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Düwa Khembo [Tib. འདུལ་བ་མཁན་པོ], this fat man. This is Dzime [Tib. རྫི་སྨད] Rimpoche. The one in the middle is Lingtsang [Tib. གླིང་ཚང] Chandzö, since Ling Rimpoche came, he was there. This is Lamenpa [Tib. བླ་སྨན་པ], the Dalai Lama's personal physician Londen Chödrag la [Tib. བློ་ལྡན་ཆོས་གྲགས་ལགས], presently in Tibet. This is Ta Lama Thubden Norsang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ནོར་བཟང], this is Kungö Phala Drönyerchemmo. This is Khenjung Ngöshe Thubden Samjo, this is Kabshöse [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་སྲས], I don't know his name. In the back is the Dalai Lama's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> cook Söthaba [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ] Chögyela [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ལགས], a relative of Thubden Nyinji la [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད་ལགས]. This is the Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] medium, Tenzin Penjor [Tib. བཏན་འཛིན་དཔལ་འབྱོར]. This is Yaba Sonam Tobgye la [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་སྟོབས་རྒྱས]. Next to him is Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] Tsidrung Kelsang la [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ལགས], who worked for a long time at the Dalai Lama Private Office. This is a Sikkimese or Indian, I don't know since it is a photo taken in India. This is, I think at that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Tratsang Lopön [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན], Trimönse [Tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན་སྲས] it is said. This is Trijang Labrang Söpön. This is said to be Namgyal Tratsang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a>, then this is the Dalai Lama's assistant on offering Chöyog la [Tib. མཆོད་གཡོག་ལགས], who is presently with the Dalai Lama. Next to that is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Rinchen la. Then there is this young person, I don't know. Maybe a servant or interpreter, I don't know. And here is the Dalai Lama's mother, Gyayum Chemmo [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡུམ་ཆེན་མོ], Jetsun Pema la [Tib. རྗེ་བཙུན་པད་མ་ལགས], the late Lady Tsering Drolma [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ], this is Semo Khandro la [Tib. sras mo mka' 'gro lags], then Ngari Rimpoche. That's it at that time.   

**Q:**  So, you are saying that most of those who came from Tibet were for the Dalai Lama's return, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it seems so.   

**Q:**  So.   

**A:**  Now some of those who came from Tibet, like the ones who were staying in India, were saying that the Dalai Lama should stay. That I don't know. Most probably, if it is in the Information Office file, then it should be spelled out there. If it is there.   

**Q:**  So you don't recall who?   

**A:**  They mentioned it, but I can't remember. If the document is there, it should be in it.   

