# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0001.14 : Tape 14  
##  : with Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 58  
**Date of Birth:** 1935  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན] was a monk official in the traditional Tibetan Government and discusses in detail the political events that occurred in Lhasa in the 1950s. In this interview, he discusses the political and armed conflicts that occurred in Lhasa, and briefly discusses the Dalai Lama’s stay in Yadong and the effects that his traveling had on the people. He also discusses the acceptance of the 17-Point Agreement and the announcement made by the Chinese regarding its acceptance. He then describes the arrival of the Chinese soldiers in Lhasa and the wearing of the Chinese uniform by Tibetan soldiers.   

---  
### Tape 14  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0001_14/H_0001_14.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The last time we spoke it was about 1951, and we talked about the two Sitsab. The Dalai Lama was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and Zhang Jingwu came to Lhasa via Yadong. Was there any reason why he came up first?   

**A:**  He came through the sea route right away and the Dalai Lama was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>. Actually, since [it was] Zhang Jingwu, he could have told the Dalai Lama that they should go together, but in the side agreements of the 17-Point Agreement, the 6-Side Agreements; it was indicated that the Dalai Lama could stay in Lhasa, Yadong or India. I recall Kungö Ganden Villa Khenjung saying that. So maybe it was something like that with the Dalai Lama staying back. Moreover, among the officials there was a section saying that he should return and others saying that he should stay. Since this was under discussion, Zhang Jingwu went straight to Lhasa. The Chinese government must also have had some fixed schedule. the Dalai Lama came a bit later.   

**Q:**  During this time, what was the situation in Lhasa? You were in Lhasa at that time, and so there must have been some political talk that the Dalai Lama was in Yadong. There probably wasn't any unrest ?   

**A:**  The 17-Point Agreement was signed and when the Chinese arrived, places for them to stay were arranged. It was not a situation where there was open clash of arms. The people expecting the Chinese to arrive did not think that they had to transport their own belongings to India, or think about going to India. No unrest. Everything was quiet, putting their faith in what happened down there . But the most important factor was that the Dalai Lama was returning, so everyone was satisfied. Wherever the Dalai Lama was, that's where people felt relaxed. Just that was enough. However, if the Dalai Lama had not returned from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, in the years '51-52, then definitely the people would have been unsettled and many would have left for India. Since the Dalai Lama was there, not a single sole left.   

**Q:**  I wonder if you have heard about this, but it's written by Lhautara, I think. After the 17-Point Agreement, people like Ngabö would have had to return to Lhasa, right? I don't know when he came exactly, but the Kashag would have had to ask how things transpired . So some talk took place and there was talk that [Ngabö] spoke for many hours at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> (Assembly) and said that that was all there was left to do.   

**A:**  When he came to the Kashag, as to the internal discussions, we didn't hear that on the outside. However, when Ngabö came up, in front of the government officials in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིང་ཀ] A park/grove in the southeast part of Lhasa by the river.">Tsidrung Lingka</a>, he explained everything. The officials could come in their official uniform or not, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> didn't need to wear their satin garment [Tib. གོས་སྟོད]. The lay officials could come in their Tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ] dress if they wished. So this is what happened at Tsidrung Lingka, it is said. At that time I had not entered government service nor was I at the meeting. However, since the meeting was a general meeting, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a>, it was something known in Lhasa. That was probably the main thing said. The moment they got down there, there weren't any relaxed discussions, but immediately they took out their 10 point list, saying that this is what had been agreed on, the question of relations between the Chinese and the Tibetans, and they wanted the signatures on that document. What shall one say, the moment the army advanced, and seeing that there wasn't any resistance, there was no need to have discussions based on truth and justice. They did not have to resort to arms, but their policy was like a militant one, where the enemy was put down immediately and they wanted the signatures on the 10-Point Agreement. Though the problem was solved without fighting, it was a forceful liberation. Even if they did not resort to a forceful liberation, they were thinking of instituting a Military Administrative Committee. Later the Tibet Autonomous Region was started, but if battles were fought at Chamdo, then they would have instituted the Military Administrative Committee. It seems that what happened after 1959 was [through the] use of the Military Administrative Committee. There would have been no scope for discussions in such a system, but only to bring out the gun immediately. So whatever was said at Tsidrung Lingka, I think Ngabö had explained everything there.   

**Q:**  Now, regarding this, there was also a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> , not just this meeting for government officials. There is talk that in that too, Ngabö spoke.   

**A:**  I really don't know about this. At a later meeting he spoke. Last time you said that at the meeting the government accepted . I think it may have been something like this. Regarding this I have never heard in Tibet. So I don't have anything to say in this regard. However, as I think about it today, I think this may have been much later. After the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was begun, Chen Yi came and there was an elaborate meeting in front of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> in the People's Assembly Hall [Tib. མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་ཁང]. Chen Yi came and all of the officials were there. I don't recall whether the Dalai Lama came. At that time, [Ngabö] said a lot and in these talks, he may have said that the Tibet Autonomous Region had started and it was so great, et cetera. That in keeping with the 17-Point Agreement, the Tibet Autonomous Region was started, et cetera. So I don't know if he had such words in his speech.   

**Q:**  What I have heard is much earlier, around 1952. The reason being that the Chinese announced that the Dalai Lama had sent a telegram and they had published the telegram. So it was said in the communist jargon.   

**A:**  I see, I see. What was the wording of the telegram?   

**Q:**  That we all have accepted the 17-Point Agreement.   

**A:**  Wow [Tib. འར་ཛི]!   

**Q:**  Then Mao sent a reply on the 28th of May, I think, saying, "It is good that you have accepted." The whole telegram is published.   

**A:**  I see, I see.   

**Q:**  Therefore, I wanted to find out how this thing happened, and what were the discussions about this. I have figured [it] out in detail, but I want to find out whether this was discussed at a meeting or what. It is possible that the Chinese were insisting that it be accepted. It is also possible that [the Dalai Lama] had talks at Yadong. So there was this said, that [Ngabö] spoke at a meeting and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> said that that was all you could have done. That you have done whatever you could. And at this time, Ngabö also said, " can do whatever they like, confiscate [my] estates, take lives away, and I have no regrets." This is in Lhautara's book, I think. The telegram, for publicity has been published by the Chinese. Something like this has happened. Except for what Lhautara has said, most have not heard about it.   

**A:**  I have not heard about it at all. I see, I see.   

**Q:**  I was wondering how it happened. I think it was in 1952, probably. Generally, if a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> was called, it was something that everyone should have heard about.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  I wonder how it happened. Maybe they didn't call a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a>, maybe something else.   

**A:**  I have not even heard that there was a meeting. Until today, I have not heard about the telegrams. Whatever it was, it was something that was not public. I don't know what took place internally. Generally, since it was an important matter of the direction, it was something one should have heard of. But I have not heard. If this was said, there would have been those who would have disagreed and said that this was not done well and Ngabö didn't put on the real seal. Even the two Sitsab had said such and such. So this was something excessively [Tib. ཐལ་ཆ] done. But I have [not] heard anything.   

**Q:**  That's why when I ask around people have not heard about it. So maybe it was not done the usual way and it was done in a different way. Generally, a general assembly would have been called and all would have known about it.   

**A:**  This is what happened. At that time there was no one in the Kashag. If there had been one actual [Tib. ངོ་མ] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, it is not possible that the Kashag would not have known about it. If an actual Kalön was still alive, he would definitely know. Now we are out of people. And at that time it was not heard publicly.   

**Q:**  What I was thinking is that if the telegrams had been sent, the deed was already done. Anyway, Zhang Jingwu was already at Lhasa and even the soldiers had now arrived. Since the soldiers had already come to the country, one could witness first hand their strength. And so it was thought that nothing could be done, I guess. Maybe that was the thinking?   

**A:**  The Commander-in-Chief, Fan Siling [Ch. si ling] [Fan Ming], came via the northern route. That was a different regiment. I heard from Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] that there were 7,000 soldiers under Fan Siling. I heard that the soldiers under Commander-in-Chief Wang Siling [Wang Qimei] were stationed in Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན] and below Chamdo.   

**Q:**  The first troop was with the Fan Siling, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was the first troop.   

**Q:**  When did they come, was that after Zhang Jingwu arrived at Lhasa and the Dalai Lama came back to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, it was just after that.   

**Q:**  Zhang Jingwu came directly and I don't know, how did they bring the car? When he was coming through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ཀླུ་ལྡིང] It is considered respectful to welcome [tib. ཕེབས་བསུ] visiting high officials some ways outside of Lhasa, much as we in the U.S. would go to meet someone at the airport. Gyetse luding was the standard reception site for this. It was located on the main road west of Lhasa between Drepung and the Norbulinga palace.">Gyetse luding</a> he was sitting in a car. At that time, there were no vehicle roads beyond that place.   

**Q:**  There were many Chinese coming, but nothing happened and in 1952, the People's Association submitted the 6-Point Report, right?   

**A:**  The Tiger Year was 1950 and the Mouse Year was 1951. Yes, that was in the Dragon Year [of] 1952.   

**Q:**  That was called the Water Dragon People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Before that, were there any kinds of unrest [Tib. ཟིང་ཆ] in the Lhasa area?   

**A:**  Before that there wasn't any unrest.   

**Q:**  Regarding this matter, I asked Chandzö la and Shingsar [Tib. ཞིང་གསར], [who is] living in Canada. I heard that Shingsar was the person who wrote the documents when they investigated that matter. They told me that the People's Association submitted the 6-Point Report. Otherwise, they didn't have anything to tell me about the unrest caused by the People's Association. From other people I heard the People's Association went into the house where Zhang Jingwu was living. Were those people from the People's Association or were they ordinary people of Lhasa?   

**A:**  Probably, that might be true. I didn't know about that and I didn't hear anything about that. Even if they had gone there, I don't think that many people went there and that they did [things] like shouting slogans and doing something disorganized [Tib. འ་རི་འུ་རི]. Just a few people probably went there, taking the report with them. But, I guess they wouldn't let them in to see Zhang Jingwu personally because they were very proud, and they might have taken the report by a lower level person. Anyway, I think that the report had reached Zhang Jingwu. Later I heard that Alo Chöndze and those people also submitted the report to the Chinese offices.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> told me the Chinese had probably told the Kashag, and at that time, the Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐོར་འཆག་པ] A low level government worker who patrolled the streets and delivered messages/notices for the office of the mayor [tib. མི་དཔོན] of Lhasa.">korchagpa</a> [Tib. སྐོར་འཆག་བ] (a kind of low level worker) from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག] The main administrative office in Lhasa that was headed by the &quot;mayor&quot; or mipön.">Nangtsesha</a> office came over and said that people were not allowed to go outside from late evening until the morning. That was a kind of curfew. The clerk of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> [Lhamo Tsering] also told me that when he was going into Lhasa City, the shops were closed and they didn't let people pass by. Do you remember anything about that?   

**A:**  I don't remember about that.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were living in Lhasa City, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but I didn't hear about that.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese soldiers came the first time, how did they stay in Lhasa? Where did they stay?   

**A:**  They stayed in Nortölinga, which was located at the west side of the Jensel Linga [Tib. སྤྱན་གསལ་གླིང] where Jensel Phodrang was located in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> . At that time, the pasture between Jensel Linga and the place where the river from Tölung was flowing under the Trisam [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟམ] Bridge was called Nortölinga. Before that, that used to be a pasture where the horses and the mules of the Tibetan government were grazed. That was a very good pasture. The Chinese wanted that pasture and settled on that place by putting [up] tents. After that, the Chinese stayed in an old Tibetan regiment called the Magar Sarpa [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ] located near Trede Linga [Tib. འཕྲལ་བདེ་གླིང་ག], which used to belong to the Trede Legung. And there was a little bit [of a] plain below the Tsidrung Linga. Later, the Chinese built a big regiment in Peding [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡིང] located just beyond <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Gungtang [Tib. ཚལ་གུང་ཐང].   

**Q:**  Was Peding near Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, you had to cross the river from the Lhadong Shenkawa [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ] ferry site and it was on the other side of the river.   

**Q:**  I heard that at that time, the price of foodstuffs had gone up. When did the Chinese themselves plant their own foodstuffs?   

**A:**  They planted vegetable in Nortölinga. The soil was good and they used good fertilizers according to the Chinese way. So vegetables were grown very big and the Chinese radishes [Tib. རྒྱ་ལ་ཕུག] were grown the size of a baby. And the cabbages were also grown this big. Once they exhibited their products on the plain of Tsidrung Linga. I saw the vegetables in the exhibition. At that time, they didn't sell the vegetables in the market. Before that, it was impossible to grow such big potatoes and radishes in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Actually, did they use the potato seeds grown in Lhasa area?   

**A:**  Yes, the main thing is that the Chinese were using human excrement as the fertilizer. Before, we didn't have that custom in Tibet.   

**Q:**  The Tibetans were using the fertilizer taken out from the toilet, right?   

**A:**  Yes, people would put the ashes in the toilet every day to get rid of the odor. That was a kind of fertilizer mixed with ashes, and Tibetans were using that fertilizer after it became rotten. The Chinese were wearing mouth masks and mixing water with excrement, and after stirring it, they were poring it on the vegetables.   

**Q:**  Didn't they plant barley and those grains?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They didn't have the land for planting grain. At that time, the Chinese had so many vegetables and the quality was also good, but I guess, maybe they were not supplying to the other regiments. The Chinese were also buying a lot of vegetables from the market in Lhasa. Whenever the Chinese would come to buy vegetables, the vegetable sellers would talk with the Chinese and they would not take notice of us, even when we were standing by. That was because the Chinese were buying them wholesale.   

**Q:**  I have heard that they had to import rice from India. Was that imported from the Indian government or was it transported from China by sea via India?   

**A:**  I guess that was transported by sea from China. At that time, there was a lot of rice called the water rice [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲས], which had a kind of smell. Usually, the rice was mostly imported from Nepal via Nyalam [Tib. གཉའ་ནང]. The best quality rice was the jasmine rice [Tib. སྨན་འབྲས] produced and imported from Kalimpong and Nepal.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came, it was said that the Tibetan soldiers should be converted into the People's Liberation Army. What happened about that? I heard that some Tibetan regiments were wearing the Tibetan uniform and some of them were wearing the Chinese uniform, and in some regiments the officers were wearing the Chinese uniform, what actually happened?   

**A:**  They probably didn't wear the Chinese uniform. It was written in the 17-Point Agreement that the Tibetan soldiers should be converted into the People's Liberation Army and the Chinese were insisting that we should put that into practice. But we didn't put Chinese uniforms on our soldiers and we didn't hoist the Chinese flag on the roof of the Tibetan regiments. Later, when the revolt took place and when it was announced that the Dalai Lama was going to the Chinese military headquarters, all of the Tibetan regiments were expected to come marching in formation and the abbots of the three great monasteries were also to come for the salute honor [Ch. zhang bai]. In the morning, when the people demonstrated, at the beginning the Tibetan soldiers were supposed to come as the guards of honor and they came marching in formation to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and they were supposed to be the Gusung of the Dalai Lama from Norbulinga to the Potala. But, before the military parade arrived at Norbulinga, all the roads to Norbulinga were filled with people. After that, when it was decided that the Dalai Lama would not leave Norbulinga, the soldiers were divided and stationed around Norbulinga. On that day, the Tibetan soldiers were holding our own military flag and they were wearing our own uniform, the yellow <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and leather boots. After we arrived at Missamari and Buxar in India, all of the Tibetan soldiers were wearing the same Tibetan uniform. If they were saying that they had put the Chinese uniform on the Tibetan soldiers, they [the Tibetan soldiers] would have worn the Chinese uniform at that time because they didn't have the time to change their uniform. They just ran away from the battlefield. Until that time, they were wearing our uniform, carrying our own flag and practicing our own drill [Tib. དམག་རྩེད]. They had never practiced the Chinese drill, never wore the Chinese uniform and [never] carried the Chinese flag. This is proof that Tibetan soldiers never wore the Chinese uniform.   

**Q:**  I saw a photo in which <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> was wearing a Chinese uniform?   

**A:**  Maybe they gave him the uniform and told him to wear it. He might be acting wantonly [Tib. མི་བྱེད་རྒུ་བྱེད] and took the photo wearing the Chinese uniform at home. Anyway, at that time, nobody wore the Chinese uniform and marched in formation [Tib. རུ་སྒྲིག]. After the soldiers came to India, they had been wearing the uniform for a long time.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to China, I have heard that some people said that it would be better if he didn't go to China and it would be better to stay, and they held a kind of meeting. Have you heard anything about that?   

**A:**  Maybe there was this kind of talk. When people heard that the Dalai Lama was going to leave, 2-3 people would have talked to each other saying, "What would happen if he would go to China?" Or, "This time, there will not be any problem." All the people were thinking that there would not be any problem if he would go to China once. People were not saying that the Dalai Lama couldn't come back if he would go to China. But the ordinary masses were very much worried about that. Since [after] they heard about that, every day there was a rush for having an audience with the Dalai Lama. At the time of the morning Trungja tea ceremony [Tib. དྲུང་ཇ] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, at that time, the elderly people in Lhasa were saying, "If we don't have an audience when we have the chance, the unlucky [Tib. བསོད་བདེ་སྐམ་པོ] people might make us lose the chance of having an audience." In the morning when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa, people were crying very much and I also felt as if my heart was taken out and became sort of unconscious. I looked at him when he was in the sedan, and I ran forward quickly and waited for awhile and looked at him again. I did that several times when he came out from Norbulinga up to the Lhadong Shenkawa ferry site. On that day, the dam at the river bank became like a forest of people, [so much] that I thought maybe there weren't any people left in Lhasa City. When the Dalai Lama went to India, people were wearing their best clothes and they burned incense. And they took tiffins and thermos flasks, and went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ཀླུ་ལྡིང] It is considered respectful to welcome [tib. ཕེབས་བསུ] visiting high officials some ways outside of Lhasa, much as we in the U.S. would go to meet someone at the airport. Gyetse luding was the standard reception site for this. It was located on the main road west of Lhasa between Drepung and the Norbulinga palace.">Gyetse luding</a> to see him off and look at him. After he left, the people enjoyed picnics and they were not worried about that [at] all. And when they came back, some of them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> opera and some of them played the flute and sang songs.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama arrived in China, maybe, they talked about the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] and about the conflict between the Tibetan government and Tashilhunpo. Did you hear anything about that? What did they talk about? All of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> were not there, so did they have to consult the Kalön in Lhasa? I have heard that the Labrang also said that they wanted the Shigatse Dzong.   

**A:**  The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> of Labrang [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>] probably talked about that very strongly. At that moment, the person who covered [Tib. ཁ་གཅོད་རྒྱག] it was Ngabö and he was the person who gave them the answers. I have heard that Dzasa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> was talking about that quite strongly and Ngabö told him, "You keep quite. We will talk when we get back to Tibet." [Dzasa] Trendong was a Tibetan government official and he had the estate given by the Tibetan government, and [Dzasa] Lhamön [Tib. ལྷ་སྨོན] was the official of the Tashilhunpo Labrang and the estate was given from Labrang. Dzasa Trendong's mother was a Tibetan government official and their estate was called the Tanag [Tib. རྟ་ནག] Trendong, and they might have kept some lands from Labrang also. That was why Ngabö told him to keep quite. I heard my maternal uncle and some other elderly [person] talking about that. I heard that Labrang said that they wanted the area upwards [Tib. ཡན་ཆད] from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གམ་པ་ལ] The mountain pass that separates Tsang and Central Tibet (Ü). It overlooks the Yarlung Tsangpo River and Chushul.">Gampala</a> mountain pass. Actually, the Tibetan government was telling them as proof that originally Tashilhunpo Monastery was founded by Gendün Druba [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་གྲུབ་པ], the first Dalai Lama. It was not founded by the lineage of the Panchen Lamss. And the estates that belonged to the Tashilhunpo monastery were granted by the Tibetan government for the monastery. The first reincarnation of the Panchen was called Ensapa Lobsang Chögyen [Tib. དབེན་ས་པ་བློ་བཟང་ཆོས་རྒྱན] and there were about 30-40 monks in the hermitage called Ensa Hermitage. It was just a small monastery. This was the origin of the Panchen Lama. Later, the Ensa Lama learned the religion well and became a famous lama. When Gendün Druba was staying in Drepung during the later part of his life, he appointed Ensapa Lama as the replacement of his throne [Tib. ཁྲི་ཚབ] in Tashilhunpo. After Ensapa died, his reincarnations were called the Panchen Lama. All of the estates were granted by the Tibetan government with land tenures with the seal of the Dalai Lama [Tib. སྦུག་དམ], and they were not going to make any changes to the estates that were already granted to them. But it would not be okay for the Tashilhunpo to say recklessly that they wanted the areas above Gampa La. The places like Paldi and Nangkartse were not granted to Labrang. Actually, what Tashilhunpo had was Lhatse [Tib. ལྷ་རྩེ], Ngamring [Tib. ངམ་རིང] and Phuntsoling [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང]. They had 5 estates that were the biggest among their estates. Before that, the people living in the areas that belonged to the Tashilhunpo were working and paying for taxes, like the horse corvée and the pack animals imposed by the Tibetan government. But later, after the Panchen Lama came, they stopped working and paying the taxes to the Tibetan government because of the Chinese strength.   

**Q:**  Yesterday we talked about the rituals [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན] that were performed because the Chinese had arrived. Would you tell me about that?   

**A:**  Some of the rituals were suggested in the astrological divination [Tib. དབྱངས་འཆར] done by the Tibetan Medical and Astrological Institute, the Mentsigang. Those were like making a ransom [Tib. སྐུ་གླུད], like the body size of the Dalai Lama and a sword that was made in one day by a single blacksmith. And the Dalai Lama [would] have to prostrate 100,000 times, offer 100,000 butter lamps and do 100,000 water offerings. And soup should be made with black sesame, black pepper, beans and fish oil, and the soup should be distributed to the regiments. At that time, people were also saying, "In the end, Lhasa will be damaged by water and the Buddha statue in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> is going to be taken to the realm of the Nagas [Tib. ཀླུ་ཡུལ]." And Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] would be damaged by sand because Samye was located in the sand. People were also speaking of [those] kinds of stories. There was a pile of stones near the dam of Lhasa [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རགས་རྡོ] and at the time of the Mönlam, all of the monks had to bring one stone and add onto that pile. That was said to be preventing Lhasa from being damaged by water. After the Chinese came and they did reckless things, I don't know how the people's merit was decreased. In Lhasa there was a big statue of Matreya [Tib. བྱམས་པ] in the Jokhang. At that time, according to the divination done by Lama Jamyang Khyentse [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་མཁྱེན་རྩེ], it was said that a statue of the Padmasambhava called Nangsi Silnön [Tib. སྣང་སྲིད་ཟིལ་གནོན] should be made and placed near the statue of Matreya in the Jokhang. And there were many butter lamps offered in big stone containers. From the beginning, it was filled by the government and people were adding butter continuously. The butter in those containers never exhausted, but at that time, all of the butter lamps were exhausted to the bottom even though people were adding the butter as before. That was a kind of bad omen. Because of that, they asked a divination to a lama and it was said that we should pray for the longevity [Tib. བརྟན་བཞུགས] of the Buddha statue in the Jokhang and the butter lamps should be refilled. For that, the government bought 70-80 loads of butter and filled the butter lamp stone containers, and they also built three statues of Khenlob Chösum [Tib. མཁན་སློབ་ཆོས་གསུམ]; Shantiraksita [Tib. མཁན་ཆེན་བོ་ཏི་ས་ཏུ], and Padmasambhava and Trisong Detsen [Tib. ཁྲི་སྲོང་ལྡེ་བཙན] at the front of the Buddha statue with their hands folded towards the Buddha. Later, when all of the statues in the Jokhang were destroyed, only the Buddha statue was left. That was because they prayed for the longevity of the Buddha statue and the effect of performing the rituals. Actually, they wanted to destroy the Buddha statue, which was the main target, but they [were] unable destroy it. The statue of Matreya called the Jampa Chöngor [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཆོས་འཁོར] in the Jokhang, which was drawn out in a cart during the Mönlam Prayer Festival. It was a statue built several hundred thousand years ago, at the time of the Buddha Wösrung [Tib. འོད་སྲུང]. That was completely destroyed. The Buddha statue in Ramoche was also built at that time and the sponsor was the king of gods, Gyajin [Tib. བརྒྱ་བྱིན]. It was the size of the Buddha [at] 8 years old The Buddha statue in the Jokhang was built in heaven at the time when Buddha was alive ,and he himself consecrated [Tib. རབ་གནས] the statue. It was the size of the 12 years old Buddha.   

**Q:**  I guess that the office in charge of performing the rituals [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལས་ཁུངས] might have rolled the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> divination where the options were written, and put in small <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> bowls regarding what kind of ritual should be preformed. At that time, what kind of additional or special rituals were performed?   

**A:**  Yes, they performed a lot of rituals like exorcisms for expelling the evil spirits [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག]. This ritual was done by a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> lama wearing a white skirt who lived in Möndrong in Lhasa. At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> in charge of performing the rituals and the guide of that lama was Ngawang Thöndrub. At that time, I heard that when people went to have an audience with the lama, he would squeeze stones like squeezing flour dough, and he also made the glass into a round ball. This lama performed a lot of rituals for driving away the evil spirit and he also performed the ritual for subduing evil spirits, Sinön [Tib. སྲི་གནོན], at the front of Shöl.   

**Q:**  What is the Sinön?   

**A:**  That was a kind of ritual for subduing the evil spirits and pressing them underground. Usually there were three different kinds of rituals; press, burn, and throw or shoot [Tib. མནན་སྲེག་འཕངས་གསུན]. Press means the subduing of the evil spirit and burn means the fire exorcism rite [Tib. སྦྱིན་སྲག]. And the throw or shoot means Torgya, the exorcism, driving away the evil spirit [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག]. These were all performed for preventing the war. The government performed a lot of these rituals.   

**Q:**  I heard that once <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Surkhang didn't attend the meeting and he left, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that that was in Yuthok's house. As you said, I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Surkhang went to urinate and then he went back home. For that, Kalön Ngabö or Shenkawa [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] probably told him, "Zhang Jingwu was very agitated. You should not act like this. You should apologize to him. If you don't apologize to him, that would not be good at all." So Surkhang went to visit Zhang Jingwu and apologized [to] him. After Surkhang left, there were other Kalöns in the meeting and at that moment, Zhang Jingwu said, "This person called Surkhang is always behaving like this. Whenever there is an important matter he shirks away [Tib. གཡོལ]." At that moment, Zhang Jingwu got angry and said many different things. I have heard about that, but I don't remember who told me.   

**Q:**  I heard that after that, Surkhang was kind of in serious danger and some people were saying that if he wasn't careful, one day he might get arrested. And the big monasteries held a meeting and said that they would never hand over <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Surkhang.   

**A:**  Regarding handing [him] over, if they would fix the date and said that they were going to arrest him on that day, they [the monks] could have done something, but if they just called him to a meeting and arrested him, just verbally saying that they would do something in the future, [that] could not save him [Tib. སྦ་ར་ཁེབ]. I heard that in the Kham area, when they arrested the high lamas and the lords [Tib. དཔོན་ཆེན], they had done the same thing. Some of them were told to come to the meeting and some of them were invited to a show or party. When they came unintentionally, they were arrested all of a sudden. Likewise, the reason for telling Surkhang to apologize was that they thought that the Chinese might do the same thing, and if it would happened like that, it would be very difficult to save him. Actually, the Chinese didn't act like that before 1959. They told the Tibetan government to arrest the people of the People's Association and they were arrested. The Chinese soldiers didn't arrest them. At that time, the two Sitsab held the political power of the Tibetan government firmly in their hands and didn't hand it over at all. Later, the two of them resigned, but even after that, some of the points that they had been arguing could not be implemented. For example, the Chinese were not able to erect the Chinese flag on the Tibetan military headquarters [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང], let alone hoist the flag on the Potala Palace. And the Tibetan flag was hoisted on the Tibetan regiments. There wasn't any Chinese flag hoisted. In case, as you said, the Chinese had given [them] their Army uniforms, they would have given their flags and the flags should have been hoisted, but there wasn't a single Chinese flag on the Tibetan regiments. It was because the two Sitsab had verbally fought with the Chinese and it was effective until even now, and it has become the basis for us to prove Tibet's independence because the two of them didn't accept the 17-Point Agreement. Later, the Chinese used a new term, "Finding truth through facts [Tib. དངོས་ཐོག་བདེན་འཚོལ]." When the Tibetan representatives went to Tibet, they said that we should leave aside the destruction that occurred in the past. If the Chinese really meant to find the truth through facts, those were the truths found through facts that existed until 1959. In the beginning, Ngabö didn't seal the Agreement, and second, the two Sitsab didn't accept it. After that, the People's Association rose one after another when the former was defeated. In the end, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> rose up. Actually they were the leading force and there were people from the three provinces [Tib. ཆོལ་ཁ་གསུམ] of Tibet in that organization. The people had been opposing the 17-Point Agreement from the beginning to the end. That should be considered as finding the truth through facts.   

