# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0001.11 : Tape 11  
##  : with Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 58  
**Date of Birth:** 1935  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Drakten [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན] was a monk official in the traditional Tibetan government and discusses in detail the political events that occurred in Lhasa in the 1950s. In this interview, he discusses Chushigandru, as well as the political maneuverings before the arrival of the Chinese. He talks about the cadre training school and the relationship between the Dalai Lama and his advisers, as well as their dispute over whether or not the Dalai Lama should stay in India (in 1957) or return to Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 11  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0001_11/H_0001_11.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last year, I asked you about the meeting to suppress the Khamba's revolt and to apologize to China, and you spoke some [of it]. Yesterday I spoke with you but I did not have my tape recorder, so today I want to ask you about it. I probably did not mention it to you in detail, but what I heard was that in the Kashag, Surkhang and Ngabö had a disagreement, and so this meeting was called. So there is such talk. Then after the resolution was written up, Ngabö tore up the agreement. I don't know whether this was in the Kashag or not. So I wanted to ask you about this and also, in general, how, why and where, did this meeting take place?   

**A:**  Regarding this, the reason why was that the Khambas were at Drigu and had established a military camp. The Chinese had asked if the Tibetan government knew whether the Khambas had gone to Drigu and had established a camp. That it would not be possible for the government not to know and so therefore, it was better to talk and try to subside the situation. So from our side, Drepung's Ngagpa Khembo and Rimshi Minkyilinga were sent to Drigu. The Chinese told them that it was not good to start a militant action and to advise them. When they arrived there, the gist of the matter is that they had to tell them not to do such things and to return. The Khambas did not agree to this. Since the two returned unsuccessfully, the Chinese said that it was good for the Tibetan government to talk, but if they did not listen, then it was alright for the Tibetan government to send the army to quell them. If the Khambas were well armed and the government was having trouble, then Zhongyang would send soldiers to support [them]. The fact that they would be destroyed was not in doubt. However, the question of destroying the Khamba soldiers was problematic since at that time, they were known as the Volunteer Army to Defend Religion and there was nothing about Khambas or others. Since the Chinese were out to destroy the Buddhist religion, they therefore called themselves the Volunteer Army to Defend Religion. Since they rose under such a name, the question of us taking up arms against ourselves was not possible from any angle. Since we were working as a government institution, we had to go through the motions of saying from our mouths that what the Khambas were doing was not good and that they had to return, but in everyone's hearts, what the Khambas were doing was what they all wanted. The thinking was that the government was not going to do anything, and whether it was the Kudrak or the people, they supported the Khambas. Although one had to say Khambas, there were people from all three provinces, Amdowas too. Later on, in the newspapers in India, they talked about matters of the Chushigandru and Amdo [Tib. ཆུ་ཨའི་གནས་ཚུལ], and the Ütsang sort of disappeared. But from the Ütsang, take for example the main monasteries, from Ganden, there were various tobtsang [dobdo's clubs]. Like the party [system], the dobdo had a lot of kyidu [associations/clubs]. The monastic kyidu were very strong, with many members and good money. Ganden had 3 tobtsang, large, medium and small. From the middle tobtsang, all the members joined Chushigandru. The leader was an ex-shengo by the name of Phara Shesur. There must have been about 80 people. When the main group left, there were others who said, "I'm going too," and they too joined. So even from the monasteries there was a separate organization of "volunteers [Tib. ཁས་ལེན་པ]." Likewise, from the Ütsang, among the military there were many who left. Like Chushul Samkar [Tib. བསམ་མཁར] and Chushul Kendrong. These days there is a Samkar around here. Yes, they had a younger son. He was in the army at first. So there were many from the Ütsang people, all volunteers. Even among the Sera monks there were many. From all 3 monasteries, and even from the people, they all joined the Chushigandru organization itself. [There is an aristocrat, Dumkhangla, who was the Kashag Gagpa for Ragashag—he joined Chushigandru. He presently lives in England.] Now, regarding the time when Namseling and all went, many soldiers from the countryside were recruited. Regarding the question of sending those two. Since the Drepung Ngagpa Khembo and Dzasa Minkyilinga were sent, and the Khambas did not listen to them, it was said that the Chinese were saying such things and it was better to calm the situation. At the same time, the Chinese were very angry over this issue and we needed to try and alleviate their anger. Such an order came [from the Dalai Lama probably] and an Assembly meeting was called. In this meeting, the usual proceedings [that occurred] in the large assembly [Tib. ཙོགས་ཆེན] where all officials attended, as well as those holding clerk status (drungtog) and other various representatives, were not followed. They were also not followed for the usual a hragdü (Abbreviated Assembly) meeting either, where the government gave a list of attendees. The moment the order came for the meeting, the various groups, like the common tsidrung and lay officials, the tsendrön, the khenjung, khenche, et cetera, each one met on their own and they voted for their representatives. In this way, it was probably the first time in Tibet that they ever used votes. The reason for this was that there were many (Tibetan officials) who were working in the Chinese offices. It was not something they went to on their own, but they were sent by the government. Anyway, the moment the meeting was called, what everyone thought and was suspicious of, was that the moment the meeting started, those who were working for the Chinese would immediately go and report to the Chinese. The officials sent by the government were not suspected, since they were sent by the government, but it was still thought that those who worked for the Chinese just might leak things out. So that was the reason for the votes. And who did they vote in? They voted in all of the ones who had no connections with the Chinese. In this way, from each group, each rank, there were 5 selected. And from the military rupön and gyagpön category, 5 were chosen. From among the Chanang (clerks) of the Tseja and Laja, 5 were chosen. All together there were about 80 odd people. In the meeting, I think the drungtsi were all there, with the rest being voted in. Among the kalön, Surkhang was the only one and so he headed the meeting. At that time, from our side, the way Kalön Surkhang thought was very good. The reason was that when we got together in the Legjö Legung (Reform Office) for the meeting, I was the representative from the common tsidrung. [Surkhang said], "As the Dalai Lama has ordered, there is a need to subside the Khambas and to alleviate the anger of the Zhongyang. This is the main agenda and a lot of other deviations here and there will not be allowed. So regarding this, please state what opinions you have (about this). At today's meeting there are representatives from the army and the government's drungtog (clerks). Now it is no longer a situation where the higher ranking ones meet without the others participating. So now, no matter what it is, it's a matter where everyone has to be involved. Especially now is the situation for the people to show their strength, as even we in the Kashag have no means to do anything." So in Surkhang's comment, there were elements which inspired the people and his speech was very effective. The people already had a feeling that they should do something, but it was what Surkhang said, even though it was just a few words, that really gave a push. As I think about it, even the actions that were to occur later, it was this talk that Surkhang gave that pushed matters. There was a meeting and he gave one or two opinions. But it would have been difficult to get everyone's opinion and not all would have been heard. It would also take too long since one had to listen while somebody else talked. So it was decided to have a number of small group (breakaway) meetings [Tib. ཙོགས་ཆུང]. The main agenda was to discuss how the Khamba revolt could be subdued and how to alleviate the anger of Zhongyang, and a lot of other matters were not to be discussed. There were 7 separate small group meetings. The meeting took place in the Legjö Legung located at the south-west side of the Tsuglagang. If this is table, then where your glasses are, then at the side of where the big caldrons were placed [Tib. ཁྲོ་ཆེན་པོ], on the other side of Barkor [Street] was Kyitöpa and on this side was the Doring [Tib. རྡོ་རིང] House. When Barkor makes a turn it was at the side. It was at the side of the Shingra, where the Legjö Legung was. Near this was the office that collected tea and salt taxes, the Jatsa Legung [Tib. ཇ་ཚྭ་ལས་ཁུངས]. So when the meeting gathered in small groups, some met in the Jatsa Legung, others in the Legjö, yet some met in the gag on top of the Tsuglagang. We were in the 4th meeting that met in the Jatsa Legung. The ranking ones among us were Ramba Theiji, Trunyichemmo Gyatso Tashi [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས], Tsipön Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ], and Khenjung Changkyim (Trekhang Kungö). Then Shöpa Tsültrim Nyimala [Tib. ཞོལ་པ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཉི་མ་ལགས], who is a Khenjung. Then Sarchung [Tib. གསར་བྱུང] Sey, Ganden representative Lumbum Shesur [Tib. ཀླུ་འབུམ་ཞལ་ཟུར], Sera Jeypa Abbot. Among those who were there, there was also Kungö Getharla. I think Gyagpön Kelsang Dramdrüla was there. I know he was at the meeting but I don't know if he was in the 4th smaller grouping or not. Barshi Jedrungla was there. A tsidrung by the name of Chömpella [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་ལགས], who was the tsidrung of Tseja Chadrung [Tib. ཕྱག་དྲུང], those are the ones I remember, and we met in the Jatsa Legung. There was an order to meet for this reason, and that was also what the Chinese were saying. However, I think it was Tsögo, who said, "It is as has been ordered, and that is also what the Chinese are saying [subdue the Khambas]. And from Lhoka, numerous petitions are being received and there is great hardship for the miser, so we should have some consideration for them if they don't listen to us." There was even such talk. I think it was Trunyichemmo Gyatso Tashi who said, "Oh, I don't think we should do that. It is not okay to do this. Sending the [army] on Tibetans who are the Volunteer Army to Defend Religion just doesn't seem to be quite right." Then Shöpa Tsültrim Nyimala and others were saying that it was better to discuss the issue and that one couldn't send the army. During this time, Barshi Jedrungla was really acting as if he was possessed. Those who were sitting ahead were the trunyichemmo, tsipön and dzasa. Barshi Jedrungla was sort of sitting here. We discussed and made a resolution, and asking whether it was alright, the resolution was read [before all]. [Then Barshi Jedrungla said] "Please don't read it this way. Please mention just a little." So a portion was read. [Jedrungla continues] "What does it say? Please stop there. Let's talk about this." So it was read. [He continues] "Now, regarding this, this is not alright. What do you think if we said it like this?" So when he asked us and said, "What if we cross this out and say it like this," Barshi Jedrungla's wording was just amazing. And everyone supported him saying, "Yes, that's fine, what you Barshi have said is good." With Barshi acting as the Umdze and everyone supporting him, even if the kungö were heading the meeting and made the draft, there was nothing that they could do except agree. So that's how strength was gathering. Finally, the resolutions from the various groups were brought to the general meeting (tsogchen). Each of the points from the various meetings were all written in a main resolution. This was sent up for referral. The main points of the resolution were the same from all, that Tibetans could not at all be sent against Tibetans, and that they would not disobey the order from the government, and so it was better to discuss [the matter]. So Tsipön Namseling and the younger Trekhang Khenjung Ngönshe Thubden Samjola were sent. They were sent from here by the Kashag, and when they arrived there, they stayed with Chushigandru. When they consulted with the Kashag they did it diplomatically, but internally they took [made] all of their consultations with Kungö Chemmo. Whatever Chemmo [Drönyerchemmo] advised, the two implemented. So the two of them just sacrificed everything, and without paying heed to the order of the Kashag, they joined with the Chushigandru. This was told [in 1983] in the Kashag sitting room when the Information Department invited all the officials and asked them. Samjola was there and he said that they did it this way. Ganden Villa Khenjung was saying, "We were consulting everything with Kungö Chemmo, weren't we?" So Khenjung in front of Kungö Chemmo said, "Even our Jenkhentsisum were consulting everything with Kungö Chemmo, right?" Shakabpa agreed saying, "At that time, all the people inside and outside [sought] their main advice from Kungö. It was not a question of not trusting the Kashag, however, in the Kashag there were people who were getting salary from the Chinese and who had good relations with them. So one could not put one's trust in the Kashag, and so Chemmo was consulted."   

**Q:**  You were saying that the first meeting was done according to votes, right? For example, if the government needed to call the tsondu, then it was not done according to the traditional manner and votes were taken.   

**A:**  At that time, it was the first time votes were cast.   

**Q:**  So then wouldn't the Kashag have to say that it was alright to take votes?   

**A:**  There was no Kashag order at all. The order was from the gag (Secretariat) itself. Right after the Trungja, everyone came out and said that we should not do [it] like that but take votes. So everyone discussed and votes were taken. There was no order from the Kashag or the government for votes to be taken, but when everyone came out from the Trungja they said that this time, unless we did things properly, there were those who were working with the Chinese. Truly, at that time, there were some who were as if [they were] possessed by the Chinese. There were many who clearly and completely had the Chinese outlook and advanced forward. So it was said that if the government appointed them, such people would be there and so no proper discussions could take place. And so votes were taken. The votes were taken in such a way that there was probably no one who was working in the Chinese office. Even if they were in the Chinese office, those who had no belief in the Chinese [were there].   

**Q:**  When the Trungja was over, you could talk about it, but the lay officials, how were they doing it? Didn't they also have to come to the meeting?   

**A:**  They also did the same thing. During the Trungja there were not many lay officials, except for those who would usually come. However, when they heard that the tsidrung decided to vote after the Trungja, they would do the same, right? Anyway, all was done according to votes.   

**Q:**  In what manner were Kungö Namseling and Samjola chosen to go? Besides the two, it would have been alright for someone else to go, wouldn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, it would have been alright. However, what I heard, and I don't know if this is true or not, but what I heard was that the Chinese themselves said that Namseling had to go. People really looked up to Kungö Chemmo and Namseling. Therefore, it is said that the Chinese suggested his name. Anyway, since he was known to have strength [Tib. མཚན་ཤུགས] , it is possible that he may have internally asked, "Shall I go?" And [they] might have told him that it would be good. But I don't know for certain.   

**Q:**  It is possible that he and Kungö Chemmo had a talk.   

**A:**  It is possible. Anyway, at times, Chemmo used to come to Namseling's place and Andru also used to come. And while they spoke, Namseling's wife, Chökyila, said that she used to guard the doors. No one was trusted, not even the servants, and Lady [Namseling] herself stood outside the door.   

**Q:**  It is said that the work of Phala, some say that the Kashag did not know. Others say that it is not possible for the Kashag to [have] known, and that most probably, they did know. Others say even if the Kashag knew, they pretended like they didn't. Some say that not all members of the Kashag knew, but that one or two knew. So what is your opinion on that?   

**A:**  I cannot say that they did not know at all because it is possible that there were internal discussions. I can give you one example of how the Kashag didn't have relations [were not involved] with what Phala did. Kungö Chemmo had said that in the Chushigandru there was Litang Athar, who is now here these days. He was sent by Kungö Sawangchemmo for training somewhere in America, and he was among those who were dropped back in Tibet. Athar was sent, it seems, with wireless equipment. Athar and his companion were on the summit of the Gempe Utse [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ་དབུ་རྩེ] hill, behind Drepung. So it seems that he was sending the wireless from there to Jenkhentsisum in India. Now it seems that Kungö Chemmo was giving all of the instructions and advice. So while Athar was there on Gempe Utse, the Chinese found out that somebody was sending wireless [messages] from the top of Gempe Utse, and they told the Kashag. Chemmo heard that the Chinese told the Kashag. Wondering, Chemmo said that he went to see Shasur, and [they] just talked idly about what was going on and what Shasur was hearing those days. Shasur said that it was strange, but the Chinese were saying that someone was sending wireless [messages] from Gempe Utse. How could that be? So it seems that he went to appraise the situation, whether it was true and what the Kashag was thinking of doing. Chemmo said, "How strange. It may be some miraculous sign [Tib. ཆོ་འཕྲུལ] of the Nechung Deity. Amazing! Could it really be true?" Shasur replied, "Yes. Yes, it couldn't be true, it must be like that" Anyway, they blamed it on Nechung's miracle. The Chinese found out and they were planning on scouring the whole hillside. As soon as Chemmo heard this from Shasur, immediately he sent a messenger to Gempe Utse and told Athar to leave at once and cross the river to Mindru dzari [Tib. སྨིན་དྲུག་རྫ་རི], a peak at the Trip side (of the Kyichu River). So Athar, a companion and one mule proceeded. It seems that they also had something to load on the mule. They had guns it seems. So they descended to Lhasa. I don't know whether it was at this time or later, but what Athar said was that he went to see Chemmo at his house since he needed to buy a horse and something else, and so he asked for some money. No, no, it wasn't money, but he wanted an audience. Yes, that's right, Kungö Chemmo himself said that they wanted an audience. He said, "Athar and his companion asked if they [could] get an audience and I could not say that it was alright. So I had to fool them a lot. I told them to go to Norbulinga and that everything would be alright, and I spoke as if everything was alright. I had to since they had to do the work. When they got there, I could not send them for an audience and [have them] do all sorts of things. I would not openly ask the Dalai Lama. . So when Athar came down, from the kitchen I asked that some fried cookies and some sweets be brought. The kitchen brought some in a white bag. And I gave an image of the [protective talisman] Jigje Mahe and a large scarf. So Phala told Athar that he had consulted with the Dalai Lama and it was felt that there were a lot of Chinese spies, so for the time being, it would not be good to give an audience, but the Dalai Lama said to give you this . So I had to give these things to Athar and send him home . He was insisting that he have an audience and he was giving me a hard time." Kungö Chemmo said that . I don't know whether this was after he came down from Gempe Utse or before, but this is what Chemmo told Athar at one point in time. Anyway, when Athar descended and went towards Trip, along with his companion and one mule, when the mule got to the middle of the new bridge at Lhadong Shenka, it just laid down. He thought that it was now most unfortunate [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་སོང]. There were Chinese guards on both sides of the bridge. He said that he also had a gun inside his sleeve and when the mule laid down and when he tried to pull and kick it to stand up, his gun was also jutting out. Since the Chinese were there he was very scared. Anyway, since it was daylight they did not pay too much attention, and [he] finally managed to go. Later they moved to Mindru Dzari and since it was across the river, it seems that Lhasa did not know about sending the wireless. Later, it was said that since Gempe Utse was all land and there was no river, the signals could be picked up. The Chinese recruited miser from Shundongkar [Tib. ཤུན་གདོང་དཀར] and other areas, and scoured [Tib. རི་ཤུལ་རྒྱག] [all over] the place. However Athar had already left.   

**Q:**  The Chinese did what?   

**A:**  They scoured and people just surrounded Gempe Utse and went up from all sides so that there was no way for escape. If one looks [at it] from this perspective, then it seems that the Kashag did not really know at all . As far as the real internal matter is concerned, it's a question of whether Sawang Surkhang may or may not have known about it.   

**Q:**  If someone in the Kashag knew, then perhaps it may have been Sawang Surkhang.   

**A:**  Yes, perhaps. Because what Chemmo mentioned here was that, the reason I had to keep it secret from the Kashag was that our main purpose was the same and there was no secret about it. However, if we didn't keep it a secret and if we didn't remain without connections, if one day we ran out of luck and if it was found out that there was a connection with the Kashag, then the name of the government was involved and it would be awful. If things did not work out, then I would have shouldered all of the responsibility and I would have sacrificed everything and [would] accept whatever punishment the Kashag doled out to me. It is for this reason that I did not consult the Kashag. As far as Kungö Chemmo was concerned, he clearly indicated that he had no connection with the Kashag. So if there was a connection with the Kashag, then the name of the government was involved. I am just one person and it was something that I had fully decided to sacrifice.   

**Q:**  Earlier we had some talk regarding Barshi Jedrungla. And it seems he called some meetings and had some kind of organization.   

**A:**  Yes. It's that what I mentioned to you yesterday. Previous to this, Barshi Jedrungla did not have an organization. Now, after the representatives were chosen, they were in the meeting to . The group consisting of the ordinary officials and the rupön and gyagpön met under a canopy on the roof of the Pelajog [Tib. དཔལ་ལྷ་ལྕོག] [in Tsuglagang], and it was said that this group must remain in existence. During this time, Chushigandru was very well known and using them as an excuse, though they had plans for military action in Lhasa, everywhere the Chinese lived they put sand in bags and made walls on the rooftops. This was everywhere the Chinese lived. In the windows they also had sandbags. The sand, it seems, absorbs the bullet. They had holes from which to shoot. If you shot at them, they had sandbags. Samdru Phodrang's (Sambo's) house is exactly in front of Sungjöra where the Dalai Lama gives his teachings. On this side is Barkor [Street]. The Chinese lived in Samdru Phodrang's house. Sandbags lined the roof and windows. On the roof were two Chinese guards holding guns. Likewise at Kyitöpa, the Dalai Lama's throne at Sungjöra was just like a target. Since the Dalai Lama came, all of the government officials were also there. Still everyone was dressed and sitting in style, without even a pistol in their dress pouches, not to say that it would have been of any help anyway. So it was said that if they [the Chinese] pulled the trigger, then it would be just too much [Tib. དཔེ་རང་རེད]. Anyway, it was a situation where all it needed was a match to light things up. It was just ready to catch fire and all it needed was a "spark" of a reason. And so it was said that the government could just not come up with a plan under the Chinese because the moment they made a move, they would be suppressed. So Jedrungla said that they should just make a decision and the organization should remain. That they needed an organization that would attend to the day to day activities. So the lower ranking representatives discussed and they came to an agreement, and they sent a notice the next day asking everyone to come . In this meeting the Trungtsi and the Kalön were not invited, but all the others were called to the meeting, including Chemmo and Kündeling. Tarala was also there. What the kungö said [was] that it was not a good idea for a group to meet and then to leave out the kungö . That this was a matter concerning all, as it was a matter of politics and religion, so it was better to invite the kungö. This was decided upon. The meeting would adjourn in the evening. The next day, the Yigtsang sent notices to the monks of the three monasteries and the tsidrung. And the Tsikhang sent notices to the lay officials, while the Magjigang sent notices to the army. The order said, "You have met once and it is over. It is a very dangerous activity. However, you have all done this with great determination and a good heart, and so this time there will be no punishment. From now on you are not at all permitted to do this." So the main meeting could not take place. However, all of a sudden, a lot of people had gathered and something seemed to have continued afterwards. Anyway, there was no time to gather to discuss what was happening since Mönlam was fast approaching. It happened like that. Regarding that (special) meeting and what was done, the main person was Barshi.   

**Q:**  He is in Canada, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  I don't know. Even if you met him, you probably won't get anything new or more than what he already said at the Medical Center. He talked about it in detail.   

**Q:**  As I look at it, in the 1950s there seems to be two groups of people who thought differently. On the one hand, the 17-Point Agreement was implemented, and even representatives were sent (to Beijing) from Tromo when there was no help coming from the outside. There were also many articles in the 17-Point Agreement that had to be implemented. So there seems to be one group who thought, well, it may not be too bad. On the other hand, whether it was the two sitsab or Phala Drönyerchemmo, there were sort of some from early on who were putting up resistance. I learned a lot about those who were resisting, however, regarding the others, what were they thinking? Were they thinking that it may not be so bad. Were some saying that the Chinese socialist system was good? For example, there were younger ones and ones who went to school. Were they saying that the socialist system was good or what were they thinking? Because we [the old system] stayed so many years after the Chinese came?   

**A:**  It is really a question of how each one thought. For example, you know the one named Shölkhang Jedrungla? There was also another Shölkhang son who was a seynampa. Among the lay officials there was Denjatsang [Tib. ལྡན་བྱ་ཚང], then Driyü. They were from early on ones very much in with the Chinese. They sort of individually volunteered, and so the Chinese made them work on road construction. They took their chupa off and carried baskets on their backs, and sort of liberated themselves . It was sort of stylish [Tib. དབྱིངས]. The Chinese started a school for cadres [Tib. ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ] and a kind of emergency school for those who would be leaders among the workers. In this school were those who were older and who knew some Tibetan. The school started in Trede Lingka [in the south of the city]. Tents were pitched there and grass was laid on the ground with a canvass covering. There were a lot of students, around 200 or so. One day, it was said the Shölkhang Jedrungla would give a speech and advice. All the students were told to bring one member of their household with them, and tea and snacks would be served. After that, there would be a movie shown. There was a relative of Kungö Gyentsen Chunden [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཆོས་ལྡན] called Thubden Ngawang, who was the nyerpa of Gyentsen Chunden and all. He entered the cadre's school. He said that he did not have any relatives and as a substitute, he asked me to come, and I did. When I got there, each of the students stood at the door and each one ushered one's relative inside and served tea and snacks. Then after some time, Shölkhang Jedrungla came and he said, "To all the students and all of their relatives, Tashi Delek, Tashi Delek! Please have tea and snacks. You have all joined the big family [Tib. ཁྱིམ་ཚང་ཆེན་པོ]. This is very good, very good! Please have tea and snacks, and relax, relax." Then he got up on the podium and gave a lecture. He said, "Today the Central Committee (Zhongyang) is giving intensive schooling for the cadres and there are this many students. And they are doing things with great enthusiasm. This is very good. However, at this moment, things are not well prepared and organized. The reason is that we don't even have houses, and we have to stay out in tents. This is not because we have to be poor and lowly, it is a question of inspiration. What can one get if one studies in such poor conditions? At a future date, if one can individually proceed forward, then one can even achieve the status of Mao Zedong, the chairman of the Central Committee. Don't we say among ourselves that if a mother's son has the knowledge, then even the Ganden Tripa position has no ownership [Tib. ཨ་མའི་བུ་ལ་ཡོན་ཏན་ཡོད་ན་དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་ལ་བདག་པོ་མེད]. Actually and truly, this is the route of the Central Committee (Zhongyang). So there is no need to feel bad because of the poor conditions, since the goal is such. If I told you all of a sudden, you would not understand. For example, people's thinking has to be gradually done in small steps and not all of a sudden. Let me give you an example. If a person is carrying a heavy load and is crossing a high pass and the sun is shining brightly outside, what is in his mind? He is hoping that if he pushes a little harder for a while, there may be a tree, and some shade and some water ahead. So if there is a tree and shade ahead, he will work hard to reach it. When he gets there, he takes off the load, drinks some water and lies down under the tree. His goal is achieved. Now his goal is to be satisfied by just walking for a while, drinking some water and lying down under a tree. That's all there is to his thinking. If he improves his situation some, then he will think that if he can put the load on a horse, then at least he can walk without carrying any load. Now when he can walk beside the horse, then he will definitely think about riding it. If we say that foreign countries have trains and planes, it will not fit their ears , neither have they seen it and they will be amazed. Some people still carry their loads and work very hard, while some in the world today fly in planes. So the problem is not having witnessed it, not that they are being short-sighted. Since that is all one sees, that is all that one is able to think about. The main thing that I am telling you is to be proud. You stay in such a place and study, but your goal is all the way here, where one can go in a plane. Just thinking to take the load off one's back, or hoping to ride a horse. And then when it comes to wheels, hoping to ride a bicycle, don't think about such things. You can go in a plane ." That's what he said. And people like Shölkhang Jedrungla were really enthusiastic about such things. He said, "I, Shölkhang Jedrung, until now have survived on the Tibetan government. However, when I am here, I can go to the government offices riding a horse and also stay in my own house. So I go to the office and then come home. Now this is not the case. See, I am here today, this is my home. And it is the same when I go to China. On the road or wherever I go in China, I go like this, the same leaders are present. Once you have returned to the fold of the big socialist family [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཁྱིམ་ཚང་ཆེན་པོ], this is the right that one has. You all are just concerned and satisfied with the concerns of a household. It's as I have mentioned previously, just hoping to take the load off your backs, don't hold on to such an outlook. Now come straight . ." So he gave such advice. When this was the case, he seemed nothing but a [real] live [Tib. གསོན་པོ] Chinese. There were some, those who earlier on leaned on the Chinese, who must have thought like that. I can't say that others were like that. There were many that found these things in vogue [Tib. དབིང་བྱེད]. Even if it was a hat, they would put on a Chinese hat, and so there were many who copied the Chinese style.   

**Q:**  I wonder if they liked to follow the Chinese and the socialism, or found these things in vogue. For example, compared to our traditional life, socialism was a western system since it came from Marx. So compared to the old ways, it is something modern, isn't it? There must have been some who were tired of the old ways and personal problems with the system, and so it is possible that they wanted to do something new, isn't it?   

**A:**  Yes. If one examines [the situation] well, families like Shölkhang were very wealthy and not just any type of household. And they have never been damaged. However, should one say this is because of the effect of one's prayers [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ་གྱི་མཐུ] or character or outlook, and when one has such wealth and benefit, but then when the Communists came all of a sudden, they behaved kind of cautiously [Tib. སྦི་གསང] and had that kind of outlook, anyway such an outlook is formed.   

**Q:**  Now, other than Shölkhang Jedrungla, in the Kashag the situation was such that it seemed that they had no other choice but to continue the work. Were there others like Shölkhang Jedrungla who had the same thoughts? Saying they wanted to modernize? And didn't many go to schools?   

**A:**  There were quite a few who went to school in Beijing. For example, Kungö Ngawang Thöndrub was among those who went to school. Then there was Sursur Sey [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར་སྲས], and there were Tsidrung nicknamed, "stingy" Jarila [Tib. ལྕག་རིལ་ལགས], Serila [Tib. སེར་རིལ་ལགས] and Khyogtse. A few tsidrung went. Then there was Manang Abo's son.   

**Q:**  How did they go? Did they individually volunteer?   

**A:**  They individually volunteered. They arrived there and studied, and at Beijing itself they opposed [the Chinese] [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ].   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  They put up some posters. For example, there is a Tsidrung Kelsang Kunga [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཀུན་དགའ] who is now in Delhi. He was among those who went to school.   

**Q:**  Where does he stay at Delhi?   

**A:**  Yabshi has an intelligence office with the Indian Government that has connections with Dehradun. He is there. They were the earliest ones to study and they were also the first ones to oppose. In the beginning they were kind of engrossed and went there, and when they had been fully educated, then the opposition started right away.   

**Q:**  Last year you mentioned in the interviews a lot about your maternal uncle [Tib. ཞང་ལགས].   

**A:**  He was a Tsendrön and when the uprising began, he was the Tsendrön Shugja (on duty) in Norbulinga. The one who stayed permanently at the Norbulinga gag and could not return home to Lhasa. The various people who came for audiences, like the Chinese, foreigners, and others, these were all attended to by Chemmo during the Trungja. After the gag was recessed and the Dalai Lama had returned to his room, the Tsendrön Shugja stayed at the gag like a guard. He attended to those who came for audiences, serving tea and snacks, and when the bell rang [Tib. ཕྱག་ཏག], he answered and stayed like an attendant. When the Dalai Lama left for his room [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་ཆིབས་སྒྱུར], the tsendrön stayed like this. Our uncle was such a person.   

**Q:**  What was his name?   

**A:**  Tsendrön Yeshe Lhundrup [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ]. It is also mentioned in Barshi's document that he met Tsendrön Yeshe Lhundrup, and he asked Barshi, "Why didn't you stay where you were supposed to stay [at the Trungja]?" He told Tsendrön Yeshe Lhundrupla that he had had to go somewhere. So he mentioned quite a lot of things, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. Yes.   

**A:**  Yes. That was my uncle, Yeshe Lhundrupla. The main reason was that he was the permanent shugja at Norbulinga and that was why he was present when a lot of things were going on there. When they went to tell Chemmo to request the Dalai Lama not to go to the Chinese military camp, Barshi Jedrungla was there and so was my uncle. Kungö Tseja Gyentsenla was there, Tarala and Gusung Depön were there too. When they, along with Chemmo, went to see Gadrang, they were all there. So they were the main ones who were trying to request the Dalai Lama not to go. My uncle was the permanent shugja and Tseja Gyentsenla, as the Tseja, had to stay there permanently also. And Chemmo had to stay there in Norbulinga, right? Being the kujar. Gusung Depön, being the Bodyguard (Regiment Commander) was always there, right? So the closest servants discussed and that's why my uncle's name always comes up. From the beginning until the end he was there. He said that it was very dangerous. The reason being that, at first when the main commanders, like Zhang Jingwu, used to come, they used to request the traditional way, which is to request for audience the day after tomorrow or in three days, and one or two companions, including interpreters, used to come. Later, in 1958, anybody who came from China used to say that they wanted an audience immediately. And 5 to 6 people used to come. Some women were also brought along. When they were waiting, they immediately [started to] smoke. And they also put their feet up, resting backwards. And since the snacks were good, they even took some away. And they ate so much and just sat, relaxing and chatting. As far as cars were concerned, they came up to the gag and were not permitted inside. Later, they came straight up to the platform of the palace. And in the room, the Dalai Lama was all alone and the attendants were all old. Below there were only two guards. Once inside, the door was closed shut and all one could hear was the call bell and not any voices. So there were 5-6 Chinese there and the Dalai Lama was all alone, and if they did do something, it was very easy. It was unbearable, and at that time he [his uncle] was so agitated. He said, "It's amazing, the Chinese are doing such things and even though outside protection may look grand, inside it is intolerable."   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  In 1958, it was very close .   

**Q:**  The earlier meeting regarding the quelling of the Khamba's disturbance and alleviating Zhongyang's anger, at first the Chinese must have been talking with the Kashag regarding this, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were constantly talking.   

**Q:**  Therefore, there must have been some discussion in the Kashag, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So, during this time, it is possible that Surkhang and Ngabö had some disagreements?   

**A:**  Yes, definitely possible. However, we on the outside never heard one word that there was such a disagreement.   

**Q:**  No?   

**A:**  Never.   

**Q:**  Later, is it possible that Ngabö would tear up the resolution of the tsondu?   

**A:**  I would not know for sure. But the question of tearing it up, this is not possible at all. The work done by 4 members of the Kashag cannot be torn up by one person. If all 4 agreed and said yes, tear it up, then that's one thing. Otherwise, the discussions [were] done by all, it was not just in the procedure of the office. So to me, this statement appears that it cannot be true.   

**Q:**  The resolution of the tsondu, even if all members of the Kashag wanted to tear it up, could they do it? I mean the resolution, after the meeting.   

**A:**  Even if there were 4 members, the resolution given by the tsondu wouldn't be torn. It was not possible to do that. It was possible for them to get rid of some correspondences or orders that were written earlier which they then felt to be useless, but the tsondu's resolution couldn't be torn up. . I don't know if it's true that Ngabö said that it was not okay. The question of whether the Dalai Lama should stay or return, Jenkhentsisum asked the Dalai Lama to stay. And besides them, there were other officials who asked the Dalai Lama to stay while another group said that he should return. So there were two groups, right? Finally, Ngabö said, "If you want to stay, then what kind of confidence [Tib. གདེང], what support do you have? If you have that, then say it. Then there is some worth in staying. Just letting go over there and staying here, then there is nothing." The kungö were saying that the Dalai Lama should stay. Finally, Jenkhentsisum asked the Kashag that if the Dalai Lama returned, then could the Kashag do this and that. It seemed that Surkhang was saying that they would do this and that. Ngabö would say that it was alright, wasn't it? Finally, in front of everyone, Ngabö said, "Now, in front of everyone, you kalön have accepted these things. Don't forget. There will be no change when we return mind you. When we get in front of the Chinese, isn't it always me that has to approach them? Then nobody else says anything, remember?" So this is what Ngabö told Surkhang. Surkhang and Ragashag were there at that time and the other Shape [were too]. Ngabö said, "Yes, when we come face to face with the Chinese, nobody says anything! Whenever we have to say something to the Chinese, I have to do it! . So today you kungö have said these things and when we return, we are going to do just that." So in this way, Ngabö spoke very strongly. The Dalai Lama was to go to Kalimpong and the Chinese said that he could not go there. Regarding this, Ngabö told Zhou Enlai, "The Dalai Lama has to go to Kalimpong, it has already been decided. The reason being that in Kalimpong, many people have come from Kham. The situation in those regions is one of great suffering and there has been great destruction. The Dalai Lama has to listen. And so the Dalai Lama is being invited there and we are taking him there. The Dalai Lama will be going there." Zhou Enlai said that he did not at all know about this situation so "If this is the case, then by all means take him there, and whatever is the situation, have it clearly written and sent down to China." When the situation really called for it, he said that Ngabö really worked hard. After this, Ngabö and Chemmo could really trust each other. Previous to this, nobody seemed to be trusting of Ngabö.   

