# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0083.01   
##  : with Sopal [Tib. བསོད་དཔལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 29 June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Sopal [Tib. བསོད་དཔལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 64  
**Date of Birth:** 1929  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sopal [Tib. བསོད་དཔལ] was a villager who was conscripted to come to Lhasa to be a Gardrugpa [member of the Dalai Lama's dance troupe] and then later became a Jola in the Tseja Office. In this interview, he discusses his role and experiences before and after the 1959 revolt. He begins by discussing his career as a teacher in Lhasa after the revolt and how he was sent to a study session held in Tsomönling. He talks in detail about the study session in which he overheard the clerk of the Police Regiment confessing about the [secret] organization in which Rupön Gurgur was the main person. He mentions the struggle session held against Tsendrön Drakpa Yargye, including his confession and how he later comitted suicde, and how Chamdo Khenjung was stoned to death. He also explains how people were selected as representatives to go to Norbulinga during the uprising of 1959. And he discusses how tsidrung Thubden Rigchog stole the minutes of the tsondu hragdü meeting held just before the revolt and how he gave them to the Chinese. Finally, he discusses how he was "labeled" with the shamo "hat" for three years because he was accused of having relations with Chushigandru, and the difficulties he experienced getting that political label removed.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0083_01/H_0083_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Do you know anybody in the People's Association in the early times? Do you know anything about the People's Association?   

**A:**  I don't know much about this, but when they set up the organization, the hunchback Rupön Gurgur [Tib. སྒུར་སྒུར] of the Police Regiment was there. After the revolt, they (the Chinese) set up a study session [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱོང་འཛིན་གྲྭ] at Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང]. [note: this study session was to explain Chinese policy and mainly to get people to say their experiences] There was a clerk of the Police Rupön called Champa Tenzin [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་འཛིན]. He confessed gebnerally about their organization at the meeting. At the time when they set up the first organization, there were not many people in it then. Anyway, this organization was to oppose the CCP, and one of the main persons in that was Rupön Gurgur.   

**Q:**  Where is Rupön Gurgur from?   

**A:**  He was a famous police officer.   

**Q:**  Who was that clerk?   

**A:**  He was the illegitimate child of the lay official Jagri Sharpa [Tib. ལྕགས་རི་ཤར་པ]. He was raised by Rupön Gurgur and he lived in the house near the yellow mani temple [Tib. མན་ཐང་སེར་པོ]. He had a mustache. At that time, the organization was very tight and the clerk Champa Tenzin was trusted by Rupön and was allowed to enter the group. He was staying in the house of Phüntso Yügye's [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གཡུ་རྒྱལ] wife.   

**Q:**  That house was called Norbu Kyilkhang [Tib. ནོར་བུ་དཀྱིལ་ཁང], right?   

**A:**  Yes. Since he was an illegitimate child, they didn't take care of him because the lay official himself was also poor. So Rupön Gurgur raised him when he was young and he became very obedient. So he knew what the organization was doing. At that time, we were taken to the study session [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱོང] held in the Tsomönling.   

**Q:**  This study session was held just after the revolt, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you remember in which month it was held?   

**A:**  In the third month of 1959, after the revolt took place, I was sent as a part-time teacher to the school set up in Shakabpa's house, saying that it was a great thing. But later, while I was working as a teacher, they said that we would have a [good] future and I was sent to Tsomönling for the study session. I stayed there three months and about three or seven days.   

**Q:**  You were made to attend the study session, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At this time, they were differentiating the people, arresting some people and releasing some others. The highest officials there were ones from the rimshi rank and the tsendrön, and from the lay officials, clerks. There were also the clerks of the Shöl Legung, and traders. [The] lowest were the heads [Tib. དཔོན་པོ་རྡ་ཡས] of the the Ragyaba [people who took the corpses of the beggars to the sky burial], and the stable-boys of the Dalai Lama's stable. And there were also most of the wives of the Kudrak. All together there were about 300 people. When they were holding the struggle sessions against each person, the clerk from the Police Regiment exposed the organization of Rupön Gurgur. I am a forgetful person. Otherwise, he talked about that in detail and how in the beginning, they set up a horse cart, which was like a front for the group, and they were doing their work around that place. If you ask him nowadays, he will tell you in detail, but in the past, he wouldn't talk about it.   

**Q:**  Please talk with him.   

**A:**  In that organization, there was the servant of Lingtsang called Trinley Phüntso [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས་ཕུན་ཤོགས] [note: he later started a group in Lhoka] and Gyurme Dorje [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ], who lived in Darboling [Tib. དར་པོ་གླིང] and who was a member of the shagtsang of Namgyera [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་བ] Khenjung. There was also Rigchöla [Tib. རིགས་ཆོས་ལགས], the daughter of Gerpa Dode [Tib. མདོ་སྡེ]. These people kind of became activists in the study session. In the study session, they were announced to be cadres, but later they didn't become cadres because things didn't work out well and most of them were arrested. And people like us were labeled [as enemies] and handed over to the neighborhood area [Tib. ས་ཁུལ]. Rupön Gurgur's clerk was sent to Kongpo to make charcoal and he became the leader of that group. His Tibetan writing was good and at that time it was hard to find people whose writing was good. He was articulate and also kind of proud in his thinking that he was innocent. On the matter of raising the wages of the workers, he said something articulate and therefore, he was arrested.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any other reason besides being articulate and argumentative about the wages?   

**A:**  This was the cause of the arrest, but I don't know whether there were other reasons. Even nowadays, he has become a person who talks recklessly about the CCP. At that time, during the study session, he and the nyerpa (steward) of Trendong were the tsugdrang. They were holding a struggle session against the tsidrung Drakpa Yargye [Tib. གྲགས་པ་ཡར་རྒྱས].   

**Q:**  He was a staff member [Tib. ལས་བྱ] in the Foreign Office [Tib. ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**A:**  Yes, he probably he knew some English.   

**Q:**  He doesn't know much English.   

**A:**  He knew all about the telegrams that were sent back and forth. When they held the struggle session against him, he confessed correctly and he remembered the dates very well. It took six days to confess and everyone said that he confessed well. They reported this, but they [the cadres] said, "No. He was just deceiving us and he didn't really confess." Then they called the activists and instigated them, telling them to hold meetings more severely against him. So he might have thought that now he could not get through, so he took off the sleeves of his chupa and tied the sleeves on his waist and started confessing again. At that time, they [the cadres] told him about the American and the Taiwanese airdrops in Drigutang and so on, and he confessed saying, "This is true and I did that because in the beginning the treaty was signed. But when I went to China, I found that the system [communism] was very bad in the end and people had to pay taxes for the things that belonged to themselves. I thought that this was not right at all. So when I returned to Lhasa, we made an organization to oppose the Chinese. And since Tibet was independent historically, we started relations with America and held many foreign affairs meetings." He mentioned many names of [those involved with] the meetings and said that Tibet was independent. He didn't mention the names of the Kudrak and just said that we had a discussion. He mentioned all the names of the Americans with whom they made a connection and also provided the dates in detail.   

**Q:**  Who were the persons who had the relations with the Americans?   

**A:**  He only mentioned his name and didn't mention the names of others. He said, "We knew the power of the CCP, but since the system was so bad, we went against the CCP."   

**Q:**  When was this organization started? In 1959?   

**A:**  No, earlier, probably around 1956.   

**Q:**  Was this organization separate from that of Alo Chöndze's?   

**A:**  Yes. It was completely separate. However, he didn't mention the names of the Tibetans involved. He only mentioned the names of the leaders in the foreign countries.   

**Q:**  Were those Tibetan names or the foreign names?   

**A:**  They were all foreign names, and he also told the months and dates, as if he had written those things down.   

**Q:**  Did they maintain connections through telegrams [Hin. tar]?   

**A:**  It was through telegrams. They discussed and exchanged information through telegram or wireless machines [Ch. dian]. The Tibetan government had 19 [sets] of telegram/wireless equipment.   

**Q:**  Were those wireless?   

**A:**  Yes. They probably didn't need wires. They pressed him very severely as to who had the equipment, and he replied that he got the wireless equipment from the government and that it was probably Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང], the Jigyab Khembo, who gave the equipment. And that they gave 19 sets. Then when we talked to each other as to where he had distributed them, he said that one was given to Andrutsang, one to (Kalön) Surkhang, one to (Kalön) Shasur, he himself kept one, and the others were divided to the Khambas and maybe to Liushar. From the 19, two or something were missing and he couldn't account for them. When we told him that two were missing, he didn't say anything. He was the one who mainly made the connections through codes [Hin. tar; Tib. yig] from Lhasa. When the revolt took place, he had been to Shide and everywhere. In the end, when he found [out] that his side of the war was going to lose, he broke the wireless equipment and burned the secret code books in Shölkang's house. He also had guns and he gave the guns and wireless equipment to Chushigandru's Andrutsang. He didn't say anything other than this. He only mentioned the names of the people who had fled and didn't mention a single name of the persons who had relations with him in Lhasa.   

**A:**  Two wireless sets were missing, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When he was pressed regarding this, he just left it like it was due to carelessness [Tib. འ་རི་འུ་རི].   

**Q:**  He said those things after six days, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was told them that from above he had 19 [sets of] wireless equipment and he hadn't confessed. There were the military officers of the Military Control Committee [Tib. དམག་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང], and they probably called the activists and told them all of those things. At that time, the military officers were not coming out openly and all of those things were done by the activists. So people said that he confessed very well. There were many teams in Tsomönling and the team of Drakpa Yargye was in Rabsal [Tib. རབ་གསལ]. Our team was in the room called Nyiwö [Tib. ཉི་འོད] and some of them were in the temple where there were the statues of the 16 Arhats [Tib. གནས་བཅུ་ལྷ་ཁང]. The women were in a protective deity's chapel [Tib. མགོན་ཁང] and Shatra's wife and Phunrabpa's wife were left under the stairs. His team was kind of relaxed and they also served him snacks at lunchtime, and he also served them snacks. Then he went to the kitchen rooftop of Tsomönling where there was a chimney and two rocks and he faced the Potala. I saw that he had eaten some blessed pills wrapped in paper and then he slit his throat with a pen knife. The blood was blackish and he died after 5 minutes. When the soldiers came, he was dead.   

**Q:**  He didn't hand over a single person who was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Two pieces of wireless equipment were missing, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but he said that they might have been broken or that he didn't have that or something. There was a lot of talk about the organization, like how they came from Kham. He had been telling those things over a period of five days. He also confessed about the connections with Taiwan and how the Americans dropped weapons and food at Drigu, and about receiving the telegrams. He was asked, "Didn't you understand the strength of China?" He said he did, but after visiting China he knew the situation and thought that if we remained like that, we would lose our freedom in the future so he had to oppose the Communists. So he started the organization and made connections with foreign countries.   

**Q:**  What was the wireless equipment like?   

**A:**  It was probably from America.   

**Q:**  He was not in the Chushigandru, right? It was different, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were separate.   

**Q:**  Chushigandru had only one connection, which was with Gyalo Thondup. That was probably from Taiwan.   

**A:**  Yes, it was from Taiwan and also from America. But he didn't have the names of the Taiwanese people and he mentioned the names of the Americans one by one, and the names were great. Everyone was shocked by his story because he knew the months and dates of contacts, etc. He also said that Taiwan dropped weapons at Drigu.   

**Q:**  Did he say he had a connection with Jenkhentsisum?   

**A:**  No, he didn't mention them.   

**Q:**  Who were the important ones he mentioned who were in India?   

**A:**  There was probably Liushar because Liushar was the main person working on foreign affairs.   

**Q:**  Did he mention Surkhang?   

**A:**  He just mentioned that they gave him the wireless equipment.   

**Q:**  If we guess, this must have been an association of Kudraks.   

**A:**  Yes, there weren't any ordinary people in it. People looked down on Drakpa Yargye because although he was a tsendrön, he had a wife. People were shocked though by what he said and they said, "These government officials are not easy to cope with [Tib. ལས་སླ་པོ་མི་འདུག]. Though we looked at him in this way, he did this works." This was because people were saying that they [Kudrak] were bad, but when people tried to find out on a large scale about this, they found that they had done a lot of work, although it was ineffective.   

**Q:**  At that time, was he a tsendrön?   

**A:**  Yes, he was.   

**Q:**  Maybe he was part of Barshi Jedrungla's group. I heard from the tape of Barshi Jedrungla that he had a group. They were a group consisting of the tsidrung who went to China and they opposed the PRC.   

**A:**  He wasn't part of that group with Ngawang Senge and Ngawang Thöndrub. They were separate. He had connections with the Foreign Office. We don't know who their head was and he didn't mention that, but below that it was the Foreign Office. When he returned from Kham to Lhasa, they set up the organization and they made relations and mobilized people, and told people that the CCP was not good. He confessed this. He wasn't in Barshi Jedrungla's group.   

**Q:**  At that time, there were many organizations consisting of 3-4 people.   

**A:**  They were tough and the people didn't know about the situation and were free and didn't need to be afraid. So there were all kinds of groups.   

**Q:**  How could they have direct relations as they didn't know English? Maybe they had relations through Lady Phünkang Lhajam [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་ལྷ་ལྕམ] of Sikkim? Actually, it was difficult for Drakpa Yargye to make relations with the Americans directly.   

**A:**  He said someone was sent from the foreign country to Lhasa to make connections with them.   

**Q:**  Was he from America?   

**A:**  Probably from America, and they made firm connections with that person.   

**Q:**  You didn't have anything to say when he came, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Many of the American CIA men went and they had relations with Yabshi Trunyila [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལགས] and the power holder was Gyalo Thondup. Was this true? He [Drakpa Yargye] didn't make up those things, right?   

**A:**  No, he himself said that. The one who took the notes was Champa Tenzin [now in Barkor]. He, Rupön Gurgur and Andrutsang were in the same organization and Champa Tenzin was the clerk. He will know all. They [Chinese] knew that and they cornered him very severely. He also said these things without hesitation or stumbling. When people lied, they would hesitate, but he didn't have any hesitation. In that study session, they held many struggle sessions, and except for Drakpa Yargye, nobody said things like him. Normally, everyone said that they exploited and suppressed the people. The bald-headed clerk of the Nyertsang confessed that he raped 300 construction worker girls when he was on the staff of the construction work. He was let go since he didn't have any others to press on him. As for the others who had relations, they were not let go and some of them were arrested from the study session. And there was the crooked-mouthed Lhasa mayor, Mipön Porkyok [Tib. སྤོར་ཀྱོག], but he just had the problem of poisoning and killing Reting.   

**Q:**  Was the tsidrung nicknamed "Nepalese" [Tib. བལ་པོ] there?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Champa Tenzin was the one who made the notes, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was also the tsugdrang and held the meetings. I heard that Rupön Gurgur took him when they made the organization. At that time, the hunchback Rupön had the main power in the Police Regiment, though the depön was Jünba [Tib. འཇུན་པ]. The hunchback was very tough. So Champa Tenzin knew all about where they held the meetings and also probably might have known something about Drakpa Yargye.   

**Q:**  It seems that this was a new organization, so he committed suicide.   

**Q:**  What is Champa Tenzin doing now?   

**A:**  He is peddling things in the Barkor and it is better that you go and tell him that you have something to ask him about the Police Regiment. If people like me go to tell him, he might say that we are making relations. I think he has something to tell you about the 5-6 people from Andrutsang's group in Rupön Gurgur's group. Long before the revolt, there was the People's Association with Chandzö Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར] and those people.   

**Q:**  Do you know the Lhatsun Labrang [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུན་བླ་བྲང] Chandzö?   

**A:**  I don't know him. The reason I knew Thamjö Sonam was because he had a pretty though quite thin daughter, and I used to tease her. Later I heard that her father was arrested. They lived in Tsomönling. [At the time of the 1959 revolt] I went to Norbulinga on the second month, first day.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the Tseja in Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Yes, I did.   

**Q:**  On what date did you go there?   

**A:**  I went there when we heard that the masses were going there on the first. At first there were not that many people there, then more and more arrived. Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] Khenjung first came to Norbulinga for drungja. Then he returned to Lhasa and changed into a chupa and a gauze mask and went back to Norbulinga riding an old bike.   

**Q:**  Did you see this yourself?   

**A:**  Yes. Trethönla [Tib. བཀྲས་དོན་ལགས] and I were there. People started saying, "He has come." Then people gathered and stoned him. Trethönla even said that he was not that person, but that he was a government Kudrak. So they grabbed him and tried to take him inside (Norbulinga), but just before entering the gate, they closed the gate.   

**Q:**  Did they know he was Phagpalha?   

**A:**  Yes. Some said that he was bad.   

**Q:**  I mean they just said that he was bad, but [they] didn't know he was Khenjung, right?   

**A:**  They knew that he was Khenjung and said that.   

**Q:**  So they were saying that he was a Chinese spy, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after the gate was closed, he ran away to the corner of the northern gate near the Nepalese Consulate. Then they stoned him like a rainfall. I heard that once he got hit with a stone by a woman and he was bleeding. Then I saw they pulled out swords and hit him. When they hit him with the swords, it sounded like, "khag khag." Then they brought him to the main gate.   

**Q:**  Did they shoot him?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. They left him near the main gate and all the people stoned him and they hit him with swords. He had shaved his head and in the beginning, he didn't get hit with the weapons. Later, they found out that he had a Mauser Pistol. As for the protective talisman, he had an undershirt [Tib. རྔུལ་ལེན] of a lama, whoever he was. Then they stuffed sand in his mouth and his eyes. Someone was taking pictures of this from the top of the Norbulinga main gate . Then a car came. It had Sambo. At that time, there was barbed wire around Norbulinga and they drove the car, cutting the wires. And Sambo came out and said, "I am [Sambo]." He was hit with a stone right away and fell. He was brought to the hospital. Then Surkhang came. He was very tactful and left his car at the bridge, Chango Samba [Tib. ཆབ་སྒོ་ཟམ་པ]. He came on foot dressed in Shape's dress. He was smiling to the people. Some people, like clerks and soldiers, held him on each side and escorted him into Norbulinga.   

**A:**  So he was whisked right into Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Did he wear the Shape's uniform?   

**A:**  Yes, he was fully dressed in the uniform of the Shape.   

**Q:**  Were there Tibetan or Chinese soldiers with him?   

**A:**  No. He came alone, but when he got there, people like the staff [Tib. ལས་བྱེད] supported him from both sides and he went in. Then from the top of the wall, someone called out to the crowd, "Don't act like this." But no one listened. Some yelled back, some were crying. Then some Khambas came from Lhasa with horses and mules loaded with boxes of bullets. [note: Trindor says most Khambas fled that day. Everyone in his courtyard left with their guns. One Khamba in my courtyard didn't want to go fight. He got many messages from his group saying, "If you don't come to Norbulinga to fight, later, when there is independence, you will have a lot of trouble." He finally went. In each courtyard people were signed up as volunteers, some went to Norbulinga and some stayed in Lhasa to fight.] Then someone said it would be good to select deputies.   

**Q:**  How was this done?   

**A:**  We just talked and selected deputies and mentioned the names, for example, Shölpa Tatongba [Tib. རྟ་གཏོང་པ], who was in charge of horse corvée, and Kopön [Tib. ཀོ་དཔོན] Nyerpa, [who was] in charge of coracles. Probably also Gyagpön Injungla [Tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཨེན་ཆུང་ལགས]. There were 4-5 people selected as deputies. These 4-5 deputies were then summoned inside. Surkhang and Phala were there and Surkhang told them, "You should not act like this. We will talk with the Chinese and the Dalai Lama isn't going to the Chinese Regiment. If you do this, this will cause a disturbance." The masses then said, "We will not leave at all and bodyguards will stay inside the wall." In the evening, the masses were told to leave. So they started the demonstration.   

**Q:**  Did they go for the demonstration in the Barkor Street?   

**A:**  The demonstration started in Norbulinga and they shouted the slogan, "From today Tibet is independent." Gurteng Künsang [Tib. གུར་སྟེང་ཀུན་བཟང] announced this standing on the stone lions, and she said that the masses should demonstrate happily. [note: Later she was executed near the Sera sky burial.] We also came together and on the way, at Kundeling, the Chinese had a billboard where they used to stick newspapers, so the people burned it. When they reached Yuthok where Zhang Guohua lived, they spat at them.   

**Q:**  Zhang Guohua was not present, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but they spat at the guards on each side of the door.   

**Q:**  What did the guards say?   

**A:**  They didn't say anything. At that time, they wouldn't do anything. Then the people went to the front of the Jokhang. There was a big image of American imperialists with high noses and chains. This they also ripped down.   

**Q:**  What time was that?   

**A:**  It was around 3-4 p.m. when they held the demonstration. After that, they started setting up the representatives and the Chushigandru also started staying in Norbulinga, and the Khambas stayed in the Shabden Lhagang [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལྷ་ཁང].   

**Q:**  Didn't you stay in Norbulinga on the 2nd-4th?   

**A:**  Yes, I stayed there and then they moved the meeting to Shöl Parkhang.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the meeting of the representatives of the masses?   

**A:**  Yes, the meeting of the representatives, and the meeting of Kudrak also moved there. We went there too.   

**Q:**  You were probably the tea servers [Tib. གསོལ་ཞུ་བ] at the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. I think on the 2nd, the meeting was held in Norbulinga in the Shabden Lhagang to separate the Kudrak who were working for the Chinese.   

**A:**  [Guja] Künphela [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས] signed his name at the meeting saying that he was on the Tibetan side and then he went to the Chinese in the evening.   

**Q:**  If he didn't, they would have beat him up, so he was scared, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time there was a person called Legtsog la [Tib. ལེགས་ཚོགས་ལགས] who was living with Künphela. He was the gate keeper of the Phodrang Sarpa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསར་པ] in Lhasa where there was an office set up in that house. The Lhasa people gave a name for this office, "The Collection of Banished People [Tib. ས་འཛིན་ཁུ་བསྡུ་ལས་ཁུངས]." The reason for giving this name was that there were Künphela, Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] and the favorite [of the 13th Dalai Lama], Tashi Thöndrubla [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དོན་གྲུབ], who were all people who had been banished earlier in history. Actually, in that house, an office was set up for the welfare of the masses, and they did things like grinding and selling tsamba and selling barley. They also made some volume measurement containers like the bo and dre vessels, and they were also paying military salaries. Later, they became more powerful and they dealt with all the grain [of the Tibetan government]. The overall person in charge [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] of this was Lhalu. They also appointed two clerks. One was related to Tashi Thöndrub and the other was Tashi Tobgye [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྟོབས་རྒྱས], the son of Phala Chandzö. Another clerk was the former Laja clerk who was said to have killed the Simgag of Tashilhunpo and gotten demoted. Then he was appointed as a clerk in the Grain Office. Tthey reported at the meeting that Künphela had left. On the 2nd, Tibetans were split into those for independence and those for the Chinese. Then from the 3rd, the meetings began to be held at the Shöl Parkhang. It was a Tsondu hragdü. They made a pass for us tea servers as they didn't let people enter indiscriminately.   

**Q:**  What was said at the meeting?   

**A:**  One was that we should be 100 percent committed to fighting the Chinese. The second was that all the tsamba eaters should be united. The third was that we should advise the Tibetans working in Chinese offices. The fourth, we should write this all down and post it outside.   

**Q:**  You had the enthusiasm to fight the Chinese, but they were many and [they] had many weapons. What was the strategy you all were thinking of to defeat them?   

**A:**  We had no thoughts about this. Tibetans believe in religion, so we trusted that the Three Jewels would show us the way [means will help to defeat them]. We thought like that. No one had any thoughts that we were going to lose. [ I had been a student in school, so I thought we would lose].   

**A:**  We thought we would fight inside Lhasa and then Chushigandru would come in from the outside and we would win. Each household had a plan to move their possessions to a monastery or the Potala temporarily. No one had thoughts of losing this. [ Most household put their things in monasteries so thieves couldn't steal them while fighting was going on. My family did that.]   

**Q:**  Did you also put your things in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, I put my things in Namgye Tratsang in the Potala because our child was in the Potala. Living above me were people from Tashilhunpo. They left their things with me because I had a big house. After the revolt I had nothing, but I gave them their things back intact.   

**Q:**  You didn't get your things back from the monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was because the Chushigandru fought in Nyemo County at that time, poor things! The Khambas killed a large number of People's Liberation Army [soldiers].   

**Q:**  Can you guess how many soldiers they killed? Was it like 100-200?   

**A:**  No, it was more than that. They even killed a lot of them in the fields. [T.N. note: The part below, which was a kind of saying in Lhasa, is neither on the tape nor was it mentioned who spoke adding that] "1. When the Chinese first came it was the Khambas who gave them khata [ceremonial scarves of welcome]. 2. When the people revolted against the Chinese, the Khambas were the first. 3. The Khambas were the first who fled to India. 4. The first who came back from India were Khambas. 5. When the policy was loosened, the Khambas were the first who did the trading [Tib. (༡) དང་པོ་ཐོག་མར་རྒྱ་མི་ཡོང་དུས, ཁ་བཏགས་གཡོགས་མཁན་དང་པོ་ཁམས་པ (༢) དེ་ནས་རྒྱ་མིར་ངོ་ལོག་རྒྱག་མཁན་དང་པོ་ཁམས་པ(༣) དེ་ནས་རྒྱ་གར་ལ་བྲོས་མཁན་དང་པོ་ཁམས་པ (༤) དེ་ནས་ཚུར་ཡོང་མཁན་དང་པོ་ཁམས་པ(༥) དེ་ནས་སྲིད་ཇུས་ལྷུག་རུ་ཕྱིན་ནས་ཚོང་དང་པོ་རྒྱག་མཁན་ཁམས་པ]." Chushigandru became famous for their fighting at Nyemo. They killed many Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did they shoot them or use swords?   

**A:**  Oh! They used swords. I had a relative in Nyemo. Some Chinese hid in his house. The Chinese wouldn't leave, so the Chushigandru set fire to the house and burned them. [ I heard of this.] At this time, the People's Liberation Army were all young kids. The Khambas would raise their sword and yell, "ki hihi," and the Chinese would drop their weapons out of fear. Then Chushigandru fought a battle at Gongkar, just past the Jagsam ferry site where the bridge goes. The Khambas surrounded some People's Liberation Army [soldiers] from top, back and front, and shot at them [Trindor--the Chinese went under a truck. The first truck swerved and drove right into the river. The rest of the trucks stopped and the Chinese hid underneath. The Khambas couldn't do much damage by shooting from a distance. The Khambas didn't get close, and then the Khambas fled.] Most trucks drove into the river and from this the Chushigandru became famous. This was in 1958 I think. The Khambas set up a regiment at Drigu and were victorious in one battle after another. So because of this situation, we all believed we would be victorious because there were only Tibetans there and the miser had to listen to whatever the Khambas said.   

**Q:**  Before the revolt, did you hear that the U.S was helping?   

**A:**  Yes. There were the rumors saying that U.S. planes had dropped guns and food in Drigu.   

**Q:**  Did you hear this before the revolt?   

**A:**  Yes, before the revolt. They were making war in other places.   

**Q:**  So you heard that in 1958, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, this rumor was widespread and we also had our confidence in that. At that time, we never thought that we would lose and we didn't know [of] the plan that the Dalai Lama was fleeing to India. When they [Chinese] fired the cannons and when we knew that we were going to lose the war, the people were saying, "Please leave it [the fight]. We will even throw excrement if we have to." After the war was over, we heard about the Dalai Lama's whereabouts. Even though the war was lost, we didn't think that they would do these things, like the liberation.   

**Q:**  Didn't people think that the land reform would be done?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the Parkhang meeting?   

**Q:**  The meeting we served tea at was an hragdü (Abbreviated) meeting so there were not many people.   

**Q:**  How many?   

**A:**  I don't know. There were quite a lot and there were some ordinary tsidrung.   

**Q:**  Wasn't the head of the Dalai Lama's dance group, Garpönla, there?   

**A:**  He wasn't there.   

**Q:**  When was the meeting at Drebu Yükha [(Tib. འབྲས་བུ་གཡུལ་ཁ) the meadow in front of the Shöl wall] held?   

**A:**  This was the masses' and the women's meeting. I think it was [on] the 2nd or 3rd. I wasn't there. I heard that during the meeting, two birds, one like a hawk and a smaller one, were flying over it. And the bigger attacked the smaller and cut its throat, and it fell in the meeting.   

**Q:**  Were you there?   

**A:**  I was not there. They reported this to the chagdrung. At that time, people were going through the motions of being happy. Most of them were probably women. Among them was the woman nicknamed Hayang Number.   

**Q:**  This was the women's demonstration, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Phüntso Yügye lived by there so he probably knew about this.   

**Q:**  I heard that Tseja Gyentsenla [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན] and Temajog [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོག] killed each other? When was that?   

**A:**  This was on the day the war was lost. Gegyepa Tenzin Dorje [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་པ་བསྟན་འཛིན] knows about this.   

**Q:**  Where were you at the time of the revolt?   

**A:**  In the beginning, we signed the names and then I was among the Dalai Lama's palanquin bearers (Tib. phebjangwa [Tib. ཕེབས་བྱམས་པ]). The clothes for this were kept in the Shöl Samgangteng [Tib. ?], and I was selected to be among the guards of that and they gave us guns. There were eight of us and we decided that if the situation was tense, all of us would stay there. Otherwise, four people were to sleep there and the others would be on guard to protect the clothes from being lost. On the first night, I and Tawangla, who lived far from Shöl, slept there. On the next night, Phüntso Namgye, who lived nearby, slept there. On the next night, the revolt took place. So I was in Lhasa when it broke out. I lived in Paljor Rabten [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་རབ་བརྟན] [a Tashilhunpo owned the house]. The morning after the revolt the Tibetan police came to our building and we made preparations for them to go to the roof. They [the Chinese] were firing a lot from Yuthok House. After awhile, they wouldn't stay there due to the heavy enemy fire and they left. At Bhamari [Tib. བ་མ་རི] and Jogpori, there were Trapchi soldiers [ they weren't there at first, they came from Tse later]. So Khenjung Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས] came from Norbulinga to Jogpori and Gyagpön Ana Dawa was also lost there.   

**Q:**  Where? In Jogpori?   

**A:**  At Senge namyang [Tib. སེང་གེ་གནམ་གཡང]. They fought and Tarala had to withdraw to Norbulinga. This was on the second day of fighting. Since the Chinese were firing artillery into Norbulinga, I heard that all of the Khambas fled inside Norbulinga to the Gag Office and everywhere. So Kungö Tarala took out a gun and told the Khambas, "In the beginning, didn't you say that you are going to fight and do great things? Is this your true color?" So all of the Khambas had to go out and run away. Tarala was determined and he was famous then. [ Not one shell was fired at Kesang Phodrang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཕོ་བྲང] since that is where they thought the Dalai Lama was]. The two who killed themselves were Tseja Gyentsenla and the other was Temajog. First Gyentsenla went to the deity Gombo and did the senriy lottery. He didn't say what it said, but when he returned he was angry. He met Temajog and these two discussed in the office and then ate blessed pills [Tib. བྱིན་རྟེན] wrapped in paper. Then Gyentsenla said, "I am the one who is regarded as a bad person." After this, they went to the entrance of the old kitchen in Norbulinga and shot themselves. They counted one, two, three, four, shoot.   

**Q:**  Do you recall the meeting at the end of 1958 called, "Quelling the Khambas disturbance and assuaging Zhongyang"?   

**A:**  I heard of the meeting, but I wasn't there. It was held in Ewang in the Tsuglagang. Before the revolt, there was a tsondu hragdü meeting. It was held in the Legjö Legung [also in Tsuglagang] and they made a great, secret resolution.   

**Q:**  Who were the main ones at the meeting?   

**A:**  In this were the deputies of the Legjö. Thubden Rigchog, who was the father of Taktra Lama, was one of the deputies. The Kashag was there and also the drungtsi. Later, the minutes [Tib. ཚིག་ཐོ] of the resolution of the tsondu were lost.   

**Q:**  Who had the minutes?   

**A:**  They left the minutes there to be reported the next day, but Thubden Rigchog had taken the minutes and given them to the Chinese. There was a lot of trouble.   

**Q:**  What was in the minutes?   

**A:**  The situation was very tense because they fired cannons in Norbulinga and many shells fell in the new palace.   

**Q:**  You mean at that time the revolt had not yet taken place, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was before the revolt and there was a lot trouble and cannon shells fell, which sparked the revolt. But they [Chinese] didn't accept it. It was said that on that evening Phala came to the Gag dressed in a monk's skirt [Ch. zhan qun], which normally was not permitted. The shells fell before the meeting. One shell fell onto the new palace .   

**Q:**  Do you know who knows about this event?   

**A:**  Thongmönla [Tib. མཐོང་སྨོན་ལགས] was [on the] staff at Norbulinga, but he died.   

**Q:**  The Chinese are accepting this. I have this in a book.   

**A:**  Because of this tense situation, our steps became very quick and this was why we couldn't bear the responsibility of the Dalai Lama's safety.   

**Q:**  What happened to Thubden Rigchog if he delivered the minutes to the Chinese? Did he get a reward for this?   

**A:**  Later, whether he was killed or died, anyway, he was no more. Before the minutes were reported to the above [Tibetan officials], it reached over there [to the Chinese].   

**Q:**  Who did they have to report the minutes to?   

**A:**  To the Dalai Lama's room.   

**Q:**  Did Shatra attend those meetings?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. He was just in the general meetings, like the tsondu gyendzom where they signed their names. At the time of the revolt, the local government stationed tsidrung and lay officials at some places like leaders, but he was not among them.   

**Q:**  Some say that in 1958 some soldiers went to join the Chushigandru. Some say that the Kashag sent them, is that so?   

**A:**  I don't know. That's hard to do, unless they ran away while making war. At the time of the revolt, the Trapchi were stationed at Cherag [Tib. བྱེ་རགས] and Bhamari. At first they [Trapchi soldiers] fired a lot, but I heard that there was no sound when they fired the cannons and guns.   

**Q:**  Why was there no sound? Was it like the gun got stuck?   

**A:**  No, it was like showing a bad omen that we would lose and it was said that they spat at the guns and broke the guns.   

**A:**  In the place where we were, Rupön Gurgur fired three cannons.   

**A:**  I saw that Rupön Gurgur was carrying a yellowish bag made in America, and he was wearing a small golden earring and was dragging a cannon. He came out from the Tsuglagang and went to the place called Sabogang [Tib. ས་བོ་གང] located at the front of Sambo House [note: The place where medicines are now sold in Barkor. It was side by side with Kapshöba]. At first, he sent some troops and they came back and told him that they weren't able to get through. Then he came and spat at the soldiers for not taking it. He was staying at the Shingra [adjacent to the Tsuglagang]. The Chinese were in the Sambo House and it was very troublesome, and there were bunkers there. In the evening, he took troops to Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] near the restaurant called Gaoji [Ch. gao ji] and near the Yuthok Bridge. He fired mortars many times. Then he had no hope so he dismantled the mortars, and then he took the depön and fled via Jagrong [Tib. ལྕགས་གྲོང] [it is a village just east of Trapchi--from there one comes to Phembo].   

**Q:**  Is he still there now?   

**A:**  He lived for a long time.   

**Q:**  In the morning of the third day, did the People's Liberation Army take you?   

**A:**  On the day the revolt was stopped, they came to our house and all the people were taken in Paljor Rabten's house. [They] said, "If the people inside don't come out, we will open fire." So everyone came out. A pockmarked, People's Liberation Army military officer told us to bring out the knives mostly using sign language as he didn't speak Tibetan. I asked him if he needed the knives and he said yes. I had four Gyatri [Tib. རྒྱ་གྲི], (a combination holder with chopsticks and 1 Nepalese knife).   

**Q:**  Did you give them the cleavers?   

**A:**  No, I didn't have to. So I brought these out. I also had a calf-knife which I brought out.   

**Q:**  Did you have a gun?   

**A:**  I had a gun, but I had left it with someone else. The officer had four stars on his shoulder [probably a battalion leader]. He took everyone else, e.g. as the people from Nyalam [Tib. གཉའ་ནང], with him, but they told me to stay at home. Then, once again, the Chinese came to my courtyard and told all the men to come out. The head of this group was Lian Dongsan, who was Tibetan. This time he spoke to me a lot saying, "Didn't you work for the Tibetan government?" I said, "During the revolt, I stayed right here. I didn't go anywhere." At that time, they were trusting the house managers [Tib. ཁང་གཉེར] and one of the jupön of the police called A gyurme [Tib. ཨ་འགྱུར་མེད] said to him, "Yes, I can vouch that he wasn't involved and we were together." Then Lian Dongsan asked him, "Can you guarantee him?" He said he could. So again they didn't take me in. Then after the revolt ended, the Chinese appointed a tsugdrang for each courtyard. Our tsugdrang was Ama Tsering. [note: All orders from above were passed through The tsugdrang, e.g., tonight there is a meeting etc. This still exists.] She said, "They are starting a school and it would be good if you worked as a teacher there." So I agreed and went to Shakabpa House as a teacher. [Shakabpa House is near the big department store in Tromsikang]. Then as they did more investigations, I was summoned to the Tsomönling Study Session. Most of the people in the Tsomönling ended up being arrested. In my case, they placed a political label on me. They told me, "The people in charge of Chushigandru's payroll, the (Tib. phogpön [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན]), sent you a letter."   

**Q:**  Is that true?   

**A:**  There was a monk who was in charge of Chushigandru and he used to send me letters and newspapers [must be Tharchin's newspaper] telling the news of Chushigandru. This was like you, Tashi Tsering, sending me letters and I also was sending you letters. Now it is called an "Organization." I had some pictures of you [Tashi Tsering] and the students of the St. Joseph's School, like Trendong’s son, but I was able to burn these.   

**Q:**  You have done well. Yes, I had sent the letter from Kalimpong.   

**A:**  At that time, you, Tashi Tsering, sent me a letter talking about the gold in the sand in the water and so on. We two were very friendly and we were in the same group and held the same standing point in the Tseja. We had a lot of problems. I was left with the political (enemy) label for 2-3 years. They said that I had relations with Chushigandru's phogpön.   

**Q:**  What did the phogpön say?   

**A:**  He was not the real phogpön. He was a trader who made the arrangements.   

**Q:**  Who was that?   

**A:**  The monk was called Nyare Gusho [Tib. མྱང་རལ་སྐུ་གཞོགས]. He was old and very rich, and all of his helpers [Tib. ཨབ་ཕྲུག] were in Chushigandru. Those were people who were carrying the national flag. Since the Chinese were suspicious, it became like this. We had some views on things BUT there weren't any special relations set up. I was labeled for three years and then I was sent to be a school teacher. [ Every week we had to give a report on who came to the house and what they said and what they thought. If you couldn't write, they had to get someone else to write it for you. Trindorla wrote many of these. Every night they had to go to meetings. If you wanted to go outside (e.g. if during the day you wanted to go to Sera) you had to ask for permission. And you had no right to vote and to be voted for [Tib. འདམས་བྱ་འདེམས་བྱེད]. Salary was the same for all work. After the Cultural Revolution, everyone had to work [for] free on Sunday. Before that, you didn't have to. Most trerim weren't labeled. Trerim without a label had it a little easier. No letter could be sent without special permission. In the beginning of these three years, the school was in Chongye Bumtang [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས་འབུམ་ཐང]. I was a teacher and I had 40 or so students. Later the school was merged and I was sent to Gongkar Gyatso [Tib. གོང་དཀར་རྒྱ་མཚོ] House. During this time, a work team came to our school and told them to find the conditions [for removing the label]. The masses mentioned my accomplishments and told them to remove my label. But there was a young Chinese clerk who came with Zhang Guohua. He was among the work team and he said it wasn't okay to remove my label. He worked for the government in the old society and he exploited the masses. I said we worked as Tseja clerks but we had no rank or influence. We were mostly like servants at the ceremonies. There was a saying or like a nickname for us, "When there is a show, cover your eyes with your hands. When there is something to eat, cover your mouth with your hands [Tib. ལྟད་མོ་ཡོད་ན་མིག་ལ་སྦར་བ་བཀབ། ཟ་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་ན་ཁ་ལ་སྦར་བ་བཀབ]." When the drungja was held, we didn't have the chance to drink because we had to serve tea, and when there were shows somewhere, we had to serve at the ceremonies. At that time, they set up a team in the masses to examine whether those who had labels should have them removed or not. Among the teams was an aid of the gerpa Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར] and a school teacher related to the late Drakpa Yargye called Dawala [Tib. ཟླ་བ་ལགས]. There were 3-4 directors [Ch. zhu ren] and they pushed on my behalf to have it removed. But some other ones, like Tseyang la [Tib. ཚེ་གཡང་ལགས] who worked in the Tax Office, didn't like my wife Tsamjola [Tib. མཚམས་གཅོད་ལགས] and she said, "He is good and humble, but his wife is proud." Others said, "His wife has nothing to do with him," so after this, they removed my label. So while I wasn't arrested, I had a lot of trouble after the revolt. Then whatever campaign came around, I got in trouble from it. And one time, it was dangerous for me when they executed people like Chögye Dorje [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ].   

