# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0212.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Temba Chöden [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ཆོས་ལྡན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Temba Chöden [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ཆོས་ལྡན]   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 22  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Temba Chöden was a monk in the Upper Tanric College. In this interview, he tells how Taktra became the regent and how when he returned from Phari, he did not know that Reting had been killed. He talks about hearing that Lhalu confessed to being an accomplice to Reting’s murder, the Lhündrub Dzong incident, how the chandzö of the Sera Jey fled through Kham and how the new Sera Jey abbot was killed by the monks. He then discusses hearing that Reting was the reincarnation of the Prince Mutri Tsenpo [Tib. མུ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ] from the Tibetan ancient kings who prophecised that Reting would become famous, but would meet misfortune in his three life times. Finally, he describes, in detail, the rules and structures of the Gyüdö tratsang (Upper Tantric College) and how the abbot, the lama umdze, the chandzö, the prayer leader, the chanden and the gegö were were selected and approved.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0212_02/H_0212_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  He had said that it's bit uncomfortable for him to remain in the office?   

**A:**  Who said this?   

**Q:**  Reting had mentioned this in his letter. Somehow Tharchin Babu had got hold of this letter. Anyhow, that's what Reting had been trying to do. This letter had been sent to Tharchin Babu by Janglojen Gung. After that he had sent another letter informing him that Demo Rinpoche had refused the Regency and he even wrote a verse saying, "Since the Reting's horn is still very sharp, it seems to be a lie to say that Demo is substituting for Reting." [Tib. རྭ་སྒྲེང་རྭ་རྩེ་ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣོ་བཞིན་པ། དེ་ཚབ་དེ་མོས་བྱེད་ཅེས་རྫུན་དུ་གྲགས]. Anyway, at that time Reting was searching for someone to replace him since he had already decided to resign. So, he had asked various worthy people like Phabongkha and finally <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was the chosen one.   

**A:**  The servants and other people have accumulated bad karmic effects by saying bad things and criticizing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Lama.   

**Q:**  They cannot criticize him because he had accepted the Regency but did not show any inclination to participate actively. He just remained as a figure head and did not take any interest in the nation's affairs.   

**A:**  I think he did not take any part in the political affairs of the country. People told me so.   

**Q:**  Most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> told me that he did not take any interest in the political affairs. Those who had served as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> or as acting nendrön told me that the main trouble creator was the lame nendrön Sukyok [Tib. གསུག་ཀྱོག] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> (his manager). Supposing there is some promotion to make or such any similar things - he would hold the seal and ask who is to be approved? The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> would point his finger on the name of the person to be approved and the Regent would say, "Are you sure? Did you ask the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> [shape]? The chandzö says yes and then the regent would say,"All right" and put his seal of the approval. So, the chandzö could do anything he wished. Later before Reting returned, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> had a difficult period.   

**A:**  Yes - at that time he had to face lot of problems.   

**Q:**  He was a good Lama. We cannot say anything against him. It is only his subordinates were too bad who misused their powers.   

**A:**  Yes - they were terrible. Once when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was returning from Phari, he was asking where Reting was residing? He had not known that Reting had been murdered.   

**Q:**  Is it? Really?   

**A:**  I heard like that. Rechungpa [Tib. རས་ཆུང་པ] Rinpoche had gone to see the new Regent.   

**Q:**  You mean the Rechungpa of Phari?   

**A:**  Yes. The Regent asked him where Reting was residing at for he had heard that Reting had gone to India? Rechungpa replied that he did not have any idea.   

**Q:**  Is this definite?   

**A:**  I was told that it was definitely said.   

**Q:**  Then it must be true.   

**A:**  He said that according to what he had heard, Reting had gone to India.   

**Q:**  I see, when I asked his subordinates Reting's whereabouts, they must have told him that he had gone to India.   

**A:**  That must be it. Actually by that time Reting was already dead.   

**Q:**  He was dead. He had been murdered. Nowadays, in Lhasa, they accept that he has been killed, but at that time they were saying that he had died because the deity Shungden [Tib. ཤུགས་ལྡན] had come in the form of a bearded monk and taken his life. [laughter]   

**A:**  Later they accepted that Reting had been deliberately killed.   

**Q:**  Yes, now they accept it. Now the secret is out. Although some of the Government officials still deny it, but the Chinese have declared that Lhalu is the murderer.   

**A:**  Was Lhalu really was involved in this murder?   

**Q:**  Yes. During a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a> [Tib. འཐབ་འཛིང] a monk from Reting Labrang stood up, slapped Lhalu and charged him with murdering Reting. Lhalu said that he was not the real killer but admitted that he was among the accomplices.   

**A:**  What past bad deeds made them do such a sinful crime?   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> became the Regent, Surkhang and Kabshöpa were appointed as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> and other many changes took place. The Chandzö Chenmo had collected large sums of money by accepting bribes.   

**A:**  At that time, there was a song, "Ask the big nose where the Chandzö, the great hungry ghost has gone." [Tib. phyag mdzod yi dags chen mo/ gar song shod rogs gnang dang/ sna chen yo tog la dris dang]   

**Q:**  The big nose was Gyanbumgang. Around that time, there was some trouble in Phembo Lhündrup [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ] Dzong and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a>. Before that I have another question to ask you. When Reting became the Regent he had made the Abbot of Sera Jey resign - is this true? The Abbot of Sera Jey who was the Abbot of his own tratsang.   

**A:**  I really don't know about it. It could be.   

**Q:**  It is said that he made the Abbot of his own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> resign.   

**A:**  By Reting himself?   

**Q:**  Yes, he told the Abbot to resign. There was some protest from the monks. In his place Reting appointed an Abbot who is a Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་ཁམས་པ]. You know the one who ran away later. This Abbot had not attended any of the Gyü [Tantric] schools. However, he had passed his Geshe degree. The reason for appointing him was that the former Reting also had a misfortune and was almost killed and at that time there was a monk from Sera Triu called Geshe Bu Lama and he saved Reting's life and this abbot was said to be his incarnation and he insisted to get appointed as the abbot of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> and he was appointed.   

**A:**  Must be.   

**Q:**  No, you tell me how is it?   

**A:**  You know the trunyichemmo Chömphel Thubten [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་ཐུབ་བསྟན], who used to reside near the Lingkor road had his brother there.   

**Q:**  If it was at Hamdong [Tib. ཧར་གདོང] Khamtsen - how can the trunyichemmo's brother be there.   

**A:**  It is not possible?   

**Q:**  No, that's the source of his livelihood.   

**A:**  Now the trunyichemmo had given some loan to one of the estates of Sera. All these loans had been signed in front of witnesses.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  There were about sixteen or seventeen monks of Sera who went and broke down the seals and took away the grains. When the trunyichemmo's brother protested, these monks poured hot water on his head, beat him up and broke open the doors. Now if he had pretended to be dead, he would have got away, but he showed some sign of feeble resistance by putting his upper teeth on his lower lip [Tib. ཨམ་གཙིགས་བསྡམས]. So they came back and killed him. They took down a statue of Avalokitaswara with thousand eyes and hands [Tib. སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་ཕྱག་སྟོང་སྤྱན་སྟོང] and left it on his dead body saying that "It's a dead man's deity [Tib. རོའི་ལྷ]." I heard about this when I was in Amdo.   

**Q:**  You mean you heard about this while you were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  At that time I was in Amdo.   

**Q:**  How strange!   

**A:**  After that, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> refused to attend the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] Festival.   

**Q:**  That's correct, they refused to go to the Mönlam.   

**A:**  I heard that in between that time there was some trouble and fighting that took place.   

**Q:**  What fighting?   

**A:**  Now, these <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> people had refused to go for Mönlam.   

**Q:**  That's right.   

**A:**  They told me about these things.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  Then the government arrested the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> along with those 17 monks who were responsible for the death of the trunyichemmo's brother.   

**Q:**  At that time you were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  It's possible to hear such news in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  Sure, I heard like that.   

**Q:**  Which part of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> were you in?   

**A:**  I was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Tashi Khyil [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ].   

**Q:**  What were you doing there?   

**A:**  At Tashi Khyil they were opening a new branch monastery of Gyütöpa. I was taken there by the lama Jayan Sheba.   

**Q:**  You mean the previous incarnation of Jayan Sheba.   

**A:**  Yes, that is correct. We had another old monk to help us.   

**Q:**  You were 2 in number. What was your companion's name?   

**A:**  His name was Yeshe Khedrub [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁས་གྲུབ].   

**Q:**  Was he from Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ],right?   

**A:**  No, he was from Rongpa.   

**Q:**  For how long did you stay there?   

**A:**  We stayed there for almost 6 to 7 years.   

**Q:**  By that time you were able to complete everything?   

**A:**  Yes, everything.   

**Q:**  After that?   

**A:**  After that, we returned to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Didn't Jamyang Shepa pass away?   

**A:**  Yes, he passed away. Then Ling Rimpoche had sent us a letter calling us back.   

**Q:**  At that time, what was Ling Rimpoche?   

**A:**  He was the abbot and Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a> of Gyutöpa.   

**Q:**  No, he couldn't have been the Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a> because the late abbot was still alive.   

**A:**  Then he must have been only the abbot.   

**Q:**  I see, he summoned you back by mail.   

**A:**  I wanted to seek permission to never go back to the monastery. Ling Rinpoche also told me to retire to a hermitage. However, later he said that it is not possible for me to go and i had to stay back at the monastery.   

**Q:**  How is that? While you were in Amdo. Ling Rimpoche had already become the royal tutor. How's this possible?   

**A:**  He had already finished his tenure as an abbot. I went to listen to his discourse on Sangwa Düpa.   

**Q:**  What courses did he give the Sangwa Düpa?   

**A:**  He gave a detailed lecture and also the initiation of the Sangwa Düpa.   

**Q:**  Were you were also there? I had also attended this same initiation when I was very young. On top of the Shabten Lhakang [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལྷ་ཁང] he gave another discourse on Drelpa Shidak [Tib. འགྲེལ་པ་ཞི་དྲག].   

**A:**  I did not attend this one.   

**Q:**  He gave a discourse on Dochog Bedonkünsel [Tib. མདོ་ཆོག་སྦས་དོན་ཀུན་གསལ] and Drepa Shidak.   

**A:**  Yes. I was sent to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> by Ling Rinpoche. Since it was his order, I could not refuse. Actually, I pretended that I was sick but it did not help.   

**Q:**  You were called back from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> also by Ling Rimpoche?   

**A:**  You remember that bearded guy. Ling Rinpoche had sent him personally to call me. It was on a day when there was a Mahayana Gelong's confessional assembly, [Tib. thek chen gso sbyong] at Ramoche. I had not gone for this ceremony. I was alone at my room (Tib. ཤག). There was no one at the monastery. So, I got up made some tea and then lied down. After sometime, someone was knocking at the door. On opening the door he told me that I was immediately summoned by Ling Rinpoche. So, I went. When I reached there he scolded me and wanted to know why I didn't go to the confessional assembly? I had to stay back because there were only about 10 days left before we departed for Amdo.   

**Q:**  Then you left with Jayang Sheba?   

**A:**  Jayan was not there, but his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> was there. He had gone by air.   

**Q:**  By air? From where?   

**A:**  From Kolcutta it was a short flight.   

**Q:**  How? You mean from India?   

**A:**  You fly from Kolcutta to Beijing.   

**Q:**  That's something.   

**A:**  We went straight from the northern route. We were about 140 strong.   

**Q:**  About 149 people?   

**A:**  Most probably.   

**Q:**  At Jayan Sheba's estate they took good care of you?   

**A:**  First class treatment.   

**Q:**  Food?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> was known for their excellent cooking.   

**Q:**  So, I see how you stayed in Amdo. In the meanwhile [question not finished]   

**A:**  In the meanwhile, I think lot of problems took place. When the fighting broke out in Sera, I was in Amdo.   

**Q:**  You could hear all these news in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, the news would reach us. People were saying that it is not good when the monks and abbots start killing. Actually there is a prophesy about this.   

**Q:**  You mean when they killed the abbot.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They killed an abbot of Sera. Actually the abbot was at fault. He had shot and killed a dobdob?   

**A:**  Whom did he kill?   

**Q:**  He had killed a dob-dob nicknamed, "White Brocade." [Tib. རྒྱ་སེ་དཀར་པོ]. This abbot had been instigated by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> of Taktra. Before this abbot, the abbot Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> who had to run away had been summoned by the government who said that they will punish him by whipping and so on. While he was the abbot he did not surrender any of the monks who were responsible for breaking into the granary of Lhundup Dzong. He would send his personal <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> or some other representative with some excuse. When he was personally called down he did not go but sent his manager instead. Gradually when the trouble became more serious, then there was a fellow nicknamed, "Famine fat." [Tib. མུ་གེ་རྒྱག་པ] who got the nicknamed because he sold the tea and butter [charging high prices] to the monks and he himself became fat [rich], stood up in a meeting and said that they must hand over the abbot to the government. After all, he is one person whereas there is the danger of government and Sera coming to serious trouble. When the abbot heard this he stood up, took off his yellow robe, chögö [Tib. ཆོས་དོས], folded it neatly and put it in front of Muge Gyakpa and said, if you are not concerned about the welfare of the monks of Sera then it hardly makes any difference to me where I stay or go. "Here is my chögö, you can give it to the government or to whomsoever you want." After saying his piece he left the hall, went up to his room, packed his things and went to Lhasa. He stayed at Kedong House for 3 nights and then, dressed in Mongolian style dress, he rode away with his servants. That's the style how he left. Later his chandzö was killed somewhere in Chamdo.   

**A:**  The abbot?   

**Q:**  The abbot was able to escape but his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and servants were killed. He stayed for sometime in Chamdo living on alms. I have talked with people who had met this abbot. Once the abbot met Lhalu who did not recognize him but nevertheless Lhalu had remarked to his companions that such people are not to be trusted. The abbot was so scared, fearing that Lhalu would recognize him.. fortunately, Lhalu failed to recognize him. Another occasion, the abbot had a narrow escape while he was trying to cross a bridge. The bridge was heavily guarded by government soldiers. For five continuous days, he had tried to cross the bridge but it was closely guarded. On the sixth day, the soldiers were playing a dice game, fearfully he went up to the soldiers and said, "Kind sirs," give me some tsampa.   

**A:**  Maybe he was trying to see what they would say?   

**Q:**  No, if he had tried to cross the bridge, the soldiers would have asked all sorts of questions. So, instead he asked them for alms. The soldiers shouted crossly, "Beggar, can't you see we are busy playing - be gone." So, he said, "Yes sir" and crossed the bridge. He had narrated this tale later to some of his friends. From there he went to Dartsedo.   

**A:**  Later , did he came back to Lhasa?   

**Q:**  He returned to Lhasa in style. We were young novices at that time. He had become the Vice Chairman [Tib. ཕུ༹་ཞུ྾ཨི] of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> and all the abbots and other high lamas of the Three Big Monastic Seats had to go and receive him. Everyone had to go in line to welcome him. All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> had to go and welcome him.   

**A:**  As a welcome reception committee.   

**Q:**  Yes, we had to go right up to gangtö [Tib. གངས་སྟོད] to welcome him. He had become a Vice Chairman of an Autonomous Region of Dartsedo. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> he received the Avalokitaswara initiation from the Dalai Lama. He was given a big throne and made to sit in between the two royal tutors. After this adventurous abbot, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> had appointed another abbot of Sera Jey. He is the one who got killed.   

**A:**  Yes, that's the Mongolian abbot.   

**Q:**  No, he was not a Mongolian.   

**A:**  Yes, people told me that he was a Mongol.   

**Q:**  Wasn't this abbot also from Triu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>? Is he from Mongolia?   

**A:**  Yes, he was a Mongol.   

**Q:**  Must be a Mongol, he is the one who got himself killed. Actually, this abbot was one of those very nervous type of persons. He would always keep on complaining to the Chandzö Chenmo that the monks are doing this and that. The monks did not like him and some times they would chase him to his room. Once some young monks went to his room and asked him what he was doing? He said, "I am firing from underneath my dress." He had a gun under his large dressing gown. He fired and killed the dobdob Gyase Karpo. This infuriated the monks and they killed his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and servants with swords and sticks. The abbot escaped with his gun through the window. Eventually, while he was trying to jump from the roof top the monks caught him and they hacked him to death.   

**A:**  They killed him?   

**Q:**  After killing him, some caught the legs while other got hold of the hand and they swung his body back and forth in unison and threw it down the stairs.   

**A:**  Such bad times!   

**Q:**  Yes, it is a sign that bad times are ahead.   

**A:**  Yes, in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> people were saying that it was the worst of times, when lamas and abbots would be killed.   

**Q:**  Yes, so the events took place as I have said. There was a lot of trouble. Actually the cause of Reting's trouble also originated from this.   

**A:**  Yes, the cause lies in these early troubles.   

**Q:**  The, when Reting Rinpoche came back to Lhasa, were you there?   

**A:**  Reting came to Lhasa for a short time.   

**Q:**  Were you in Lhasa at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there.   

**Q:**  Then how was it? When the Lhündup Dzong trouble started you said you were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> but when Reting came to Lhasa you say, you were three in Lhasa. Unless you performed some miracle how is this possible?   

**A:**  That was during the time when Reting handed over the regency to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> and he was going away.   

**Q:**  At that time, you must have been present? After that Reting came back to Lhasa once, did you know about this?   

**A:**  I didn't know about it.   

**Q:**  After 3 years Reting came back in great style. The pretext was that he was being invited to consecrate a new congregational hall which had been built at Sera Jey. Anyway - he did come to Lhasa. You did not know about it?   

**A:**  At that time, didn't the government give him a proper reception or how was it?   

**Q:**  At that time, they couldn't have a proper dialogue. Anyway, nothing concrete was achieved. Later during the Reting war you were in Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, I was in Amdo.   

**Q:**  What did you hear in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  People were saying that Reting's war had started. People were condemning it. I went to see Huang Selon, who was the elder brother of Jayan Sheba and he had been conferred some rank by the Chinese. He told me that the people in Lhasa cannot stay put, they are always up to some mischief. Now they are firing upon the monks of Sera and harassing Reting. He told me that the Chinese people were making inquires.   

**Q:**  What inquiries in China?   

**A:**  He was saying that in China they were making proper inquires as to how the trouble started and who were responsible and then send soldiers to punish them. So, I told him to ask them not to send Chinese soldiers into Tibet because these soldiers would break down the temples, sacred icons and statue and generally destroy our religion. He told me that it is true but the Tibetans in Lhasa needed to be taught a lesson.   

**Q:**  At that time, Reting was yet to be murdered?   

**A:**  Yes, he was yet to be killed. He was saying that the people in Lhasa do not know how to behave themselves.   

**Q:**  They must have received orders to send soldiers.   

**A:**  Could be. Then Chang Kaishek had ordered to build a motor road from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> to Lhasa. Huang Selon told me that he and his estate manager had requested them to abandon this project since it would become very harmful to the spirit and belief of our religion. He was wondering how their request would be treated.   

**Q:**  You mean the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Jayan Shepa?   

**A:**  Yes, sir. This <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> was someone extraordinary.   

**Q:**  Then later where did you hear about the death of Reting Rinpoche.   

**A:**  I think I heard it in Amdo.   

**Q:**  Is it? Do you remember anything?   

**A:**  I heard that Reting had died.   

**Q:**  Were they saying that he died or that he was killed?   

**A:**  I heard that he had died.   

**Q:**  Later, when you returned to Lhasa what did you hear?   

**A:**  In Lhasa people were saying that Reting had been murdered.   

**Q:**  They were saying that he was killed?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that he was killed and before he died he is supposed to have let out scream of pain.   

**Q:**  I think this is really true. Everyone seems to agree that before he died he let out cry of agony. Many people seem to know about this.   

**A:**  Yes, lot of people had heard this cry. You remember one tall <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་དཔོན] The mayor of Lhasa during the traditional era. The head of the Nangtsesha Office [tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤར].">mipön</a> with the twisted mouth nicknamed Porkyo [Tib. སྤོར་ཀྱོག], he had heard the cry.   

**A:**  Mr X. They say that silk scarves were stuffed down his throat.   

**Q:**  That's all ancient rumors. Once during the fifth Dalai lama reign, Trüku Dragpa Gyentsen [Tib. གྲགས་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] had been murdered by stuffing silk scarves down his throat. I don't think Reting was killed like this.   

**A:**  No, I don't think so.   

**Q:**  I wonder how he was killed? What did you hear?   

**A:**  Afew people went to his room around mid-night.   

**Q:**  They must have entered his bed room while he was sleeping.   

**A:**  I wonder how it was. He must have known that was going to happen to him. After all he is one of the courageous boddhisattvas [Tib. བྱང་འཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ].   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  He must have known, but I suppose he acted as if he wasn't aware of it.   

**Q:**  I don't think he would have known about it since he was fated to be killed.   

**A:**  You think so?   

**Q:**  He must have had visions and omens sometimes before but when the actual moment of death he wouldn't have known. It must have been his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> that he should suffer from this problems.   

**A:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Tashi Khyil, the learned abbots were saying that once at Samye the famous Guru Padmasambawa was giving a prophesy to the king and his minister. He had specifically asked the guard to let no one enter once the session had started. It so happened that the crown prince Mutri Tsempo [Tib. མུ་ཁྲི་བཙན་པོ] who drew his sword and slew the guard. When he entered the hall, Padmasambawa told him that in future you will be very famous in the world, but you meet downfall three times for this deed.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  He said in future, when your fame will spread like the thunder of the dragon in the world, you will meet with downfall three times. Now this Reting happens to be the second one who met with such a bad end. Still one of his future incarnations will meet another violent and bad end. They say that the previous Reting had also suffered another humiliation.   

**Q:**  That's true but the previous Reting was not murdered.   

**A:**  Yes, the wise abbots were saying things like that. Another thing is that once the Karmapa lama went to Kolcutta and from there he insisted on buying an Indian dog, paying lot of money for it. You know the breed which has long loose ears, short hands and long legs. He had insisted on buying this particular dog.   

**Q:**  Who had bought it?   

**A:**  Karmapa had bought it. A few months later, after returning he sent a person to Tshurbu [Tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] and said the dog should be delivered to Jayan Sheba.   

**Q:**  You mean the dog?   

**A:**  Yes sir. When they reached Tshurbu, Jayan Sheba said "Poor doggy, he is our store-keeper's [Tib. ལྡེ་འཆང་བ]. [rebirth]" Go and leave him with the store-keeper and feed him properly. So, they left the doggy (ex-store keeper) was left with them and later you could see it tagging along with the store-keepers.   

**Q:**  I see. This present karmapa had bought it in Kolcutta?   

**A:**  Yes, Karma bought it from Kolcutta sent it to Reting and from there sent it to Jayan Sheba.   

**Q:**  Who sent it to Reting?   

**A:**  Karmapa sent it.   

**Q:**  Did he present it to Reting?   

**A:**  No, Reting sent it down to Jayan Sheba.   

**Q:**  No, I mean who sent it Jayan Sheba, Reting or Karmapa?   

**A:**  Reting sent it down. Jayan Sheba said that the dog was a reincarnation of one of their late store-keepers.   

**Q:**  He had been reborn in Kolcutta?   

**A:**  That's correct.   

**Q:**  Karmapa had collected it from there?   

**A:**  Correct.   

**Q:**  Then when did you arrive in Lhasa?   

**A:**  When I arrived in Lhasa, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was the regent. I had few things to present to him. So, I went for an audience.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  He asked me about the country in Amdo. So, I gave him a brief description. I also gave him some silver and a blue-print for construction a new monastery which had been sent by a Mongolian lama known as Guru Deva.   

**Q:**  What Mongolian lama?   

**A:**  Mongolian lama Guru Deva.   

**Q:**  You mean this present one?   

**A:**  No, not this one.   

**Q:**  Is there another Guru Deva?   

**A:**  Yes, there is another one. So, I presented to him these things sent by the Guru Deva. He told me that this is a noble idea to build such a big monastery but the communist will not appreciate them. They are dead set against religion and anything to do with religion. He asked me how the situation was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>? I told him that right now its not too bad.   

**Q:**  The communist had already arrived there?   

**A:**  Down there the communist have already arrived and they were widespread.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it you who had brought the selected work, Sungbum [Tib. གསུང་འབུམ] of Tamang Könchog Gyentsen's [Tib. རྟ་མང་དཀོན་ཇོག་རྒྱལ་པོ] for Ling Rinpoche?   

**A:**  Yes, it was me. I presented it and explained to him in details about its background.   

**Q:**  Yes, the Sungbum had been taken from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and a few pages were missing. So, it was you who had brought it. I was told by Ling Rinpoche that a monk from Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> had brought it, the pages are uneven in length.   

**A:**  Yes, there was little defect like that.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> became the regent there were lot of troubles. Wasn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, there were little problems. However, we weren't aware of it. After coming back to Lhasa - shortly I went into retreat. I was instructed to go into retreat with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> of Joktang.   

**Q:**  Who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  There was one tsidrung. This guy passed away sometime later. We went to Samye and stayed in retreat for three or four months.   

**Q:**  In retreat what rituals did you perform?   

**A:**  We did mostly <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Pawo Jigpa [Tib. དཔའ་བོ་གཅིག་པ], the White Tara or Drölkar and Vajra Yogini or Naljorma [Tib. རྣལ་འབྱོར་མ].   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> was helping you?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  During the Sera war you had no connection?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  I remember the Sera war. At that time, nothing happened at Drepung. At that time, it was ordered to kill anyone with short hair. That time, the situation was very tense.   

**A:**  It must have been real bad.   

**Q:**  It is fact that the Central Government issues orders to kill anyone whose heads were shaved off. We used to be very scared to go out. Once when the ritual was over, I came out very hesitantly. I remember this very vividly. The late Gen Yungdrung Rimpoche was there. At that time, a fight took place.   

**A:**  With whom?   

**Q:**  With Dashendi.   

**A:**  For what reason?   

**Q:**  I really don't know.   

**A:**  May be he must have told him that they can't go up.   

**Q:**  Yes, they exchanged physical blows. The late Gen was with us. Geshe Sherab Gyentsen [Tib. ཤེས་རབ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] and the Dashendi had a fist fight. Anyway, at that time, I was at Demo Labrang. At Reting Labrang they exchanged lot of gun fire. They put some tin boxes near my pillow and bed. Fortunately, no bullets came about otherwise these boxes could not have been much of a protection. Now one realizes that those boxes were made out of plastics. At that time, we did not know it. It shows how ignorant we were about such things.   

**A:**  They had kept it as a shelter against the bullets?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Who was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> [Tib. བཞི་བདེ]?   

**Q:**  It was at Reting Labrang?   

**A:**  Yes, there was nothing much left at the labrang. It was just before the government confiscated and sealed the labrang. You could hear the gunfire chattering away at Reting. Then they moved up to Drepung and everything became very quiet. Then they started selling the property of Reting Labrang. There were such a lot of things. Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  I was down at kham.   

**Q:**  They sold lot of things at such cheap rate.   

**A:**  They had brought these things from Reting?   

**Q:**  They had stolen it from Reting. It was said that they cut a golden statue of Varjra Yogini into two halves. It was done by a smith who used to live behind Phunkhang.   

**A:**  After that they must have cut it into pieces?   

**Q:**  They sold all the priceless icons, statues and other ritual objects. There were various carpets, and numerous other objects. We did not buy anything but they were really selling them cheap. Such terrible things happened. Then when the communist came where were you?   

**A:**  When the communists came, I had already returned to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  The communist arrived in 1948-49. Isn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right.   

**Q:**  In 1947, the Reting war took place. The communist had already arrived by 1951. Then there was not much anyone could do. We lost Chamdo in 1951. Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  I was at my hometown in 1951.   

**Q:**  Did you come up with the communists?   

**A:**  Yes, I came up with them.   

**Q:**  In 1952 [really 1951], they signed the 17-Point Agreement. When the communist came to Chamdo - where were you?   

**A:**  At that time, I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What did they do at that time?   

**A:**  [another person] I don't remember anything. I think on the eve on Chamdo invasion, I could not sleep at all. I was feeling restless and my back started aching.   

**Q:**  You must have heard that the Chinese would take over Chamdo?   

**A:**  Yes, there was such talk.   

**Q:**  So, while you were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, you have witnessed certain events.   

**A:**  Yes, I had a dream and in the dream I was told that unless I do the ritual of Dugsher Sengsum [Tib. གདུགས་ཤེས་སེང་གསུམ], something bad will happen.   

**Q:**  Who told you this?   

**A:**  I was about to fall of to sleep, it seemed like a dream, in the dream I was told that unless I perform the above mentioned ritual something bad will happen. So, I got up and performed this ritual and prayed a lot but it did not help much. Very soon the Chinese had taken over Chamdo. We heard this over the phone.   

**Q:**  You mean that you heard that the Chamdo have lost?   

**A:**  There was some sort of phone and on it they heard the news that Chamdo was taken over by the communists. All the people started running away.   

**Q:**  That's right. People started leaving. Where did they go?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama had sent all his belongings to Kalimpong. All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> left for Gangtok.   

**Q:**  Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa. I didn't run because I didn't know where to run. Anyway, then the main Chinese force [officials] came from the India side.   

**Q:**  Yes, they came from that side.   

**A:**  Two of the officers were called Zhang Jingwu and the other Zhang something.   

**Q:**  You remember the names too?   

**A:**  Yes, when they came we went to see them. We saw them with a mule loaded with 20-23 Indian mugs. I thought the Chinese were nothing impressive.   

**Q:**  The Chinese are like any other human being.   

**A:**  Yes, they were like any other human being. They came bringing few mugs with them. After something they said that they must bring a few reforms at Sera and they went there.   

**Q:**  You mean the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, they were so many of them that they filled up the hall and courtyards of sera. They even donated 3 to 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> to each monk in the assembly and also to the monks sitting on the stone steps.   

**Q:**  You mean the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I see. Then they must have given that to the monks of Drepung too?   

**A:**  Yes, also to the monks of Gyütöpa and Gyümeypa.   

**A:**  Mr. X: May be they wanted to find out the number of the monks?   

**Q:**  There was nothing to count. It was just a good will gesture to win over and lull the monks' suspicions.   

**A:**  I wasn't there to receive the cash gift. I was among the onlookers. There were so many of them that even outside the courtyard - all the stairs were packed with them.   

**Q:**  You have no association with Sera?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Then for what reason did you go there?   

**A:**  I just went to see what the Chinese would do? We saw them distributing silver dollars to the monks. After that I left.   

**Q:**  Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> resigned just before the Chinese arrival?   

**A:**  Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> had something to do with it.   

**Q:**  Was it done by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> or by the Ta lama?   

**A:**  It is done by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> and the Ta lama.   

**Q:**  I wonder how these two managed it?   

**A:**  Later, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> big-crooked-nose said that all the mischief [Tib. མི་བྱེད་རྒུ་བྱེད] is done by Ta lama.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  All the trouble was started by Ta lama.   

**Q:**  Who said this?   

**A:**  Chandzö big-crooked-nose said it.   

**Q:**  Chandzö big -crooked-nose is not the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Taktra. He is from Gyanbumgang [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང].   

**A:**  No, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> said that the main culprit was Ta lama.   

**Q:**  What did Ta lama do?   

**A:**  They say that once all deities were invoked and all monks and lay officials were gathered for a meeting because there were some heavy problems, when they consulted the deity <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> for advice and the oracle mumbled few words and then faded away. The Ta lama leaped up and caught hold of the medium by the chest and said "We have always been faithful in our offerings. Now when we are faced with serious problems. Is it proper that you should abandon us? Have you all forgotten your past promises to uphold and protect Tibet? Then they invited the Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] Deity and after this he [Nechung] went in front of the Dalai lama's throne and after making the customary 3 prostration he said that it is time to offer the throne to the Dalai lama and ask him to assume his powers. This bold statement threw everyone into confusion. At once his friends singed to him to leave the meeting.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  The majority of the lower officials and the ordinary people wanted the regent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> to resign and the Dalai lama to assume his rightful place. So everyone said that the Dalai lama must ascend the throne. Therefore, the Taktra's supporters could not raise any objections.   

**Q:**  What objections?   

**A:**  They could not say that the regent must continue his regency.   

**Q:**  So, they lost the chance?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then the Dalai Lama assumed temporal and religious power as the supreme leader of Tibet.   

**A:**  Ta lama said while serving the dewa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང] 1. A government. 2. The government of the Dalai Lama.">shung</a> (central government.) he has made two or three positive contributions. I made sure that the Dalai lama got to rule the government without much problems, then on the day of the throning ceremony, I got all prisoners released.   

**Q:**  Ta lama was responsible for it?   

**A:**  Yes, he told us that he was responsible for it.   

**Q:**  It couldn't have been at the enthroning ceremony. It must have been on the day he took over the duties as the real ruler of Tibet.   

**A:**  Yes on the day he assumed power, Ta lama got all the prisoners pardoned and released.   

**Q:**  So, these two deeds are his achievements. In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> Tratsang, the head is the abbot. However, in reality the abbot is not a member of the Gyüpa Tratsang association.   

**A:**  Yes, that's right.   

**Q:**  The person who gets promoted from the association becomes the abbot.   

**A:**  Yes, sir.   

**Q:**  After the abbot comes the Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a> and then the gegö.   

**A:**  Below them if you go according to their ranks, after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> comes, the prayer leader, Gyüshung Chanden [Tib. རྒྱུད་གཞུང་ཇ་འདྲེན], then the Khabte [Tib. ?] Geshe and so on.   

**Q:**  Then what about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a>?   

**A:**  They look after the material things and has no concern with the religious aspect.   

**Q:**  How are the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> selected?   

**A:**  In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> - previously there were no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and the abbots would look after things. The 13th Dalai Lama started the chandzö.   

**Q:**  I see. They looked after all the things?   

**A:**  Yes, after everything. From the monastic income they would try to minimize the expenditures as less as possible. When their tenure was finished they would take along with them everything - even the brooms!   

**Q:**  What did you say about the brooms?   

**A:**  Even the brooms will be taken away by the abbots when they go away on completing their tenure.   

**Q:**  You mean the abbots packs them and takes them away with them?   

**A:**  Yes, the ex-abbots take everything.   

**Q:**  I see. Previously was that the practice?   

**A:**  This practice would give great problems to the tratsang. When the 13th Dalai lama heard about this he sent an inquiry. He traced the ex-abbots whereabouts. Those who had personal monastic estate were fined, those who didn't have estates, their monastic house or relatives were made to pay the fine. They had to pay some thousands of dotse. With this money, the Ramoche Temple was renovated.   

**Q:**  I see. The Ramoche temple was renovated.   

**A:**  After that he fixed some income to the lama and abbots. The monastic lands were no longer to be looked after by them and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> were installed.   

**Q:**  Now how are the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> appointed?   

**A:**  Now, there are five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and from each khamtsen one person who seemed most capable was nominated.   

**Q:**  You mean by election?   

**A:**  Yes, election.   

**Q:**  How is the system of election?   

**A:**  They would have a talk among themselves - each expressing their choice.   

**Q:**  How is it? I don't think they write down the names on ballot papers?   

**A:**  No, but they would discuss among themselves, agree upon the most suitable person.   

**Q:**  By the elder members of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, the senior monks of the house would elect a member from their own house.   

**Q:**  You mean each house would elect a member each?   

**A:**  Yes, each <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> would elect a representative. The names of these five elected members would be written down and put into the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> divine diviination and the Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a> would roll it in front of the Gömpo. Whoever's name comes out he becomes the new chandzö.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> are there?   

**A:**  There are five of them.   

**Q:**  If there are only five names than how can you roll the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a>?   

**A:**  From each house comes three nominated members.   

**Q:**  I see. So, there is 15 of them. Then how is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> (disciplinary master) selected?   

**A:**  During the four months of winter the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> becomes the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a>. During the spring and summer, the kyerimpa [Tib. སྐྱེད་རིམ་པ], the Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> who were not geshe becomes the gegö for four months each.   

**Q:**  In one year how many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> were there?   

**A:**  There were three of them.   

**Q:**  How many did you say? Four of them?   

**A:**  No, there are 3 of them.   

**Q:**  How is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> elected?   

**A:**  For this they gave a list of names seniority wise.   

**Q:**  You mean after becoming the monk overseeing the monk's recitation, the Tripa Kyorpön [Tib. ཁྲི་པ་སྐྱོར་དཔོན]?   

**A:**  After becoming a Tripa Kyorpön if they want to become a Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a> they must become a gegö.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  Suppose you want to become a Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a> and you have the proper qualification then you must become a gegö.   

**Q:**  How is it? Every <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> doesn't have to become a Tripa Kyorpön?   

**A:**  No, all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> do not have to become a Tripa Kyorpön.   

**Q:**  First they must take a tantric vow. After that?   

**A:**  After that they must line up - or rather each is given a serial number and according to it they get a chance to become the gegö.   

**Q:**  This taking of tantric vow is organized every year?   

**A:**  No, after two or three years when the list of the previous candidates are about to finish, then another one is organized.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  So when their turn comes they become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> and then they can become a Lama Umdze.   

**Q:**  So, now they must wait till the previous Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a> retires or the seat is vacant?   

**A:**  Yes. So, later there can be a couple of candidates to become Lama Umdze. Among them the selection is not done according to seniority or first come first basis. Their names are put forward to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I see. They have to seek his approval?   

**A:**  Yes, they must.   

**Q:**  So, whoever name comes, according to the approval, is selected. There is no question of merit or anything?   

**A:**  Correct.   

**Q:**  From the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> they just nominate the names - that's all?   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  So, before the taking of tantric vow and becoming Tripa Kyorpön what must one do?   

**A:**  Then he must become a chötrimpa [gegö] [Tib. ཆོས་ཁྲིམས་པ] for one year visiting various monasteriesw. After that if he wants he can go back to his monastery.   

**Q:**  If he doesn't want to go back to his monastery, can he leave it?   

**A:**  He can.   

**Q:**  Then does one become a Kyerimpa?   

**A:**  Just before you stand for gegö.   

**Q:**  No, no. I mean first you become the scholar monk who lives with the patron, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་མཚམས་པ] The scholar monks who live with a patron while studying tsenyi or while memorizing religious texts (pecha) to become a lama güypa.">pentsampa</a> [Tib. དཔེ་མཚམས་པ] and give your examination and then what?   

**A:**  After the examination, one must go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. chöra (ཆོས་ར)] The walled-in grove in monasteries (monastic colleges) where monks go to study/practice debating.">dharma grove</a> and the assembly for three years. Then they must attend this routine prayers without a single day's absence.   

**Q:**  For how many days does one have to attend this prayer?   

**A:**  For three years. After that once again they must abide by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> law, the chötrim [Tib. ཆོས་ཁྲིམས] for 9 to 10 years.   

**Q:**  Is it? What is this 3 years for?   

**A:**  During these three years they cannot go anywhere. They must study these dharma courses without interruptions.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  After these 3 years they can leave the monastery and go wherever they want.   

**Q:**  You mean they must get permission to leave?   

**A:**  Yes, only with permission.   

**Q:**  While staying in Lhasa do they have to attend this course?   

**A:**  Only after nine or ten years they can leave with permission.   

**Q:**  I see. For 9 to 10 years they must attend these courses?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  Only after 9 to 10 years, after getting the permission they can retire to their own rooms for the night.   

**Q:**  They can?   

**A:**  Yes, they can.   

**Q:**  While one is attending the courses, how is the people who make the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོར་མ] A ritual offering made from tsamba and water.">torma</a> and their assistant, chöyog [Tib. ཆོས་གཡོག] are selected?   

**A:**  The abbot would say that such and such house should produce people to make such arrangements. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན་དགེ་རྒན] The head official of a khamtsen.">khamtsen gegen</a> would select among his members those who have skill in such matters.   

**Q:**  Do these people enjoy any special privileges?   

**A:**  No, no special privileges.   

**Q:**  Is it not just an extra job for them?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then who makes all those sand mandalas [Tib. དཀྱིལ་འཁོར]?   

**A:**  These are also done by the same people as mentioned above. They are known as chöyog.   

**Q:**  Everything is done by the chöyog? Like mapping out the lines, coloring them with dry powders and making the sacrificial cakes?   

**A:**  Yes, all these are done by the chöyog.   

**Q:**  Then what about the religious musical instruments - who operates them?   

**A:**  For that there are separate people know as the 'front row.'   

**Q:**  How are they selected?   

**A:**  For these anyone who knows how to play the instruments volunteers. The most gifted are chosen.   

**Q:**  They are led by the chant master, chanten.   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, in Trag Yerpa [Tib. བྲག་ཡེར་པ], they would hold the ritual for making a box to bring good fortune, [Tib. གཡང་སྒམ]. They had to go there to do the ritual. After that, if you can chat well, you will become the chanden of the Chapel of the protective deities [Tib. མགོན་ཁང་ཇ་འདྲེན]] and they become the Gyüshung Chanden. The chanden <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chemmo</a> [Tib. ཇ་འདྲེན་ཆེན་མོ] would be selected from Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  What kind of privilege did the chanden <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chemmo</a> have?   

**A:**  They don't need to attend the assembly, if they don't want to. They should attend the assembly on the festivals and some special occasions in the month.   

**Q:**  Normally, the prayers were led by the Gyüshung Chanden, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when the Gyüshung Chanden didn't have time, the Gönkhang Chanden would lead the prayers.   

**Q:**  If all of the three didn't have time, who would lead the prayers?   

**A:**  Then the senior in the front line will lead the prayers.   

**Q:**  What are the privileges of the senior kyerimpa?   

**A:**  They don't need to attend the assembly.   

**Q:**  What are the incomes of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> Tratsang?   

**A:**  They have very good estates. In Lhasa they have an estate.   

**Q:**  How many estates does the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྟོད] The Upper Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyütö</a> Tratsang have?   

**A:**  They have about 11 to 12 estates.   

**Q:**  If you add up their incomes how much does it amount to?   

**A:**  They have about 100-200 or 1000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grains?   

**Q:**  You mean from each estate?   

**A:**  Yes, from each estate.   

**Q:**  These are the incomes. If you deduct the expenditure form these incomes - how much would be left at the end of the year?   

**A:**  A little bit of grain would be left.   

**Q:**  Then do the lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> give out loans?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do they charge a high rate of interest?   

**A:**  Yes, they charged quite high interest rates.   

**Q:**  Do the quality of the food and other facility offered to the monks depend on the standard of the income? I mean if the income is good then the monks get better servings and likewise if the income happens to be poor the monks get inferior servings?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. Another point is that every five years the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> gets replaced. During that time they take out the reserve stock of grains and share it among everyone.   

**Q:**  Why have they kept such reserved stocks?   

**A:**  That's reserved for emergencies to be used only if the monastery faces food scarcity due to various reasons. This hording or stocking of supplies is practiced by the Three Big Monastic Seats too.   

**Q:**  If you talk in terms of percentage - how many percent would they keep as reserve?   

**A:**  Around 10% of the income.   

**Q:**  About 10%.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They don't keep more than that?   

**A:**  No.   

