# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0212.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Temba Chöden  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1982  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Temba Chöden  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 62  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Temba Chöden was a Tibetan monk in the Upper Tantric College. In this interview, he describes the Jongyu ceremony that the Lama Gyüpa attended, including what they did and where it was. He also describes performing the long life ritual for the Dalai Lama, and how he heard the 13th Dalai Lama was ill, and that he died and his reaction to this news. He then talks about how after the Dalai Lama’s death, Reting became the regent, sent letters and gifts to the Lady Jogtre, and how Reting later took her as his consort. Additionally, he talks about Lungshar's fall, the many bribes taken by the Ta Lama, and how Kapshöba and Surkhang bribed Taktra, and how Trimön became insane and dressed in a strange manner. And it includes verbatim the famous letter Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] sent from exile in Tsöna criticizing the government in Lhasa.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0212_01/H_0212_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The previous Dalai Lama normally attended the ceremony for the Lama Gyüpa called Jongyu [Tib. ལྗོང་རྒྱུ] [in the Potala] right?   

**A:**  Yes, he would attend it.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama arrived, were the Lama Gyüpa already assembled in the hall or did they enter the hall only after the Dalai Lama has entered and seated himself. How was it?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama enters the hall first.   

**Q:**  Is this a tradition - I mean the Dalai Lama entering the hall before the monks assemble?   

**A:**  Yes, always the Dalai Lama enters the Hall first and when the monks enter the hall, they make mandala offering called Mendre Tensum [Tib. མན་དྲལ་རྟེན་གསུམ] to him. Along with the mandala they make other offerings.   

**Q:**  Isn't the mandala offering made later? I mean according to a certain sequence and the mandala does not come in the beginning?   

**A:**  No. The mandala is offered first. All these offerings are made by the Abbots, the Lamas and the umdze as they enter the gate, they chant the prayer Panden Sasuma, [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ས་གསུམ་མ]   

**Q:**  How is it? As they assemble in the hall they start the prayer?   

**A:**  No, it's not like that. The Dalai Lama is already seated on the throne.   

**Q:**  Is it?   

**A:**  Yes, the Dalai Lama is on the throne and opposite to him - on a lesser throne sits the regent. When the previous Dalai Lama sits on the throne you just could not get an audience. You enter the hall chanting the above mentioned prayer and bear offerings like tea, flour, nambu [Tib. སྣམ་བུ] (woolen materials) and someone would accept these gifts before you reach the Dalai Lama's throne.   

**Q:**  I see. They go in chanting the prayer known as Panden Sasuma?   

**A:**  They would chant this very loudly till all the monks file past the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I see. Then what happens?   

**A:**  After chanting this prayer, they say the elaborate mandala prayer.   

**Q:**  I guess it must be the normal elaborate mandala prayer and not the one which had 37 tsombu [Tib. ཚོམ་བུ]?   

**A:**  It's the mandala known as Sangwa Dupa [Tib. གསང་བ་འདུས་པ] a longevity prayer offering to the Dalai Lama, while saying all these prayers, the monks keep on entering the hall - all the time chanting. When the hall gets filled up and there is no more space to sit, the remaining monks go out and go home.   

**Q:**  What are the other prayers they had to recite?   

**A:**  The mandala of body, voice and mind [Tib. སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས] is read out elaborately. After that they offer the prayer of longevity [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན] for the Dalai Lama. After all these prayers are finished, then the Abbot gives a detailed explanation of the mandala offering. Just as he finishes expounding the mandala, another prayer for the longevity of the Dalai Lama is said and then the ceremony is concluded.   

**Q:**  Is there no performance of the rituals of the long life [for the Dalai Lama] called tenshug, [Tib. བརྟན་ཞུགས]?   

**A:**  We don't make the normal tenshug.   

**Q:**  I think they serve tea 2 or 3 times?   

**A:**  We serve tea only once.   

**Q:**  You serve tea only once?   

**A:**  Yes, only once. The monks don't bring their biggest wooden tea bowl. The tea is served by the tratsang (college/monastery) itself. The Abbot performs a ceremony to get rid of any poison in the tea [Tib. དུག་སེལ].   

**Q:**  Later, when the Dalai Lama was no more - how was the ceremony held?   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama had passed away the ceremony would be held and all the same prayers are chanted.   

**Q:**  You wouldn't know before hand whether the Dalai Lama had come or not?   

**A:**  Yes, I would know as soon as I enter the gate.   

**Q:**  As you entered, you would see that the throne was empty and only a symbolic cloak was seated on the throne, right?   

**A:**  On that day my heart felt very sad. Tears would come to my eyes without any reason.   

**Q:**  Why is that? At that time, you would not have known that the previous Dalai Lama was ill, right?   

**A:**  I didn't know, but all the same, I felt very sad.   

**Q:**  You must have wondered about your sadness?   

**A:**  I just felt that the Dalai Lama would not live for long.   

**Q:**  Did your colleagues talk among themselves saying that the Dalai Lama will not attend the function?   

**A:**  Yes. They said that the Dalai Lama will not attend the function. Before that, during the day commemorating the death of the Chamchen Chöje [Tib. བྱམས་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྗེ], Shimchö [Tib. བཞི་མཆོད] the Dalai Lama had gone to the Gyümey (Tantric cellege).   

**Q:**  Did he go to Gyümey?   

**A:**  Yes, he had attended the Shimcho at Gyümey. But on the next day, at the main function of the commemorating the death of Tsongkhapa [Tib. ཙོང་ཁ་པ], Ngamchö [Tib. ལྔ་མཆོད] he was not able to come. We heard that he had a little cold.   

**Q:**  Who said this?   

**A:**  It must have been said by his kujar (favorite).   

**Q:**  To whom did they say this?   

**A:**  Our Liaison Officer had heard them.   

**Q:**  I see - they heard that the Dalai Lama was down with cold and he would not be able to attend the function. Did this news about the Dalai Lama illness create a lot of speculation and talk among the monks?   

**A:**  No, it didn't arouse such a stir.   

**Q:**  Then, did it seem sort of empty to you?   

**A:**  Not exactly - I just fell uneasy.   

**Q:**  I see - it's just your personal feeling.   

**A:**  That's right.   

**Q:**  Then - even if the Dalai Lama is not there - still do Kujar and his other retinue like the personal attendant in charge of clothes, the Simpön Khembo [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] stand behind his throne as they do when the Dalai Lama was present?   

**A:**  Yes - they attended it like they did normally.   

**Q:**  Did they still enter the hall, bearing incense and other formal offerings like when the Dalai Lama was present?   

**A:**  Even if such offerings were not made - when he comes to Ramoche, [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  No, not at Ramoche. During the Jongyu at Tse?   

**A:**  No, not during Jongyu.   

**Q:**  Definitely not?   

**A:**  Yes, he would be seated on the throne before hand.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama would be seated on the throne and all of you have to go in and be seated - is that all?   

**A:**  Yes, there is nothing else. They would say - let the monks enter and we would enter.   

**A:**  This was called Jongyu and not the winter audience [Tib. དགུན་མཇལ], right?   

**A:**  That's correct.   

**Q:**  Then on the last day of the month, the Dalai Lama passed away?   

**A:**  Yes. On the 28th and 29th they said that the Dalai Lama's illness has become very serious and they sent out instructions to perform rituals for a speedy recovery. We performed the rituals continuously without sleep at night. We performed the Tsesung [Tib. ཚེ་ཟུངས] and other such rituals. Just before dawn - at the first cock's crow, we had a recess to relieve ourselves and we saw bright flickering lights of the butter lamps of Sera. Then we heard the gongs from the Tse [Potala]. Then our people were saying that the Dalai Lama has left us and everyone became very frightened.   

**Q:**  I see - till that time you had no idea whatsoever?   

**A:**  We didn't know much except for the fact that he was ill.   

**Q:**  You all were assembled and doing your rituals?   

**A:**  Yes - that's correct.   

**Q:**  Didn't they inform the Gyüpa Tratsang saying that the Dalai Lama had passed away?   

**A:**  They informed everyone. They would tell everyone to lower the flags and take off the colored tassel from their braided hair. From these orders everybody knew that the Dalai Lama had passed away.   

**Q:**  At that time, you all were assembled and saying prayers. Didn't any message arrive informing you about the Dalai Lama's death?   

**A:**  No - we didn't receive such information.   

**Q:**  There was no announcement or message to the congregation?   

**A:**  No - nothing.   

**Q:**  I see - during the recess when you all came out you saw the lamps burning in Sera?   

**A:**  Once before, we had a recess, but at that time there were no lamps glittering from Sera. It was dark. On the second recess, Sera, was lit up with lamps.   

**Q:**  When you talk about going to urinate - do they stop the prayers for a while and everyone goes out or is it that any individual who needs to empty his bladder gets up and goes out while the rest continue prayers?   

**A:**  No, they stop the prayer for a while - a recess during which everyone goes out to urinate or stretch their legs. To urinate you have to cross the stairs and relieve yourself at the Lingkor road.   

**Q:**  During first recess there was nothing at Sera? Was it just before the first cock's crow?   

**A:**  Yes - I think just before the first cock's crow - a little after 12 PM.   

**Q:**  Was it on the night of the namgang [Tib. གནམ་གང]? (last date of the month)   

**A:**  Yes, it was the night of the namgang.   

**Q:**  On that day - the first day of the month is missing.   

**A:**  Yes - something like that.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me exactly when the Dalai Lama passed away?   

**A:**  I cannot tell you exactly when the Dalai Lama passed away.   

**Q:**  Didn't someone tell you or have you not heard anything?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anything. I think it was mentioned in some biography.   

**Q:**  I doubt it.   

**A:**  I can't really recollect exactly when the previous Dalai Lama passed away.   

**Q:**  There are a lot of different versions concerning the exact time he passed away. Shakabpa has mentioned in his book that he passed away in the afternoon around 4 or 5 PM. He told us the same time during our interview. But I don't think this is true. It seems more probably that he passed away sometime in the night.   

**A:**  It was during the night.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama's death what does the monastery do?   

**A:**  The Gyütö Tratsang (Upper Tantric College) went to perform rituals at Shabtö [Tib. ཤབ་སྟོད].   

**Q:**  They went down to Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Yes. Both the monks of Gyütö and Gyüme went to Norbulinga. The Gyüme (Lower Tantric College) went to perform the rituals in the yellow palace built by the Dalai Lama Kelsang Gyatso [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ].   

**Q:**  What rituals did they perform?   

**A:**  I think they performed the Sangwa Dupa ritual.   

**Q:**  The Gyütö performed the ritual of Heruka or Dechog [Tib. བདེ་མཆོག]. Then what?   

**A:**  They performed these rituals for a full 20 days.   

**Q:**  I see. For 20 days they performed rituals continuously?   

**A:**  Yes - continuously for 20 days.   

**Q:**  Did you also go to Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there.   

**Q:**  During the ritual, did you doze off - I mean performing the ritual for day and night while the Dalai Lama was ill?   

**A:**  There was no problem. They served us very strong tea with lot of butter in it.   

**Q:**  Did this keep you awake?   

**A:**  We didn't feel sleepy because at that time we were greatly concerned about the Dalai Lama's illness.   

**Q:**  I see - so you performed the Dechog Drubchö [Tib. བདེ་མཆོག་སྒྲུབ་མཆོད]?   

**A:**  Yes - we performed only Drubchö.   

**Q:**  Everyday did you have to perform the ritual Dagjug [Tib. བདག་འཇུག]?   

**A:**  Yes - everyday.   

**Q:**  I think everyone from Gyütö did not come for the ritual?   

**A:**  Everyone had come.   

**Q:**  Did everybody come down to Norbulinga?   

**A:**  During that time our Abbot was the previous one.   

**Q:**  Is it?   

**A:**  Yes - he used to scold us a lot.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  He would say that while performing the ritual - we should not look around but must concentrate on the ritual.   

**Q:**  I see - then the Lama Umdze was the previous Abbot?   

**A:**  I think he was the Lama Umze.   

**Q:**  Don't you think Tashi Namgyal [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] was the Lama Umze?   

**A:**  Yes - he was the Lama Umdze but he was not an Abbot.   

**Q:**  In that case - the previous Abbot was yet to become a Lama Umdze.   

**A:**  Yes, that's true.   

**Q:**  Were you in Norbulinga when they arrested Kunphel la [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས]?   

**A:**  The ritual lasted for about 3 weeks and after that we returned to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  During those 3 weeks Künphel la was arrested, they held a meeting in Norbulinga and Künphel la was sent into exile.   

**A:**  Yes - I think after that we left. We didn't hear anything about it.   

**Q:**  You mean you heard nothing about the meeting they held in Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Yes, the sky was clear, adorned with lot of different kinds of beautiful white clouds.   

**Q:**  Later the body was taken up to Tse?   

**A:**  Yes, they say that later the body was taken up to Tse. At Norbulinga we went to have a last audience - the permitted us to see the body, [Tib. སྐུ་གདུང].   

**Q:**  I know they gave a public audience but while performing the ritual weren't you near the body?   

**A:**  No, the body had been taken straight to the Jensel [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ] palace.   

**Q:**  In the Jensel Palace who were performing the rituals?   

**A:**  The Namgyal Tratsang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང] were performing the Yamantaka or Jigje [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] ritual. There were many Lamas and trüku.   

**Q:**  Like was Phurbuchog [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་ལྕོག] there? Was Ling Rimpoche also there?   

**A:**  I think Ling [Tib. གླིང] Rimpoche was present.   

**Q:**  Phurpuchog was the main Lama?   

**A:**  I heard that the body was facing towards the East.   

**Q:**  That was after he passed away and his body was propped up on the thron, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Sir, that was after the body had been propped up.   

**Q:**  Then in Lhasa, what did they say about Künphel la and his party?   

**A:**  I don't know much about it. I heard that Künphel la and his father had been arrested and they had been put on an ox and taken around the Barkor.   

**Q:**  What is the reason for punishing Künphel la's father like that?   

**A:**  I heard that his father had been misusing his power.   

**Q:**  Is it really true?   

**A:**  Yes, it is true. However, I cannot point out any particular instances where the Kujar have maltreated anyone.   

**Q:**  Have you heard any grumbling and cursing done by the monks? Did not these monks say that its too much - punishing the kujar (favorite) of Dalai Lama right after his death?   

**A:**  Yes, there were many who said that punishing his favorite so soon after his death would really offend the deceased Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Did they say anything about the reason why the kujar is being punished?   

**A:**  They said that kujar didn't look after the Dalai Lama properly, and didn't give him medicine fast enough and furthemore, he didn't inform the Kashag promptly about his failing health.   

**Q:**  There were no other serious charges?   

**A:**  No, no other serious charges.   

**Q:**  After that the Lungshar problem arose. There was a lot of talk about appointing a new Regent. What did you hear?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anything about appointing a new Regent. Reting had to come back.   

**Q:**  Haven't you heard anything about appointing a new Regent and convening meetings for this purpose?   

**A:**  Yes, there was some talk about it, but I don't remember much about that.   

**Q:**  I think they offered a senriy (divine lottery)?   

**A:**  Yes - I think they did.   

**Q:**  The names offered in the senril were Phurbuchog, the Ganden Tripa Amey of Minyag and Reting. The person who offered the senriy was Champa Chödrak [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཆོས་གྲགས], the ex-Tripa Tehor Trisur [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་ཁྲི་ཟུར].   

**A:**  Yes, I think they were the ones.   

**Q:**  Don't you remember these clearly now?   

**A:**  No, I don't remember much.   

**Q:**  Just before the Dalai Lama passed away - at Norbulinga - Phurbuchog, Tehor Trisur, the Kashag and the Silön had sought ab audience in order to ask him [the Dalai Lama] to live longer. However, they had not been granted an audience. However, some say the Phurbuchog Champa Chödrak [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཆོས་གྲགས] was permitted to visit the Dalai Lama, but the Silön and the Kashag were not permitted to see him. Still another source says that none of them were allowed to see the Dalai Lama. When they didn't get to see the Dalai Lama at Norbulinga, they were told to go to Tse. At Tse, in front of the Avalokitaswara statue, all the Government employees gathered and said the prayer known as Phaktö [Tib. འཕགས་སྟོད] in praise of Avalokitaswara. Do you have any comment on this?   

**A:**  I have nothing concrete to say about this.   

**Q:**  You haven't heard about this?   

**A:**  Definitely, I have not heard about it.   

**Q:**  Then Reting was selected as the Regent?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they give an elaborate ceremony of enthronement?   

**A:**  Yes - I think so.   

**Q:**  I think they couldn't have celebrated it on a grand scale since the Dalai Lama had passed away and the period of mourning was not yet over.   

**A:**  While we were doing ritual at Ramoche, they made an offer of thousand butter lamps, torma, incense, flowers and water offerings. I remember that. He was wearing a big garment called Dago [Tib. ད་གུཨ] with a yellow at the top and a rosery of corals.   

**Q:**  You mean Reting Rimpoche?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You mean he had come to attend the ritual?   

**A:**  Yes - he came up for a pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  For what purpose?   

**A:**  He wouldn't attend it regularly. He had come to make his pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  Didn't he sit at the top of the row of the Lama Gyüpa- performing the ritual?   

**A:**  No, he wouldn't. He would go straight to the Jowo [Tib. ཇོ་བོ] statue, offer his khata and other offerings and pray and then leave. On that day, the present Rimpoche's previous incarnation, the ex-abbot told me that Reting was extraordinarily unique. When I asked him the reason, he said that so far he has never seen a shower of flowers till today. This morning, I have seen real flowers raining - flowers of four petals and five petals with stem had fallen with the snow. As you watch them for quite some time they would slowly dissolve into water.   

**Q:**  Yes - Reting is surely extraordinary.   

**A:**  Yes - he told me about this.   

**Q:**  Was it during his throning ceremony?   

**A:**  Yes - when he was being enthroned. This is very clear.   

**Q:**  At that time who was the Abbot of Gyütö?   

**A:**  I wonder who would have been the Abbot. He was the Lama Umdze then Laba Tripa [Tib. ལྭ་བ་ཁྲི་པ] would have been the Abbot.   

**Q:**  Oh! I see - you mean Gen Dramnag la [Tib. རྒན་འགྲམ་ནག]? He is from Sera Mey. Oh no, you mean Lawa Tripa?   

**A:**  yes  

**Q:**  During Reting's Regency, was there any scarcity of commodities?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't any problem.   

**Q:**  The commodities were freely available in the market?   

**A:**  Yes - they were easily available.   

**Q:**  The appointment of higher officials like a Shape, there wasn't any cases or incidents of taking bribes?   

**A:**  I don't think there were any such cases - however, I don't know for sure because later, there were talks about it.   

**Q:**  Later, there were many such cases. At first there were no such cases. Reting personally had nothing to do with it, right?   

**A:**  In the beginning there were no such cases.   

**Q:**  During that time Trimön was one of the Shape, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was.   

**Q:**  Wasn't Shatra the first Shape appointed by Reting? The one who was with Gen Yungdrung [Tib. རྒན་གཡུང་དྲུང] Rimpoche - down in Powo [tib spo bo]. Tsipön Shatra was first appointed as a Shape by Reting.   

**A:**  Yes, that's true. Later he became ill and died.   

**Q:**  He became ill, so later he couldn't be appointed as a Shape formally. In his place Bönshö was appointed as a shape?   

**A:**  Yes - I think it was something like that.   

**Q:**  During that time were there no cases of bribery and corruption?   

**A:**  There were no such cases.   

**Q:**  There were no cases of gifts being accepted in return for favors?   

**A:**  Yes - Yes.   

**Q:**  Whom did Reting appoint as the Lama Umdze?   

**A:**  I think Reting appointed Yongdzin [Tib. ཡོངས་འཛིན] Rimpoche, the Dalai Lama's senior tutor as the Lama Umdze.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me who was appointed as the Lama Umdze of Gyüme?   

**A:**  I am sorry - I don't remember.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Ganden Tripa [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] was Gen Amey [Tib. རྒན་ཨ་མེས] right?   

**A:**  Yes - Gen Amey was the Ganden Tripa.   

**Q:**  After Amey, who became the Abbot?   

**A:**  After Amey, the Tsangpa Tripa [Tib. གཙང་པ་ཁྲི་པ] - the fat one, became the Tripa.   

**Q:**  Yes, the same Tsangpa Tripa - whose reincarnation was later recognized. After him, did Amey became the Tripa?   

**A:**  After Amey, I think Minyak Tongpön [Tib. མི་ཉག་སྟོང་དཔོན] was the Tripa.   

**Q:**  What was he like - this Minyak?   

**A:**  He is the one who went to Drip Tsechokling's [Tib. གྲིབ་ཚེ་མཆོག་གླིང].   

**Q:**  You mean Tongchung [Tib. སྟོང་ཆུང]? That's much later. By that time, I had already reached Lhasa.   

**A:**  Is it? I wonder who could have been in between this gap?   

**Q:**  I think Gen Tripa Dramnag was the Tripa in between.   

**A:**  Yes - that's correct. Dramnag was the one.   

**Q:**  Dramnag Lhündrup Tsöndrü [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས] was there when I arrived. He was the Tripa then. Gen Tongpön was the abbot.   

**A:**  When I was going to Amdo, Tongchung was the Tripa and I think Dramnag was yet to become the Tripa.   

**Q:**  Tongchung came much, much later. Dramnag was the Abbot before Tongpön.   

**A:**  Is it?   

**Q:**  Yes. Dramnag was the Abbot when I joined the monastery. And later Tongpön became the Abbot.   

**A:**  It must be. I am not very definite about it.   

**Q:**  In between these two - there was another Tripa. I wonder who he was?   

**A:**  I wonder?   

**A:**  You should look up in the scripture named Gyetongpa [Tib. བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པ].   

**Q:**  Why check in the Gyetongpa.   

**A:**  In that book they have the photos of the Tripa.   

**Q:**  Really? You mean all the successive Ganden Tripa? Can you tell me till what period that covers?   

**A:**  It covers right up to the present time.   

**Q:**  You mean in this new print of Gyetongpa?   

**A:**  Yes, Sir.   

**Q:**  This is a new print. Before that there was no new print?   

**A:**  Chöndze Kangkyog [Tib. རྐང་ཀྱོག] (Lame) had printed this.   

**Q:**  I see. I didn't know about it. In this, they have mentioned the succession of Ganden Tripas - is it?   

**A:**  In that they have many lamas and monks [Tib. བླ་གྲྭ].   

**Q:**  What are the things they have mentioned? I hadn't taken any notice. I thought it was just the Gyetongpa. I didn't know that they have many lams and the monks   

**A:**  It's definite. They have also mentioned all the successive Ganden Tripas.   

**Q:**  Then the Lungshar problem rose up. What had happened? They had said that he was devil and he has got horns on his head and tail on his rump. People said like that.   

**A:**  It's for sure that people did say like that.   

**Q:**  What are the things he had done - according to the gossip?   

**A:**  I really don't know what all he had done.   

**Q:**  I don't think he had horns and tails?   

**A:**  These are just nonsense.   

**Q:**  I am sure that he didn't have horns and tails. But can you tell me how such talks came about?   

**A:**  The servants would say that when two scorpions were fighting - a black and a white one - he would become very happy if the black wins but if the white wins, he becomes very unhappy. This was just malicious gossip. At that time, there was an old monk from Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ] who was the liaison (Neshen [Tib. སྣེ་ཤན]) Lama Gyüpa to Lungshar. We had to go regularly to his place to perform rituals. He would tell us these things. The main reason is, I think, he tried to bring democracy in Tibet.   

**Q:**  I think they were spreading all cock and bull rumors like he is a devil and so on but the real reason is that he tried to democratize Tibet.   

**A:**  That's the reason for doing away with Lungshar.   

**Q:**  Lungshar had formed a party - popularly known as Kyichog Kündü [Tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས]. Have you heard about this?   

**A:**  I haven't heard about it at all.   

**Q:**  That's the name of his party. The members consisted of tsidrung and lay officials, many kudrak and also many abbots of the three great monasteries. The most important question I have to ask you is - after the 13th Dalai Lama passed away and Künphel la landed into trouble - the Drönyerchemmo died?   

**A:**  Yes. The Kopak Drönyerchemmo passed away.   

**Q:**  How did he die? Kopak must have been involved?   

**A:**  They might have gone to Kopak to perform the ritual. On that day - they say that it was mainly Kopak who scolded Künphel la. I think it was on the day when Künphel la was being ousted.   

**Q:**  It was before that. He was about to be ousted but not yet thrown out.   

**A:**  I don't know exactly on which day it was - but the Drönyerchemmo had scolded Künphel la very badly. On the same night Kopak died.   

**Q:**  Yes, some say that deity Gombo [Tib. མགོན་པོ] of Norbulinga was displeased. This is a popular saying. Along with the Drönyerchemmo, an abbot of Drepung had also died.   

**A:**  I didn't know about that.   

**Q:**  I wonder who the Abbot can be? He had also died under similar circumstances as the Drönyerchemmo. I was told that he had been one of the people who scolded Künphel la. It might be Dülwa Khembo?   

**A:**  It must be Dülwa Khembo.   

**Q:**  At that time what was Dülwa Khembo?   

**A:**  I don't know what responsibilities he had? I am not very familiar with the affairs of Drepung.   

**Q:**  I cannot find out about him.   

**A:**  I think you can find out from the older monks of that period.   

**Q:**  I haven't come across any old monk of that period.   

**A:**  Aren't there any monks from Drepung?   

**Q:**  The oldest monk of Drepung is Gen Pema Gyentsen [Tib. པད་མ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] and Gen Nyima Gyentsen [Tib. ཉི་མ་རྒྱལ་མཚན]. They can't help me.   

**A:**  May be they didn't take much notice about such affairs.   

**Q:**  I guess they wouldn't take much interest about these things. They have to study the books. Now only the senior tutor Ling Rimpoche might know about it but I don't have the courage to ask him - Anyway, an abbot had died on the same night with similar cause. At night he coughed a few times and then died, Kopak also had died similarly. I wonder if the abbot was Dülwa Khembo.   

**A:**  I see. He must have died like that.   

**Q:**  We know precisely how Kopak Drönyerchemmo died because Trekhang of Shöl who later became a shape and the Tseja then, was sharing a room with the Drönyerchemmo. Around midnight, he coughed very seriously. When Trekhang asked him what was wrong he replied that he was in great pain. He asked for water. They gave him water and sent for the Doctor who was nearby. Before the Doctor arrived, he was dead.   

**A:**  It must be.   

**Q:**  Later, they told us that the Abbot from Drepung had died similarly.   

**A:**  Alas! The Gömbo (deity) must have been angered.   

**Q:**  Yes - they told us the same thing. Then later, what happened to Lungshar?   

**A:**  Lungshar was later imprisoned at Shöl - his eyes were gouged out and they put hot oil in the sockets. His screams and the stench of burning flesh reached up to Tse. Such talks were being circulated at that time.   

**Q:**  Who told you these?   

**A:**  I heard like that. It was being said among our Lama Gyüpa.   

**Q:**  Is it? Did they really say like that?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time people were really talking like that.   

**Q:**  My congratulations to you. It's very good that you have told me this. The Ta lama - Jawtang Lengden [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང་ལེགས་ལྡན] gave a lecture to the teacher trainees - and in this he mentioned that when they poured hot oil in Lungshar's eye sockets, the stench of burning of flesh reached up to Tse. Everyone said that. It is a lie.   

**A:**  I definitely heard this.   

**Q:**  They, Lama Gyüpa talk like that but in reality the smell couldn't have reached to Tse.   

**Q:**  Do they say that they heard the scream or do they say that they smelled the stench?   

**A:**  They say that they heard screams and smelled the stench as well.   

**Q:**  You mean he screamed in pain?   

**A:**  Among the Lama Gyüpa, there are many who liked him and they were saying such things. Later, I went to Gyatsoling [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ་གླིང] to make a fire exorcism ceremony for our Tratsang. While returning they were taking Lungshar's body to Gangri Thökar [Tib. གངས་རི་ཐོད་དཀར].   

**Q:**  You mean the body - he was dead?   

**A:**  Yes - he was dead.   

**Q:**  Lungshar didn't die so soon - he lived for quite sometime after his punishment.   

**A:**  I am also talking about much later.   

**Q:**  I see - later when he died - you met his body being taken away for cremation?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How were they talking his body?   

**A:**  In some sort of a palanquin.   

**Q:**  You mean they had put the body in a palanquin?   

**A:**  Yes, they were taking it to Gangri Thokar. The place of Longchen Rabjam [Tib. ཀློང་ཆེན་རབ་འབྱམས].   

**Q:**  Where is it?   

**A:**  It's parallel to Jang [Tib. འཇང] - on the other side of the river where there is a huge monastery.   

**Q:**  You mean the place where Jang Günchö resides?   

**A:**  Opposite to the hill of Jamyang Gonchog's place - across the river.   

**Q:**  Is there a Nyingmapa [Tib. རྙིང་མ་པ] monastery?   

**A:**  Yes - it is the place ofre Shungse Jetsunma [Tib. ཤུགས་གསེབ་རྗེ་བཙུན་མ]. They took the body there.   

**Q:**  What do they call it?   

**A:**  It is known as Gangri Thökar.   

**Q:**  Later, Lungshar's body was taken there. Then Kunphel la, Janglochen Gung and their accomplices were exiled to Kongpo. [Later] They ran away from there,, right?   

**A:**  Who?   

**Q:**  Kunphel la and Janglojen ran away to India - and reached Kalimpong.   

**A:**  How is it? Did they run away or were they sent there on purpose?   

**Q:**  They ran away. Who would sent them on purpose?   

**A:**  I was told that in Kongpo Chamnag [Tib. ཆབ་ནག] - Künphel la was the overseer of the Demo Labrang's construction works in Kongpo.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  Künphel la.   

**Q:**  You mean he was the Overseer of construction works?   

**A:**  Yes, he was generally to supervise the work and plan the constructions. He had carried out this works very efficiently, and therefore, he was released by his custodians.   

**Q:**  Who released him?   

**A:**  Must be someone of authority in that locality. But outsiders would say that he ran away.   

**Q:**  I see. So they say he was sent on purpose?   

**A:**  Yes, they talk along that line.   

**Q:**  I see. It is true that he ran away because the Government had not pardoned him, but he must have been released by his custodians on the sly - in appreciation of his good work. Such things happen.   

**A:**  The Government also did not really investigate the matter. They just let it pass.   

**Q:**  I think the Government did investigate and looked into this matter - didn't they?   

**A:**  I don't know. How do you mean the Government carried out the investigation?   

**Q:**  Of course, they did investigate by sending many letters. It is said that Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] sent a famous letter from Tsöna [Tib. མཚོ་སྣ] with the words, "Lungshar's son Lhalu Sey could get through the investigation by falsely saying that his father was Shelkar Depön. The fair and just system from the three dharma kings of Tibet to the 13th Dalai Lama does not exist and because of the unfair treatment by a few evil people among the authorities, we didn't even get permission to return to one's home land. So we had no choice but to go abroad to seek support for justice." [Tib. lung phrug lha sras skyed byed shel mdar brdzus nas rgyu rkyen gyi go phud/ nged gnyis rang yul rkyang pa tsam la log 'thus gzhung sa'i mi ngan re zung gi byed rtsol la brten nas mdzad dka' 'dug na/ chos rgyal mes dpon rnam gsum nas skyabs mgon sku phreng bcu gsum pa'i bar drang po'i gzhung bsrangs bzhin pa'i lam ni da lta gangs can gyi yul du shul tsam yang med pas/ re zhig nged gnyis phyi rgyal du bden rgab zhu bar mi 'gro ka med byng song]   

**A:**  I have no idea about this.   

**Q:**  Yes, this was a very famous incident. Most of the aristocrats can recite this letter by heart. Now what happened to Trimön? What was the reason that made him resign?   

**A:**  Trimön was the silön for some time and then in between [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  No, he was not the silön. He was a shape.   

**A:**  While he was a shape, he ran away to Drepung.   

**Q:**  That was during Lungshar's problem, right?   

**A:**  He ran away to Drepung and came back only after Lungshar had been arrested.   

**Q:**  At that time did you hear about his escape to Drepung?   

**A:**  Yes - I heard about it.   

**Q:**  What happened. Did it happen on the same day - I mean Trimön's escape and Lungshar being arrested?   

**A:**  I think they had some party members ready. They just couldn't act on time, otherwise they were planning to do something.   

**Q:**  How is it?   

**A:**  It was a power struggle between Lungshar and his opposition. It so happened that Lungshar's opposition was just one step ahead with their prompt action. Actually Government affairs (political maneuvers) are very strange.   

**Q:**  It's a case of whoever acts faster at the right moment.   

**A:**  Something like that.   

**Q:**  Lungshar was a little slower and Trimön was a bit faster to act. Before that, was there any talks among you Lama Gyüpa monks?   

**A:**  No, there was no talk.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any rumor like something is going to happen or someone is going to be killed?   

**A:**  No, there was no talk.   

**Q:**  It is said, there is one guy among Lungshar's party known as Karchung [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང] Depön. This guy would always wear a leather hand glove even during summer. When he was asked why does he wear a leather glove in this summer heat, he would reply that like the previous case of Phola [Tib. ཕོ་ལྷ], one day I will have to hold Trimön by his hair knot or pajog [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག] and the hair ornament might be gold. (an ornament around which the hair is tied - signifying one's rank). One that day, if I don't have a glove on - his hair knot would injure my hand, therefore, I wear it constantly. He is supposed to have volunteered to catch Trimön by his pajok. Trimön is also supposed to have had a lot of Khamba merchants backing him.   

**A:**  If he has - then they must be from the Derge side.   

**Q:**  Were they from Derge? I heard that there were a lot of merchants from Ba [Tib. འབའ]. When Trimön went somewhere - about 6 to 7 Khambas would proceed him and another group would follow him at a discreet distance. Amd along with him, 2 or 3 would accompany him.   

**A:**  The people who are supposed to uphold the Government affairs are rather pathetic.   

**Q:**  It's not only the Government, everywhere in the world it is the same thing. Each is trying to oust the other in order to become more powerful. Once you have entered in this worldly politics, it is like that. Then why did Trimön had to resign? Lungshar and his party had lost. They were arrested, tried and exiled. How did Lhalu get back to his former post?   

**A:**  Yes, he got it back.   

**Q:**  How did it happen?   

**A:**  Didn't it happen during Reting's regime?   

**Q:**  Yes, Reting was still there. It was during Reting's regency that he got demoted and reinstalled.   

**A:**  Kungnö Ta Lama told me that he had never landed in such troubles.   

**Q:**  You mean Ta Lama himself?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Ta Lama did not land in troubles. However, on 2 or 3 occasions, he nearly ended up with serious trouble.   

**A:**  Yes, he nearly got into trouble. On each occasion, he did a exorcism [Tib. གཏོར་རྒྱག] of Sengdongma [Tib. སེང་གདོང་མ], the deity with a lion's face and his trouble would subside. He told me that on many occasions, he nearly got into trouble.   

**Q:**  He himself had done few things which would deserve punishment. But I was told that he had accepted a lot of bribes.   

**A:**  If someone offers - anyone would accept it.   

**Q:**  I think none has ever been so corrupt as Ta Lama. He exhorted lot of bribes.   

**A:**  There must be others.   

**Q:**  I doubt it. It is a very doubtful that anyone has ever accepted more bribes than the Ta Lama. From Demo Labrang alone he has taken very large amounts. From the Para Estate in Tölung he has taken loads and loads of grain as bribes.   

**A:**  You mean the Demo of Tengyeling [Tib. bstan rhyas gling]? He told me that he was on very good terms with the people of Tengyeling.   

**Q:**  That's natural, unless you are on close terms - who would offer him so much in bribes. Unless you know someone well - none will offer a bribe.   

**A:**  The reason why he was on such good terms with Tengyeling is that he was related to the previous Demo Rimpoche. They are from the same house. He further told me that the previous Demo had given him chablug [Tib. ཆབ་བླུག] especially made for him.   

**Q:**  Which previous one?   

**A:**  The previous Demo Rinpoche.   

**Q:**  You mean my late father?   

**A:**  Yes - that one.   

**Q:**  That could be. Anyway, he had received countless khe of grain from the Para Estate. Once during a Tsidrung's picnic, where all the Tsidrung were gathered and they were listening to a radio program from India, they were turning the knob around - trying to get a better reception when all of a sudden they heard a wireless message being transmitted. They had intercepted a wireless communication between Dartsedo and Lhasa - from the Pomda [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] family to its agent in Lhasa. In it they were saying you must request the Kungnö Ta Lama properly. The reply said that they had already requested him and also had offered him 30 boxes of brick tea. They replied back saying that you must request him properly so do you think 30 boxes is enough? All the while the Tsidrung who were having their annual summer picnic had gathered round the radio and were listening to exchange of communication. Ta Lama sat with his head bowed down.   

**A:**  He was sitting with his head bowed?   

**Q:**  Yes, now they would not know that everyone - including Ta Lama were listening to their talks.   

**A:**  While I was there, there was no such talk concerning this incident.   

**Q:**  Accepting gifts or bribes is not bad as such. All big officials accept it. In India bribery is on such a massive scale that the bribery scale in Tibet is like child's play. In India they talk in crores of rupees and with bribery they change the policy of the country. The highest bribe ever paid was 50,000 dotse by Surkhang or a small basketful of gold.   

**A:**  That's true. Isn't there a street song concerning this - something like Surkhang erecting a golden brick wall?   

**Q:**  "Raised a wall of gold bricks and erected a prayer flag on the corner [Tib. གསེར་གྱི་རྩིག་པ་བརྩིགས་ནས་། ཟུར་ལ་དར་ལྕོག་བཙུགས་སོང] .   

**A:**  Then there is another song which talks about "Sending a golden message and breaking his wife's right hip..."   

**Q:**  That was before that. "A Golden arrow, from Kapshoba's roof top, broke the right hip of the Lady of Yabshi." [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་ཐོག་ཁའི་སྒང་ནས། གསེར་གྱི་མདའ་བོ་བཏང་སོང། ཡབ་གཞིས་ལྷ་ལྕམ་སྐུ་ཞབས། དཔྱི་མགོ་གཡས་པ་བཅག་སོང]. That song was sung when Kapshöba and Lungshar had some problems and later when Kapshöba became a tsipön. "Kapshöba with his wizardry flew a golden plane after circling in space, he landed in the Tsikhang." [Tib. ka shod sprul pa mkhas nas/ gser gyi gnam gru btang nas/ gnam gru lding skor bryab nas/ rtsis khang nang la bab song] This song refers to his various antics in order to become an additional tsipön. He had the audacity to ask for the post of shape. But he had to be content with the post of tsipön.   

**A:**  Kapshöba was very infamous for bribing.   

**Q:**  Kapshöba was a real trouble-maker - he got involved in everyone's affair. During Lungshar's downfall, he had his hand there too. Isn't it?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  He was one of the main antagonists of Lungshar. What did Kapshöba do? Do you have any idea?   

**A:**  Kapshöba what?   

**Q:**  What were his accusations against Lungshar?   

**A:**  I have not heard anything definite.   

**Q:**  Some source says that Lungshar held Kapshöba like this and said in front of the investigators, "Please, keep quiet now." Kapshöba said, "Look he is holding me like this and asking me to keep quiet!" "Another source says that it is not like this at all. According to it he is supposed to have said "Now that's enough, keep your mouth shut. Till now you have been living like a lackey to me and you have received a few favors from me. So, hold your tongue." Kapshöba replied, "If you had granted me a few favors I have already worked for them like if you did the worth of one khagang [Tib. ཁ་གང], I have bribed you 5 karma [Tib. སྐར་མ]. After your bid to overturn and destroy the Governmen, whatever little loyalty I had, I will not support you. It is like the proverb, "Even if the religious practitioner got drunk, he won't change his skull cup with chang." [Tib. རྟོགས་ལྡན་ཆང་གིས་བཟི་ཡང། ཀ་ལི་ཆང་དང་རྒྱག་གི་མ་རེད]. Haven't you heard about this?   

**A:**  I have never heard anything like this - really.   

**Q:**  Reting Rinpoche resigned. But why did Trimön also resign? The person who had disliked him was Lungshar and he had already been fixed. He (Trimön) had gone with Reting to Lhamo Latso [Tib. ལྷ་མོ་བླ་མཚོ], the lake of vision and also renovated the Samye monastery. After doing all this, why did he resign?   

**A:**  He himself wanted to resign.   

**Q:**  There must be a reason for his resignation?   

**A:**  I have no idea about it.   

**Q:**  Do they say that Trimön became insane?   

**A:**  Yes - he became slightly crazy.   

**Q:**  Did he become insane after resigning as a shape or before that?   

**A:**  I think it was before he resigned from shape. Early one morning he came to Ramoche wearing raw silk monk dress. At first it seemed that he had an attendant with him, but later there were no servants with him. He had brought his wife with him.   

**Q:**  Would he come all of a sudden? Does he live nearby?   

**A:**  Actually he came from Trimön.   

**Q:**  You mean from the market place Wontö Shinga [Tib. འོན་སྟོད་ཞིང་ག] near Trimön house?   

**A:**  Yes - that is right. He came from there.   

**Q:**  He went insane before he resigned from shape?   

**A:**  That's right. He would become mentally unstable at certain times and in other periods he becomes sane and lucid.   

**Q:**  I see - was he like that from before? Maybe that's the reason why he resigned?   

**A:**  That could be it.   

**Q:**  Maybe Reting made him resigned without embarrassing him?   

**A:**  Possibly.   

**Q:**  After that, what's the reason behind Reting's resignation?   

**A:**  They say that Taktra had something to do with his resignation.   

**Q:**  What's that?   

**A:**  Some say that Reting told him that he would like to take leave for a few years. During that period he must accept the regency. Taktra refused at first, but after much insistence he agreed. There is a prophecy concerning this.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  They say that according to the prophesy, Taktra had to become the Regent. Once when the famous Amdo Jayan Sheba came to Lhasa, when he was leaving, he was supposed to have left the canopy at Drepung Gomang and told them to give it to Taktra because one day he will need to use it. So goes the legend.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for Reting's resignation?   

**A:**  None told him to resign.   

**Q:**  Was it a voluntary resignation?   

**A:**  One minor cause could be this. The Shungse Jetsünma of Gangri Thökar had suggested that he should resign for a few years, since they were going to be very unfavorable to him.   

**Q:**  Why did he suggest that?   

**A:**  He said that the next few years were not good for him.   

**Q:**  This Shungse Jetsünma, was he a very renowned holy lama?   

**A:**  This was not so famously known - like any ordinary lama. He was a she (female lama). She would say that bad times are coming and it is not good because she can smell the gunpowder. She kept on saying this before the communists came. Then she went to see the Regent.   

**Q:**  There are two tales concerning the resignation of the Regent. According to one - it is said that by nature, Reting was a very carefree and fun loving man. Therefore, he found the running of the Government involves lot of minor problems and headaches, like sending numerous reports to the Kashag and Yigtsang. Since he loved fun and excitement, these tedious tasks made him very unhappy and suffocating. Therefore, he did not want to continue as the Regent. He told them that the stars and times were bad and he wants to go into retreat and meditate for a few years. However, he did not go into meditational retreat. According to the other version - he had not been able to keep his vows as a monk. Therefore, since the time was drawing near for the Dalai Lama to accept his vows as a monk. Since Reting happened to be the young Dalai Lama's senior tutor as well as the Regent, he had to ordain the Dalai Lama and accept his monk's vow. This made the situation very delicate for the Regent. He could not refuse to ordain the Dalai Lama and yet at the same time he himself had broken his monk's vow, therefore, his conscience would not allow him to pretend. Therefore, he resigned. I don't know which of the above two versions is correct but it has got to be one of them.   

**A:**  Kungnö Ta Lama told me that it was because he would not keep up his vows of a monk. He says that there are letters of his which was written that he took the Lady Jogtre [Tib. ལྕོག་བཀྲས] as his consort.   

**Q:**  You mean the part which made him abstain from ordaining the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  One day she had some disputes and she came to the Ta Lama's place. He had asked me to observe how she was.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  That the Jogtre's wife would come to his place and I was to observe how she was. She was a thin woman with smallpox marks on her face. After that I asked if it was really true that she and the Regent Reting were involved in an affair? He told me that it was because he had seen letters and gifts coming to her from the Regent. He used to lavish her with gifts.   

**Q:**  Yes, I heard that too. He used to give her lots of gifts.   

**A:**  She said that she did not need all the gifts.   

**Q:**  Who said this?   

**A:**  Jogtre's wife said that. She had returned all the gifts. She wouldn't accept them. In the letter Reting had told her "You forget about that lay official Jogtre. You come over to Reting. It is better." She replied that it's impossible to come Reting - so please forgive me and you must excuse me because this would violate karma. Now, if you ask me to come to Lhasa, I would come willingly and serve you as before." She had not accepted any of the gifts sent by the Regent.   

**Q:**  I think he used to sent lots of gifts. His were not ordinary ones. Gifts coming from Reting Rinpoche would always be in large amount and generous. It would be any amount - one hundred dotse to six hundred dotse. On top of that he would send rice, butter, meat and so on. To his servants also he would give such gifts generously. At that time, such amounts were incredible. Reting would also send gifts to the Baso [Tib. བྲག་གསེབ] Lama like 200-500 dotse. At that time, it was a great amount.   

**A:**  At that time, there was scarcity of money so it was really a huge sum.   

**Q:**  Therefore, I think the latter version seems more plausible in this case - I mean as a reason for Reting's resignation.   

**A:**  I think it seems like that.   

**Q:**  You mean Jogtre's wife?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Later, Delek Rabten [Tib. བདེ་ལེགས་རབ་བརྟན] of Tsang told something?   

**A:**  The lady was quite old by that time.   

**Q:**  You mean she was quite old? She must be something special.   

**A:**  She was someone extraordinary.   

**Q:**  She must be a dakini [Tib. མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ], right?   

**A:**  Yes - she was someone special.   

**Q:**  She must be a dakini. Reting Rinpoche was a great Lama.   

**A:**  That is for sure.   

**Q:**  He was not only a Lama well versed in the academic field but in practice also he had reached a very high stage.   

**A:**  Once he had closed the mouth of a pot as if it was wet clay.   

**Q:**  And in Reting you can still see how had driven a wooden stake into a rock.   

**A:**  This must be at Lhoka?   

**Q:**  Yes - at Lhoka, at his birth place, you can see this miracle. Later due to Karma, it happened that he had to keep a wife and resign from the Regency.   

**A:**  You can call it fate or you can say that it was Tibet's bad luck or demerit [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་དམན་པ].   

**Q:**  Anyway, on the 1st of the New Year, Taktra became the Regent?   

**A:**  I think so too. At that time he also came similarly.   

**Q:**  You mean Taktra?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Taktra was also a very learned scholar as well as a religious teacher, so why did he wear a Dagozi?   

**A:**  I heard that the Dagozi was an honor conferred upon him by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  We are not Chinese. He did not have to wear this dress. Did Taktra wear this Dagozi?   

**A:**  Yes, he wore it.   

**Q:**  He had a coral beads?   

**A:**  I don't know if he wore a coral bead. He was wearing a red shawl. The Dagozi is rank conferred upon him by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  No, it's not China but the Mongolians who had conferred this rank upon him. Actually it would have been better if he had not worn this dress.   

**A:**  He was wearing the Dagozi and everyone was scared of him.   

**Q:**  Since everyone had received religious teachings from him, everyone was scared of him - which was natural.   

**A:**  Yes - they would hold him in awe. Even I had received his teachings.   

**Q:**  He was also a great lama. He is supposed to be the true incarnation of Jigje, Yamantaka.   

**A:**  I believe so.   

**Q:**  He shouldn't have worn this dress. Reting could have worn it since it was normally accepted. Reting had requested Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] to accept the Regency - did you know about that?   

**A:**  No, I didn't know about it.   

**Q:**  That is true, I had heard this.   

**A:**  That could be. They liked each other and were friends.   

**Q:**  I had asked the Chandzö of the Phabongkha Lama and he told me that it is true. He said, they received a message written on a wooden slate [Tib. ཕྱག་སམ]. He further told me that he had advised his master not to accept it when he was asked by his master as what to do? He had said that whatever they are is enough and they don't need any more power or prestige. Now, we don't know whether this is true or not, but the fact that they received a written message on Samtra from the Regent asking Phapongkha to accept his post is definitely true.   

**A:**  That's a certainty.   

**Q:**  Reting had been searching for a person to take over his place?   

**A:**  That's normal since he wanted to resign.   

**Q:**  It is also said that the Regent had asked Demo Rinpoche to accept the Regency. Kündeling Dzasa told me that I could find this letter concerning the offer at Tharchin Babu's place. I searched for it thoroughly but I didn't find it.   

