#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0216.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Tando Rimpoche [Tib. དར་མདོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Kalimpong, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Tando Rimpoche [Tib. དར་མདོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tando Rimpoche [Tib. དར་མདོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] was a well-known Gelugpa incarnate lama from Drepung Monastery who later lived in India. In this interview, he discusses in detail the events surrounding the death of the 13th Dalai Lama and the struggles of Kujar and Lungshar after the Dalai Lama's death, as well as the death of the Drönyerchemmo Kongpo and about how the Ganden Tripa Ami was almost punished for doing the wrong divination about the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0216_01/H_0216_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  His Holiness the Thirteenth Dalai Lama passed away in the Water Bird Year and in the Water-Monkey year (the preceding year) he issued a testament which is well known as 'The Water-Monkey Year Testament.' [Tib. ཆུ་སྤྲེ་ཞལ་གདམས]. You might have been in your monastery at that time. Could you tell me under what circumstances this testament was issued?   

**A:**  I cannot say the real reason for issuing this testament, but I learned that there were indications of the Dalai Lama's dissatisfaction with how the government officials were working.   

**Q:**  Was the Dalai Lama unwell at that time?   

**A:**  I think that probably he was not ill at that time.   

**Q:**  Later, on the 24th or the 25th, he could not attend the ceremonies at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྟོད] The Upper Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyütö</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] The Lower Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüme</a> - one of them meant going too far. So for how long had he been sick?   

**A:**  I think he wasn't ill for many days. When Phurchog Champa [Tib. ཕུར་ལྕོག་བྱམས་པ] Rimpoche and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> [Tib. རྨེ་རུ] Trisur [Tib. རྨེ་རུ་ཁྲི་ཟུར] Rimpoche appealed for a private audience to request him to [live long], Kujar didn't let them in. This was what I heard at that time. I was very young and was in the monastery. On the morning of the 30th day of the month we were called to an urgent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a> (morning prayer assembly] and I went too. As I went there I saw a few monks in tears. Since I was too young at that time, I could not understand why they were weeping. When I asked my fellow monks what had happened, they said, 'Now our luck has dried up,' [Tib. ད་བསོད་ནམས་སྐམ་སོང]. Still I could not understand what they meant and I didn't dare to ask people. Only when I reached my room and asked my teacher, he scolded me saying, "How dull-headed are you? Didn't you hear the shengo reading the letter requesting the prayers [Tib. སྐྱབས་ཐོ]? The Dalai Lama has passed away." I came to know then.   

**Q:**  I don't think it was in the morning of the 30th. He passed away in the evening of the 30th.   

**A:**  It must be, then it was on the first day of the month.   

**Q:**  It seems the first day was missing that year [according to the Tibetan calendar]. The monks of Drepung monastery were served <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. They were told that it was an emergency and everyone had to attend the prayer session with tea. At that time we didn't know. Otherwise, I heard that they had also offered butter lamps all over Drepung. My <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> was situated independently and we didn't have any relations with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a>, hence we did not know about it. We didn't receive any message.   

**Q:**  Were you not required to pull down the fringes and the curtains of your windows and doors?   

**A:**  This was done only during the day. We did not know about it earlier.   

**Q:**  Did you have to pull down the banners made from yak hair [Tib. ཐུག] and the victory banner from rooftops too?   

**A:**  No. You didn't have to pull down the whole banner, only the crest of the banner, like the trident crest. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར] Drunyichemmo was at that time in charge of all these. He has been newly appointed as a drunyichemmo. Just before the demise of the Dalai Lama, Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] too was appointed.   

**Q:**  Had Jawdang been already appointed at that time?   

**Q:**  He was appointed before the Dalai Lama passed away. He was the youngest among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>   

**Q:**  He was called Lengdenla [Tib. ལེགས་ལྡན་ལགས] right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time they gave the monks a three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> coin for the first time, so the people called it the unlucky coin [Tib. ཁ་ནག་སྒོར་མོ].   

**Q:**  When did they give this coin?   

**A:**  They gave it just before the Dalai Lama passed away.   

**Q:**  You mean the coin was printed before that, but this was the first time it was given to the monks as alms, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the monastery perform any special rituals?   

**A:**  Yes, they recited the Lama Chöpa [Tib. བླ་མ་མཆོད་པ] prayer and made offerings. Other than this, there weren't any special rituals. Drepung had no such special traditions.   

**Q:**  What did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> do?   

**A:**  We went for the morning prayer assembly and then returned to our monk's apartment. The monks chanted the Lama Chöpa prayer and made <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོག] 1. An offering made of tsamba, butter and dry cheese in the shape of a cone. 2. A prayer assembly meeting in monasteries when all the monks come to an assembly hall and chant prayers together.">tshog</a> offerings.   

**Q:**  At night they burned butter lamps on the house tops. Otherwise, there were no other activities, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then for a quite a number of days, mourning was observed and banners and flags were taken down.   

**Q:**  Did the shengo hold the staff in his hand during the prayer assembly?   

**A:**  Yes. He did.   

**Q:**  Did he wear the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> as well?   

**A:**  I was not paying attention to that.   

**Q:**  I heard that the government lay officials had to remove the crest of their hats. I wonder what the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> did. So, did the monasteries observe the "weekly ritual" prayers called Duntsig [Tib. བདུན་ཚིགས] [ NOTE: According to Tibetan death rituals, these weekly rituals are observed for seven weeks beginning six days from the day the person died.]   

**A:**  No such rituals were done by the monasteries. Whatever rituals and prayers the government did, the monasteries only observed the mourning. The government did many things like the Dalai Lama tutors performed rituals for the remains [Tib. གདུང་སྒྲུབ].   

**Q:**  So after this came the Kujar trouble?   

**A:**  Yes. I heard that the medium of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> was terminated for offering the wrong medicine to the Dalai Lama. Also the doctor Amji Champa [Tib. བྱམས་པ] was demoted and exiled.   

**Q:**  What did the medium do?   

**A:**  The medium was Gowo Chösur. He told his servant to bring the medicine bag.   

**Q:**  Was that the medium or the protective deity?   

**A:**  It was kind of strange. At the beginning it was the medium and then it was the deity. Actually, since the medium was not in trance, he couldn't have told them to bring the medicine bag, right?   

**Q:**  I heard that the oracle came into trance without invoking the deity?   

**A:**  I have not heard that.   

**Q:**  I heard that he I heard that he came into trance without invoking and told his servant to bring him the medicine bag. Anyway, was the medium himself a doctor?   

**A:**  No. He wasn't.   

**Q:**  Then how did he ask his servant to bring him the medicine bag?   

**A:**  I don't know. I have no knowledge of him being a doctor.   

**Q:**  Anyhow, the medicine was offered to the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  It was said that a medicine was offered and that the medicine was the wrong one.   

**Q:**  It was said that he offered the Tibetan medicine dephinium trichorum [Tib. ག་བུར] for the fever disease and it was also said that the medicine 'Chamjom Powo Judun' [Tib. དཔའོ་བཅུ་བདུན] or Jubzhi [Tib. བཅུ་བཞི] was offered?   

**A:**  Yes, that was the medicine. After it had already been taken by the ailing Dalai Lama, they said it was the wrong medicine.   

**Q:**  Such are the stupidities they indulged in, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then after the death of the Dalai Lama, Kujar, his favorite, was accused of not allowing Phurchog Rimpoche and Trisur Rimpoche to have a private audience with the Dalai Lama. That was the primary charge leveled against him. But basically, Kujar's harsh and bullying predictions had nurtured animosity in the heart of many of the officials. Another charge against him was that he had not informed anyone about the illness of the Dalai Lama. Kujar's defense was that he had informed the Kashag. He said that he had personally gone to the Kashag to inform them. This was revealed when he was called for interrogation. Kujar had the chance to speak in his defense but there was no one to support him.   

**Q:**  Kujar was called for interrogation for two days?   

**A:**  Yes. That's true.   

**Q:**  The 13th Dalai Lama had reportedly handed over a bunch of letters to Kujar <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] which he kept in his own house. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and his supporters were said to be after these letters. When Lungshar learnt that the letters were in the possession of Kujar, he went to see Kujar with lot of gifts under the pretext of consoling Kujar on the demise of the 13th Dalai Lama. During this meeting, Lungshar told Kujar that "Since the Dalai Lama has passed away, many things could happen, so under such circumstance we should remain united." And he got Kujar to burn all those letter. Those letters were said to be personal letters sent by Lungshar to the Dalai Lama which contained criticisms against all the officials in power. The Dalai Lama is said to have handed over these letters to Kujar. Did you hear about this?   

**A:**  I have not heard about it. I was a child at that time, but even later I did not hear about such letters.   

**Q:**  There is a group of people who say this. They claim to have talked personally with Kujar regarding this.   

**A:**  It seems Kujar must not have been aware of the importance of those letters. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s request to burn the letters should have aroused Kujar's suspicions.   

**Q:**  It is said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> went to Kujar many times, like once in the morning and then again in the evening. Then when was the Tsondu called?   

**A:**  The Tsondu was called immediately after the demise of the Dalai Lama. Wasn't your tutor the abbot of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>?   

**A:**  No. He wasn't.   

**Q:**  Who was the abbot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> at that time? Who was the abbot of Loseling?   

**A:**  It was Lhopa Khembo. He was the abbot during the reign of Reting too. His predecessor Gowo Khembo Lodrö Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་རྒྱལ་མཚན] completed his term of office after giving the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> of Rigdra twice. Then Lhopa Khembo took over from him and he also gave the tonggo of Rigdra twice. After Lhopa Khembo, it was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Khembo [Tib. གཙང་པ་མཁན་པོ]. At that time I was in the monastery. He was a nice person and didn't make people suffer, but he had to resign owing to inefficiency and lapses of his servants, the one became the laja and the one who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> chöndze and was related to the Samye Khenchö [Tib. བསམ་ཡས་མཁན་ཆོས]. He was otherwise efficient, but not authoritative. Much later, there was even talk that he was drinking alcohol. Later he could not fulfill his religious obligations and he succumbed to disease [Tib. གྲིབ] and died. The laja too died.   

**Q:**  Did he succumb to this disease during his abbotship or later?   

**A:**  The abbot succumbed to it after his resignation and after he had handed over his abbotship. He came to my tutor for treatment, but could not get completely cured.   

**Q:**  Who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Abbot at that time?   

**A:**  I am not sure who the abbot was at that time because there were frequent changes of abbots of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> at that time. At the time the abbot was Lodrö Gyentsen or it was the Mongolian Wöser Dorje [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་རྡོ་རྗེ]?   

**Q:**  The famous one, right?   

**A:**  Yes, then it was the abbot from Hor with the bald head and the one called Lama Shang and Chömpel Söpa [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་བཟོད་པ] from Lhawangling [Tib. ལྷ་དབང་གླིང].   

**Q:**  Could you tell me about Kujar <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> episode and his subsequent exile?   

**A:**  What I have heard was that in the beginning <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> had suggested to the Tsondu that Kujar should be made the Regent, but later things happened otherwise as Kujar was put in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> [Tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོག] prison. I don't know what really happened. Kujar's father was put in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> prison. Finally on the 29th of the 12th month [two days before the Tibetan New Year], both Kujar and his father were sent into exile on the same day. One was sent going clockwise around the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> and the other going counter-clockwise around the Barkor.   

**Q:**  Why did they arrest Kujar's father?   

**A:**  I heard the father used Kujar's name and made the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> suffer a lot. When some people warned him not to do that too much, he would say, "No problem, we have to chase the donkey when it goes."   

**Q:**  So the father seemed to be powerful. Later on I heard that Kujar didn't have any property, what happened?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether Kujar himself had a private house because he stayed with the Dalai Lama. But there was lot of talk that the father built houses and so on.   

**Q:**  He was like sharing the livelihood the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Later he built the Jensel [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ] Palace which was supposed to be his, but later it was owned by the government. On the day when Kujar was exiled. [not finished] Ultimately, I heard that some front part of this palace was given to Kujar during the period of the two sitsab. It was when Kujar came back from China that he got the front part of the palace. We all heard the moaning sound of the hills near Drepung. We all heard the moaning and whining sound of the hills. At that moment my tutor said to me, "I am old and will not live long, but you are young and will live to see the day [when it is clear about Kujar]. Whether he was good or bad, Kujar was the favorite of the Dalai Lama. He was like the pores on his skin and meting out such ill treatment to him will definitely bring unhappiness and evil times. We will never be happy." He said these words. Kujar was exiled on the 29th of the last month of the year. That day the hills moaned and the sound died down slowly on the eastern side.   

**Q:**  Sometime before or after the banishment of Kujar, Drönyerchemmo Kongpo died suddenly and an Abbot of Drepung too died under similar circumstances. Do you know about these?   

**A:**  I don't know about these in detail, but I think it was the Dülwa Khembo, the one who used to be the tutor to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>, who died.   

**Q:**  Under what circumstances did these two die?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  There are two versions. One version has it that they were given poison, while the second version says that Gombo, the protector deity of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, was annoyed. Whatever may be the cause of their death, they died on the same night under similar circumstances. I am not sure whether one of them was the Dülwa Khembo, but the other one was definitely Kongpo Drönyerchemmo. On the night when Kongpo died, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Trekhang, who later became <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama, was sleeping with him in the same room. Around midnight, he heard Kongpo coughing. Trekhang woke up and asked him what was happening. Soon Kongpo vomited blood and fell down, never to rise again. They had no time to call the doctor. The Dülwa Khembo too died that same night. One group of people maintained that both the Dülwa Khembo and Kongpo were supporters of Kujar, and another group says that they challenged Kujar, hence it annoyed Gombo, the deity who caused their end. Whether it was Gombo's wrath or not, they did die.   

**A:**  I definitely heard that the Dülwa Khembo died and he was the tutor to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>, but I don't know about Kongpo.   

**Q:**  It was two, three days after the demise of the 13th.   

**A:**  I am not sure about the date.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the main force who backed and caused Kujar's downfall and exile, right?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was there at that time, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was the most powerful official at that juncture.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was a shape so he had no influence or power in the Tsondu.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and his group were the main force in the Tsondu gyendzom.   

**Q:**  At that time, from Sera, the monks like the one nicknamed "the big horse," Tikijag, Chamsur la [Tib. བྱམས་ཟུར་ལགས] and from Drepung Sog Depa [Tib. སོག་སྡེ་པ] also attended the Tsondu. Who was this Sog depa?   

**A:**  He was from Gomang.   

**Q:**  I don't understand how they were allowed to attend the Tsondu?   

**A:**  They might have attended the Tsondu as representatives.   

**Q:**  But only the abbots can attend the Tsondu as representatives.   

**A:**  I think a precedent was established during the time of the Lönchen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བློན་ཆེན་བཤད་སྒྲ] when the Ganden Chandzö Naring and some Drepung monks attended the Tsondu. Ganden Chandzö Naring is said to have attended the Kashag too. Later he became the Jigyab Khembo, the highest ecclesiastical officer. His real name was Khembo Palden Thöndrub [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་དོན་གྲུབ]. So there was such a tradition by which not only the abbots but also other monks could attend the Tsondu. This tradition was discontinued during the reign of the 13th Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  So was it revived just after the demise of the 13th?   

**A:**  Yes. I am not sure whether they were sent by the laji or whether the government officials suggested that in addition to the abbots, efficient and able persons from the monastic side should attend the Tsondu. Tikijag and others were very popular figures at that time.   

**Q:**  What was the talk in the [Drepung] monastery, when Reting Rimpoche became the Regent?   

**A:**  It was said at that time that the 13th Dalai Lama visited Reting a year before his demise and had shown great fondness and good will towards Reting Rimpoche and was believed to have confided in him many things during their meeting. The 13th had even presented him the "dice" he used for divination calculations.   

**Q:**  Did you hear about this during that same period?   

**A:**  Yes. It was said that the reason why Reting Rimpoche was appointed the Regent was that he was already approved by the 13th.   

**Q:**  Actually, the appointment was done through a "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a>," lottery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The candidates who were proposed were Reting, Minyag Ami [Tib. མི་ཉག་ཨ་མེས] and Phurbujog Rimpoche. Although they were all high lamas, Reting Rimpoche seemed to be the right person.   

**Q:**  What about Phurbujog Rimpoche?   

**A:**  He was very a learned and a knowledgeable person, but was limited in political matters.   

**Q:**  If so, then why his name was proposed as a candidate?   

**A:**  He was the tutor to the 13th Dalai Lama. Besides, people said that the 13th had special respect and affection for him. He used to call him to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, take teachings from him, and also used to take him around the palace for a walk and show him many flowers. However, when the Dalai Lama asked him did you see that flower, he always says that he was not paying attention. Therefore the Dalai Lama would be unhappy and even scolded the servants and he also told Phurbujog that I heard that your servants need to help you to tie your belt. I could tie my belt by myself even when I was young.   

**Q:**  Minyag Ami too was a strange character.   

**A:**  He was the reigning <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a>. He was a great person, but at the same time he was frank and ingenuous and naive and unsophisticated. Such a person was not fit to be Regent. He was, at that time, the reigning Ganden Tripa and Champa Chödrag was the ex-Ganden Tripa. Champa Chödrag was twice appointed Ganden Tripa.   

**Q:**  How was this done?   

**A:**  It was done through the arbitrary wish of the Dalai Lama. Actually, there was an ex-Ganden Tripa called Jangyab Trisur [Tib. ལྕང་རྒྱབ་ཁྲི་ཟུར], but Champa Chödrag was appointed again.   

**Q:**  In this the way the Sharjang Chöje [Tib. ཤར་བྱང་ཆོས་རྗེ] lost his chance to become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There was no choice.   

**Q:**  How did they manage the turns of being the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a>? The turn was Changtse Chöje's [Tib. བྱང་རྩེ་ཆོས་རྗེ], right?   

**A:**  Yes, Jangyab Trisur must be Shartse. The 13th Dalai Lama was very arbitrary and would always want to have everything his own way and would not listen to anybody.   

**Q:**  Yes, he was very strict and powerful.   

**A:**  Yes. He used to select the monks with good voices from the Lama <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་པ] The two Tantric Colleges in Lhasa: the Upper Tantric College and the Lower Tantric College.">Gyüpa</a> for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྲྭ་ཚང] The monastery of the Dalai Lama located in the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Namgye Tratsang</a>, his personal monastery. He even appointed the ex-shengo as the Dalai Lama's personal attendant in charge of offerings, the Chöpön, and clothes, the Simpön Khembo [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], although this was usually appointed from among the monks of Namgye Tratsang.   

**Q:**  The personal attendant in charge of the offering, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] One of the three monk attendants of the Dalai Lama. He was in charge of religious offerings/rituals.">Chöpön Khembo</a> [Tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], was appointed from among the monks of Namgye Tratsang.   

**A:**  Yes, actually the Simpön Khembo was appointed from among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> ranks, but Tsatrül Rimpoche was appointed as the Simpön Khembo after the ex-shengo of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> was appointed as the Simpön Khembo. The 13th disregarded all the rules of tradition. This certainly created much discomfort in the hearts of many, but nobody could speak against him.   

**Q:**  What were the achievements of Reting Rimpoche during his Regency?   

**A:**  The country experienced great peace and prosperity. With respect to wars, things seemed to have been settled amicably through peaceful talks.   

**Q:**  Which war are you referring too?   

**A:**  It was during the Reting period that he sent his emissaries to China and it was said that they returned with success.   

**Q:**  What was the "trouble" at that time?   

**A:**  It seems some trouble had come up between the Tibetan and Chinese governments and Reting sent his emissaries to Chiang Kaishek to settle the matter.   

**Q:**  Who did he send?   

**A:**  I don't remember the names of the officials sent by him, but it was said that they were sent with gifts of golden cup stands for the Chinese ruler. Actually, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> office was functioning in China, at that time.   

**Q:**  Was there a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> at that time?   

**A:**  It seems some trouble had come up between the Tibetan and Chinese governments and Reting sent his emissaries to Chiang Kaishek to settle the matter.   

**Q:**  Who did he send?   

**A:**  I don't remember the names of the officials sent by him, but it was said that they were sent with gifts of golden cup stands and lids for the Chinese ruler. Actually, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> office was functioning in China at that time.   

**Q:**  Was there a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> office in China at the that time? At the time of the 13th's demise?   

**A:**  It was there, but it might have been discontinued after the 13th Dalai Lama declared Tibet's independence. Actually, China never had a stable leadership, they were always engaged in civil wars.   

**Q:**  What kind of trouble did Tibet have with the Chinese during Reting Rimpoche's period?   

**A:**  Some trouble surely arose during Reting time, but because of the merit of Reting, Chiang Kaishek also respected him very highly. The elders used to say that Reting Rimpoche was a very fortunate ruler and that everything was settled peacefully and with much success. It was also said that the then Chinese ruler showered great honor and respect on Reting. Later it was also said the Reting was the suppressor of China.   

**Q:**  Could you now tell me about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> trouble   

**A:**  The talk that circulated in public was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was a devil-incarnate and that he practiced black magic and even cursed the 13th Dalai Lama and Reting. The rumors we heard at that time said that he had even attempted his black art on the 13th Dalai Lama and he held a meeting in the house called Ngagkhang [Tib. སྔགས་ཁང] and took signatures on blank paper and Dakpo Drumpa [Tib. dwags po bhrum pa] who was related to the 13th Dalai Lama, refused to sign the paper. Drumpa was normally said to be bit eccentric and a very sleepy person. At that moment too, when Lungshar asked for his signature, he was found dozing. When he woke up and saw the plain paper on which he was to sign, he openly refused to sign on it. He then stood up and walked straight out in the middle of the gathering and reported this to the Drönyerchemmo Apso.   

**Q:**  Apso and Kongpo, are they two different persons?   

**A:**  Yes. Kongpo was appointed after the death of Apso. When I went to take the monk's vow from the Dalai Lama, it was coincident with the enthronement of Kongpo and I heard that Kongpo had a good relationship with our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and we also borrowed the place to make tea. Regarding the cause of the Kongpo's death, some even said that he died of heart disease.   

**Q:**  Yes, some said that and while others said that his death was caused by Gombo, the deity of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, as if Gombo had no other work to do.   

**A:**  When I was in Bodhgaya, India, I met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Ta Lama, a Mongolian who was said to be the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Telopa Huthogthu. We traveled in the same train in India. He was well informed about communism. He told me once while we were circumambulating the Bodhgaya Stupa, "Now the situation in Tibet is a very difficult one with the arrival of the Chinese." In those days our mentality on such matters were very orthodox so my reply to him was that nothing bad will ever happen to Tibet because the dharma of the Buddha is flourishing and the "master and the disciple" [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཡབ་སྲས] (Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama) are still living, and besides that, to guard the Dharma we have the protector deities. Hence nothing will happen. My reply did not impress him and he further said, "The great Nalanda and Bodhgaya were destroyed only by men. The Gombo [deity] of Nalanda was put out of a job and he came to our Gomang Tratsang." He said such things.   

**Q:**  This is a fact?   

**A:**  We used to think of ourselves as formidable and people even said that airplanes cannot land in Tibet.   

**Q:**  I heard that once, one of our kalön told a Chinese or a British officer that no airplane can land in Tibet. When the other person asked the reason, our kalön said that Tibet is situated at a very high altitude. So the other person just laughed and said nothing.   

**A:**  It was a problem those days to land at high altitude, but today men have reached on the moon and Mars too.   

**Q:**  I heard that this Mongolian Ta Lama was one of the high ranking spies. He is said to have been paid by the Japanese and some other nations too.   

**A:**  Our country never had any experience with espionage systems so because of that we did not know about the spies functioning in our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> Khamtsen. We simply believed that they had really come to study Buddhist scriptures. The Mongolians had more experience as they were under foreign domination for many years.   

**Q:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> Khamtsen was filled with spies.   

**A:**  Yes, we came to know about them only later on and I also told him you should belong to the Chinese, Gya Khamtsen, but he said no. Probably, he was send to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Actually, there was not a single Chinese person in the Chinese Khamtsen, right?   

**A:**  I heard that there used to be two Chinese and they would become Khamtsen Gegen in turn. We learned that our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> Khamtsen was filled with many spies. Actually, there was a separate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> for the Chinese, called Gya Khamtsan, but gradually the number of Chinese declined and later there were only two Chinese monks in the Gya Khamtsen. So after these two Chinese monks, Gya Khamtsan was closed, and later Chinese entered in the Gyerong Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> Khamtsen, there were monks from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>, right?   

**Q:**  In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> Khamtsen there were monks from nearly all of the 18 districts of Gyerong like Woshiya and Sinea, etc., and the Gyerong Khensur was from Sinea.   

**Q:**  Were those under the Trochupön [Tib. ཁྲོ་ཆུ་དཔོན]   

**A:**  No, though he occupied some parts of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a>, he had his own area called Troshab [Tib. ཁྲོ་ཞབས]   

**Q:**  What were the other charges against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**A:**  There was talk that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> practiced a certain necromancy, called "Gesar Damo" [Tib. གེ་སར་མདའ་མོ] or Gesar's Arrow. It was also said that Lungshar used black magic against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>'s [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] son who was a tsipön. Such was the varied gossip at that time. Lungshar's Lama who was a very reputed Lama, escaped to Shar Khumbu [in Nepal] during Lungshar's trouble and died there. His name was Dzogchen [Tib. རྫོགས་ཆེན] Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  What was the real cause of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s trouble? The practice of black magic could not be the only cause?   

**A:**  The real trouble started during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama. The famous Tsarong was also there at the time. Then the 13th sent Tsarong to India and made <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> the magji.   

**Q:**  No. It was not Lungshar. It was Drumba.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> too was appointed to some post.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was appointed to the post of overseer to the Magji 'Magji Tsondzin.' [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་འཚོ་འཛིན]   

**A:**  That must be true. It was said that they tried to establish a "People's Government " [Tib. མི་སེར་རྒྱལ་ཁབ]. Drönyerchemmo Apso had reported to the 13th that, "They have conspired to send you to the Gemphel Hermitage [Tib. དགེ་འཕེལ་རི་ཁྲོད] and throw me in the river wrapped in a leather bag. And Tsarong planned to become the king." It was said that they did make preparations for establishing a democratic setup. After the demise of the 13th, they met again.   

**Q:**  Tsarong was not involved in the later period?   

**A:**  Maybe he was not in the later period.   

**Q:**  Who were involved at the time? And what did they do after the meeting?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was involved. There was much talk about Kapshöba's "two-faced" deeds. In the beginning, I heard that Kapshöba was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> group.   

**Q:**  Were there anything special happening in Drepung?   

**A:**  It was said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> informed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> of something and then Trimön went to Drepung to Tenme Simkhang [Tib. བསྟན་མའི་གཟིམ་ཁང]. It was not exactly known where Trimön stayed at Drepung.   

**Q:**  How did you learn about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s arrival in Drepung? It was also said that he came to Tsetang Khamtsen [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] and it was said that he came to the apartment of Trimön Chöndze.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did he go to Gemphel Hermitage or Tenme Simkhang?   

**A:**  I think it was kind of secret and he stayed in both places. I heard this all of a sudden while in the dharma grove. Some said that he had escaped from Lhasa, while others said he had fled to the Drepung Laji. He did not stay for long.   

**Q:**  Normally the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> of Drepung has to go and meet kalön whenever a shape visited the monastery. Did they go to meet <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. Normally the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> had to meet a kalön.   

**Q:**  Was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> arrested after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> returned?   

**A:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> became the main power after he returned from Drepung.   

**Q:**  So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was completely eliminated .   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was said to have had the backing of Sendregasum. It was said that there were letters and other documents to prove this point. I heard that Sog Depa had signed a pledge with Lungshar.   

**A:**  I see. I don't know what internal understanding he might have had with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a>, but externally the monks did not like him. He was believed to be a devil-incarnate. It was said that a prophecy of Lhamo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> [Tib. ལ་མོ་ཚངས་པ] said, "The Minster Trishu of the past, is now born in the East of the land." [Tib. སྔར་གྱི་བློན་པོ་ཀྲི་ཤུ་དེ། དུས་ད་ཆ་ལུང་པའི་ཤར་ནས་དར]. Acting on this prophecy, the monks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> had finished off another person in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s native place and since the present Lungshar was clever and shrewd, he escaped. The prophecy said the incarnation of Trishu was born in the East of the land, which was the name of Lungshar's birth place. Literally, Lungshar means, "East of the Land." So, the monks caught a wrong person, while the real person had escaped to Lhasa. This was a legend told among the monks. We have no idea about whatever understanding and rapport he might have had with the heads of the monasteries.   

**Q:**  Did you know when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> went to Drepung, whether the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> of Drepung went to Lhasa and met the Regent and the Silön?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anything about it.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> set up a party called, "Kyichog Kündün." Did you know anything about this?   

**A:**  I didn't know anything about it. I only heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had conspired to become king himself.   

**Q:**  During Reting Rimpoche's regency, he went to the "Sacred Lake" to see a prophecy in the lake. Can you tell me about it?   

**A:**  I don't know much about it, except that Ami Rimpoche, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a>, was approached by the government to do the divination regarding the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. He revealed through his divination that the new Dalai Lama will be born at such and such a place. Later, gossip circulated widely that Ami Rimpoche would be punished by the government because of his wrong revelations regarding the incarnation of the Dalai Lama. Ami Rimpoche heard this and during a huge religious congregation, told the gathering what he had done no offend the government to cause him to now face the government's punishment. He further said that he did not go to the government and request it to let him make the divination but they came to him and requested him to do the divination.   

**Q:**  What did he prophesize?   

**A:**  I heard that he made a very clear and open prophecy regarding the reincarnation of Dalai Lama at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. chöra (ཆོས་ར)] The walled-in grove in monasteries (monastic colleges) where monks go to study/practice debating.">dharma grove</a> in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was the present Dalai Lama the one prophesied by him?   

**A:**  No. I don't think so. Some even said that it was not a divination but a mirror divination [Tib. དཔྲ]. Ami Rimpoche said that I was asked by the government to pronounce my divination and I just revealed whatever came in the divination and I did not concoct anything, so there is no reason that I should face any punishment.   

**Q:**  Ami Rimpoche was basically a very eccentric person.   

**A:**  Yes. Once he gave a very strongly worded admonition to the Abbots of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> during a religious congregation. He pointed out that the abbots should seriously look after the conduct and discipline of the monks. He said that if the abbots were not capable of discharging their duties properly, they should not have taken the responsibility in the first place. He further ridiculed those who said that times are bad. He said, "Times are bad, that is why one should be stricter. In the beginning of human civilization, there were no kings but gradually human beings were inflicted with the vices of lies and deception." So kings who were respected by the majority came into existence. He said that the Great Fifth Dalai Lama established the institution of the Tsogchen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a>, the disciplinarian of the Great Mönlam Prayer Festival. Under him there were two chagdampa [Tib. ཕྱག་དམ་པ] and then under him there were 16 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</a> carrying sticks and swords. They were appointed to punish the wrong-doers. He insisted that the abbots of the Sendregasum should discharge their duties sincerely once they have taken their posts.   

**Q:**  I have never heard a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a> scolding like this. Usually they just gave their teaching like paying a tax, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Could you tell me about the Golden Stupa which was build to encase the body of the 13th Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, we, the Tsogchen Trülku, had to attend the ceremony on its completion in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> [Potala]. Mainly Trijang Rimpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ], Ling [Tib. གླིང] Rimpoche, Ketsang [Tib. ཀེ་ཚང] Rimpoche and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Rimpoche were the main ones in charge of the building of the stupa. There was an elaborate ceremony on the day when they brought the "body" of the 13th to the stupa. Then in the old meeting hall, they gave gifts like dresses of brocade called Tagshun and a new fox cap and rainbow boots and they had to wear them at that ceremony. The master craftsmen were also given gifts.   

**Q:**  What happened if the shoes did not fit?   

**A:**  They made the shoes especially to fit them. Some gossip from the back said that he [Trimön] was the giver of gifts as well as the taker.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བ] The name of the aristocratic family of an important government official.">Trogawa</a> too were the staff members in charge, right.   

**A:**  Yes, they were. Reting Rimpoche at that time was the newly appointed Regent, so <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was the pivotal figure among the kalön.   

**Q:**  But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was not heard of at the time of Reting's resignation.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> Tripa.   

**Q:**  No. He wasn't the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> Tripa at the time of Reting's resignation.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> Tripa after Tsarong.   

**Q:**  Tsarong wasn't a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> Tripa but he was the Commander-in-chief of Tibet [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་དམག་སྤྱི་ཆེན་མོ].   

**A:**  He was demoted from the magji.   

**Q:**  After that, he became a theiji.   

**A:**  When I went to see him, he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> Tripa.   

**Q:**  Why did Tsarong get demoted?   

**A:**  He did something wrong and the Dalai Lama demoted him. Probably, he didn't get along with Kujar.   

**Q:**  That's right.   

**A:**  I also heard that he slapped Kujar. There was a lot of talk. It was said that they had the quarrel in front of the Dalai Lama and he slapped him saying, "You are new. What do you know?" Then he was demoted and some say that the Dalai Lama acted cleverly and demoted him when the Dalai Lama was alive. If he was left in his position as he was, when the Dalai Lama died Tsarong would have faced misfortune.   

**Q:**  I heard that Tsarong himself said that if the Dalai Lama hadn't made him take leave, when the Dalai Lama would get sick, I would definitely given him an aspirin and I would have been blamed for poisoning the Dalai Lama with foreign medicine.   

**A:**  I heard the Dalai Lama had a great affection for Tsarong and even after he was demoted, he would send Tsarong messages written on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སམ་ཁྲ] The traditional rectangular wooden writing/message board. The message was written on the polished, blackened surface of the wood that was covered with a white chalk. A stylus was used to clear away the chalk leaving the shape of the letters, which appeared black. It was usually about 12-14 inches long and 2 inches wide. There was a lower board on which the messages were written and a top board which served as the cover. In many cases there were several additional writing boards between these two.">samtra</a> writing boards.   

