#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0216.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Tando Rimpoche [Tib. དར་མདོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1983  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Tando Rimpoche [Tib. དར་མདོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tando Rimpoche [Tib. དར་མདོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] was a well-known Gelugpa incarnate lama from Drepung Monastery who later lived in India. In this interview, he discusses in detail the favorites of the 13th Dalai Lama, especially Kujar Kunphel. He also discusses the Langdün and Pandatsang incidents and the dispute between the Gelugpa and the Sakya sects at the time of renovating the Samye Monastery. He also comments on the source of the conflict between Tashilhunpo and the Drönyerchemmo Apso la, and the origin of the Tibetan national flag.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0216_02/H_0216_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The 13th Dalai Lama had so many "favorites" (Tib. ཇེནསེ [སྤྱན་བསལ]). What actually were they [favorites]?   

**A:**  They were the ones the Dalai Lama liked and had affection for.   

**Q:**  Any similarities to what was found in the monasteries?   

**A:**  They were like friends. Since they are not selected from among the government officials but chosen arbitrarily, they are called Jensel. Among the Jense, Jense Gyatruk [Tib. རྒྱ་ཕྲུག་ལགས] was offered by the Chinese. His real name was Senjor [Ch. sen jiao]. Actually, the Chinese offered two Jense at that time. One of them turned out to be an informer for the Chinese at the time when the 13th Dalai Lama went to India. The other Jense, Senjor, was very honest and sincere. The 13th Dalai Lama himself taught him poetry and grammar, etc. Later on, he also carved a throne for the Buddha statue called Tsütrima [Tib. ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་མ] in Drepung. Much later he even wrote a book that implied that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> didn't recognize the incarnation. His real name was Senjor but he was popularly known as gyatruk (literally: Chinese kid). The other Jense were Namdröl [Tib. རྣམ་གྲོལ] and Dechen Yingsal [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་དབྱིངས་གསལ]. They were the later (newer) Jense.   

**Q:**  Where do the older Jense go?   

**A:**  They live separately and do their prayers and other religious practices. They still remain Jense but they do not have to go to the Dalai Lama daily. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> was always with the Dalai Lama. Jense Etruk [Tib. ཨེ་ཕྲུག] and Dechen Yingsal came after Künphel.   

**Q:**  Dechen Yingsal was exiled to the Lhoka area.   

**A:**  There are also instances of Jense being chosen from among the stable boys of the Dalai Lama [Tib. ཆིབས་གྱོག].   

**Q:**  What is the criterion to become a Jense?   

**A:**  It depends on whether the Dalai Lama keeps him or not.   

**Q:**  How would the Dalai Lama keep him?   

**A:**  He keeps the person among his Jense. Jense <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> was, in the beginning, a wood block carver [Tib. པར་བརྐོས་པ]. The Dalai Lama was impressed by his work and he kept him as his Jense. Later, in the Tsondu, there was strong oppositions to the institution of Jense. This opposition came up in the Tsondu after the demise of the Dalai Lama. It was said in the Tsondu that there should not be a separate office of Jense in addition to the government officials. Among the Jense, Künphel was the most powerful. Even the shape nearly had to bow before him.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> was said to even attend the Kashag and would discuss important matters and give his opinions on them. Later, after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama, when Künphel was called to the Tsondu, a lot of trouble came up. There was also some talk regarding guns. Did you hear that?   

**A:**  Yes. The Lhopa Khenpo too nearly got involved in the trouble. Lhopa Khenpo said that we should not treat <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> badly because the Dalai Lama liked him and this kind of supported the group in the Tsondu that supported Künphel. However, Lhopa Khenpo might have made this suggestion purely out of his religious feelings as he also quoted some related texts. Lhopa Khenpo was supported by the Ngagpa ex-Khenpo nicknamed "Nepalese", Phepo [Tib. བལ་པོ]. I definitely heard that both of them nearly suffered misfortune [Tib. དབུ་ཉེས] because of this.   

**Q:**  Was that the meeting to discuss whether or not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> should be punished?   

**A:**  Some people even said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> had offered them [Lhopa Khembo and Ngagpa Khembo] a package of gold and a monk's vest made from brocade (Tib. töngag [སྟོད་འགག]).   

**Q:**  Usually monks are fond of all sorts of gossip.   

**A:**  At that time my tutor told me that by treating <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> in such a manner and by also demoting the Silön, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a>, nothing good would come out of this for the country. We were at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> Prayer Festival on the day when Langdün was demoted. On this day some strange natural omens occurred. The sky was overcast by a dusty cloud and there was a wailing wind which brought down dust like drizzle. The sun had a reddish color without any glow and warmth. At the same time, people in the Lhasa street's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> all sorts of songs. One of the songs said, "Even though the mule is annoyed, let him be. Mount the brown horse and be prepared to leave." [Tib. དྲེལ་ཐོ་ལོག་ཙིགཔ་ཟ་ནའི་ཟ་རྟ་རགཔ་བཞོན་ནས་འགྲོ་རྩིས་བྱེད]. The meaning of the first line of the song, "If the mule..." refers to Langdün who was demoted and at that time had a mule. So the song says let him be annoyed or feel humiliated. The second line of the song, "Ride the brown horse and leave." refers to Reting who had a very good brown horse. At that time, people understood this as Langdün being humiliated, but my teacher told me that talking about the brown horse was not a good sign for Reting Rimpoche and Reting did have misfortune. If he had heeded the warning of the song and had gone to India on a pilgrimage as was suggested by many of his people, he would have got through. Tsörujenpa [Tib. གཙོད་རུ་ཅན་པ], the Deity of Ganden Chöngor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] Monastery gave symbolic predictions twice. In the first instance, when Reting was yet to become the Regent, the deity revealed a goat [symbolizes Reting] adorned with the ornaments of gems. After Reting's accession to the Regency, the deity revealed a goat with a wheel of weapons [Tib. མཚོན་ཆ་འཁོར་ལོ] on its back.   

**Q:**  As you know, after the demise of the 13th Dalai Lama, Huang Musung of the Guomindang, and Richardson and Rai Bahadur of British India came to Lhasa to offer condolence offerings. Could you tell me more about this?   

**A:**  Yes. I remember Huang Musung. He came at first to offer condolences but then continued to stay as the Chinese (government's) representative.   

**Q:**  What did he do at Drepung Monastery?   

**A:**  He came to Drepung and gave alms to the monks.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese representative offer a new "pan" at the main gate of the assembly hall?' [NOTE: 'Pan,' is a kind of board hung on the top of a gate bearing words in Chinese characters. It was traditionally gifted by the Chinese rulers to monasteries.]   

**A:**  I don't think they offered a new pan. They might have offered one to the new Golden Stupa. Drepung had one already, so I don't think they offered a new one.   

**Q:**  What was written on that pan?   

**A:**  I asked the two Chinese monks, Champa Künkhyen [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཀུན་མཁྱེན] and Rinchen Dorje [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེ] and they told me that what was written on that pan was not very favorable for the Tibetans. They said that although it mentions high exalted positions to the holder, yet ultimately it mentions Tibet as a part of China. Of these two Chinese monks, Champa Künkhyen was more learned and later I heard that he was working in the Newspaper Office. The other Chinese monk, Rinchen Dorje, confided in me that before coming to Lhasa he was an army officer of the not very high rank of Lian Zhang. He told me frankly that these pan mention Tibet as a part of China.   

**Q:**  There was one called Chöndze Lobsang Dönyö [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དོན་ཡོད], right?   

**A:**  Yes, in the beginning. Later he was nothing and worked for the Chinese.   

**Q:**  No one had any idea about the meaning of those inscriptions on the pan. I heard that even today these pans are still hanging in their places.   

**A:**  The real objective of the Chinese to offer these pan was to symbolize their jurisdiction over Tibet.   

**Q:**  What did the Tibetans believe these to be?   

**A:**  Tibetans said that they contained auspicious words that were compliments, like the Chinese word "bao" which means precious stone and the word "shou" which means long life. There was one at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>, and another at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> in front of the Avalokitsevara's image with a red silk knot called Ling. They had specially placed them at important places.   

**Q:**  Then after this, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> trouble came up, right?   

**A:**  It was widely said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Raga [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་རབ་དགའ] and Tobgye [Tib. སྟོབས་རྒྱལ] were coming to Lhasa from Kham with soldiers and were going to make war. In Lhasa, the Panda House was surrounded by the army.   

**Q:**  At that time I heard the Drepung's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> College did not offer a surety for Panda. What was the reason for that?   

**A:**  They did offer a surety in the end. Probably the Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་སྤྱི] The highest administrative council in large monasteries, like Drepung. It consisted of the Abbots, the Tshogchen Umdze, the Shengo and the Jiso. In Drepung it also included ex-abbots.">Laji</a> gave the surety.   

**Q:**  No. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> did not come to give a surety. I heard that Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] had gone to the Kashag too.   

**A:**  I have never heard that.   

**Q:**  At that time, the main persons who negotiated with the government about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> were Phabongkha's Chandzö, Genda Urgyen [Tib. རྒན་བདག་ཨོ་རྒྱན] and few others. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a> college [Tib. སྨད] gave a surety but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> did not.   

**A:**  Maybe Lhopa Khembo told them not to do that. Although <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> [House] was surrounded by the army from the outside, the matter was settled through talks by Panda's men and his supporters. Most prominent among them was a grey haired monk called something Gelong [Tib. དགེ་སློང]. He was a very capable person.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was at that time the most powerful person in the Kashag. It was said that they [Panda] paid a huge amount to Trimön, which is reflected in the following song, "The golden family of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a>, shot a golden arrow which landed on the roof of Trimön with the sound "jag" [Tib. གསེར་ཁྱིམ་སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང་ནས། གསེར་གྱི་མདའ་མོ་བཏང་སོང། ས་དབང་ཁྲི་སྨོན་ཐོག་ཁར། འཇག་སྒྲ་བརྒྱབ་ནས་བབ་སོང].   

**A:**  Such songs were very common in Lhasa. The legend of these songs is believed to have originated from the water carriers of the Mönlam Prayer Festival. It is believed that they are manifestations of the deity Palden Lhamo [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལྡན་མོ] [Shri Devi]. This seems to hold some truth because such songs were also sung before and after Reting's trouble. The song that was sung after the Reting's trouble was: "The compassionate billy-goat, offered something to the Tiger. The merciless Tiger, devoured the billy-goat in one swallow." [Tib. ར་ཕོ་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཅན་གྱིས། སྟག་ལ་ཅིག་ཅིག་སྤྲད་སོང། སྟག་མོ་སྙིང་རྗེ་མེད་པས། ར་ཕོ་ཁྱུར་མིད་བཏང་སོང] Similar satiric songs were sung about the promotion, demotion and appointment of the kudrak.   

**Q:**  What renovation work was done by Reting Rimpoche on Samye Monastery?   

**A:**  At that time Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] were entrusted with the supervision of the renovation work. At the suggestion of Liushar and Shasur, Kyabji Khangsar [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྗེ་ཁང་གསར] Rimpoche was invited to Rapchung College [Tib. རབ་བྱུང་གྲྭ་ཚང] [at Samye] as its head Lama. One of the incarnate lamas of Rapchung College and another one did not like this. According to them they [Liushar, etc.] had requested Kyabji Rimpoche to convert Rapchung College, which belonged to the Sakya sect, into the Gelugpa sect. Kyabji Khangsar Rimpoche declined to do this. [What happened was that] in response to the request for a good abbot to be sent to Rapchung College, one was sent who was well accomplished in the theoretical aspects of tantra but was not initiated in the practice of sutra. Liushar and Shasur, who were both well informed about religion, found much lacking in the abbot and sent a petition to the government for a better abbot. However, the new abbot sent from Sakya proved to be just the opposite of his predecessor. He was well versed in sutra dialectics, but was devoid of any knowledge of tantra. Naturally, Liushar and Shasur were not satisfied with this abbot and sent a very strong report saying that the former one was only practicing tantra and the latter one was only practicing sutra so finally one of the dungsey [Tib. གདུང་སྲས] [sons] of either <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. སྒྲོལ་མ, 2. གྲོ་མ] 1. The goddess Tara. 2. A woman&#x27;s name. 3. A wild sweet potato.">Droma</a> Phodrang or Phüntso Phodrang was sent. During his stay, Kyabji Khangsar Rimpoche was invited by someone to give a religious initiation and while Rimpoche was preaching, the Sakya Dungsey happened to be listening from a secret place. After the conclusion of Kyabji Rimpoche's teaching, the Sakya Dungsey called everyone and told them "Kyabji Rimpoche is a great teacher who can teach and direct you in the very foundation of religion and that I do not measure up to Rimpoche's standard." He further told them, "I have come only because of the order of the government, but I don't have any detailed teaching to give on the five dialectics volumes [Tib. གཞུང་ཆེན་བཀའ་པོད་ལྔ] so I am going to return back to Sakya." And he returned to Sakya. Later I heard both Liushar and Shasur nearly received whippings.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for that?   

**A:**  The main reason was not accepting Kyabji Khangsar Rimpoche as the head of Rapchung College and also for speaking against him. They were nearly given whippings. Kyabji Rimpoche didn't let them whip them, but a lot of trouble ensued owing to this. Kyabji Rimpoche died soon thereafter and it was believed that he was killed through black-magic [Tib. བྱད་གཏད]. At that time there was talk about a large congregation of tantric practitioners in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> gathering there to cast black-magic on all the well-known lamas of the Gelugpa sect, including the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama. It was said that over a thousand tantric practitioners had assembled at that time. Later, it was said that the teacher of those tantric Practitioners was afflicted by a very dreadful disease. The flesh of his body cracked into pieces. Still the teacher was undaunted. He called all of his students to his house and as his last death wish he told his students, "We are all equally committed to this tantric curse [Tib. མནན་པ]. I am about to die but you students should not discontinue the yearly ritual practices." At this, one of the students stood up, prostrated three times before his teacher and pleaded, "O Guru, do not commit us to do such practices any more. You see with your own naked eyes the consequences of such a practice." The teacher was annoyed by this and told the student that he had violated his obligation and hence, from that day on, he was expelled from the community of his students. This particular student later went to Central Tibet. Some people even maintain that the 13th Dalai Lama's death too was caused by the curse [Tib. གནོད་པ]. When Phabongkha Rimpoche returned to Lhasa, he told my teacher, "Look, I have returned safely now. If something had happened to me on the way, they would have said that it was due to their curse. Even nowadays, there is lot of talk about this. Sometimes, I feel like the curse is real because I also have said some things and the talk would spread right away and I also had the name [of the lama]. So I have a strange uncomfortable feeling. In general, I always act unbiased, but when it comes to a critical point, I would have a slip of the tongue and say something like, One should keep on one's tradition [Tib. རང་ལུགས་གཏད་སོ་ཡོད་པ] and perceive [the other sects] as good because it is said that all sentient beings should be seen as Buddhas [Tib. སེམས་ཅན་ཚང་མར་སྟོན་པའི་དག་སྣང་སྦྱང་དགོས], but this doesn't mean that we should mix everything [traditions].   

**Q:**  It is said that Reting Rimpoche carried out tremendous renovation work on Samye monastery, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He did. Dongthog Rimpoche was of the opinion that the original Tibetan flag was newly made somewhere in Samye by the two of them [Liushar and Shasur]. After the completion of the renovation work, Liushar and Shasur had designed a new one based on the old one which was taken from a hidden treasure [Tib. གཏེར]. He said that the original one did not have the yellow border [Tib. འཇའ་སེར་པོ] and that they consulted Phabongkha Rimpoche and he designed the yellow border. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> has a different view on this subject. According to him, the Tibetan national flag was designed by the 13th Dalai Lama. He even claims that the original prints of the design were in the Kashag office.   

**Q:**  Dongthog says that Phabongkha had influence in making of the design and the original one was at Samye.   

**A:**  Dongthog says that the yellow border was not in the original one.   

**Q:**  I don't think that the original flag at Samye was the Tibetan flag.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> says that the flag with the emblem of human skulls was originally used as a war flag. But he did not talk about the other designs of this flag.   

**Q:**  There was no tradition of a national flag in Tibet. It must have been a flag attached to the spear of a protector deity [Tib. ཆོས་སྐྱོང་གི་རྟེན་མདུང].   

**A:**  Yes, that is true. But the present national flag was, I was told, designed by the 13th Dalai Lama himself and there were symbols like the sword and the vajra. It seems he made based on his observations in foreign countries.   

**Q:**  It has some resemblance to the British flag.   

**A:**  But many do not agree with this hypothesis.   

**Q:**  Is it because of the "yellow color?" [NOTE: Yellow is the symbol of the Gelug Sect of Tibetan Buddhism. This sect is also known as the 'Yellow hat' sect because of the yellow hat worn by its founder, Je Tsongkhapa [Tib. རྗེ་ཙོན་ཁ་པ]. So the yellow colour on the flag is also interpreted as representing the Gelug sect.]   

**A:**  The government later changed the original definition of the yellow border of the flag saying it was the "radiance of Buddha's doctrine" instead of the original definition, "the radiance of the Ganden sect." But actually there was no need to change it.   

**Q:**  But, still if you change it to "the radiance of Buddha's doctrine," then you exclude the Bönpo and Christian communities. The government must have felt some pressure to make these changes.   

**A:**  The Great 5th Dalai Lama was a Gelugpa Lama.   

**Q:**  One can not say for certain whether he was a Gelugpa Lama or a Nyingmapa Lama.   

**A:**  But he was a Lama of Drepung Monastery.   

**Q:**  I think you cannot say that a Drepung Lama is a Gelugpa Lama as well.   

**A:**  The Great 5th Dalai Lama had said that I did this thing [religious practices], but was not included in the Nyingmapa sect and I did that thing, but was not included in the Kagyüpa sect. The 13th Dalai Lama showed great inclination towards the Nyingma sect's doctrine. The Nyingmapa at that time said that the 13th Dalai Lama too might be like the Great 5th, because the 5th Dalai Lama showed great liking towards the Nyingmapa but in reality he was a staunch Gelugpa at heart.   

**Q:**  Could you tell me more about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> trouble?   

**A:**  I heard about it when I was in the monastery. In the beginning it was said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> House was going to be sealed by the government. Much commotion and confusion seemed to have followed, but due to the tactful intervention of the mediators for Pandatsang, the issue was resolved within a short span of time. Most notable among those who mediated on behalf of Pandatsang with the government was one called Changeling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> [Tib. བྱང་གླིང་ཇོ་ལགས], who approached the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and other concerned influential officers. Ultimately we heard that the Pandatsang house was not sealed and that the issue was resolved very leniently.   

**Q:**  Did Reting Rimpoche make a public announcement of what he had seen in the Sacred Lake regarding the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anything different than what is mentioned in the 14th Dalai Lama's autobiography. In it is mentioned that Reting Rimpoche saw three letters, A, KA, MA in the lake. The letter A means <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and KA means the monastery of Karmapa Rölpey Dorje [Tib. ཀར་མ་པ་རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ] It seems these revelations appeared in the lake like the pictures on a cinema screen.   

**Q:**  Didn't the letter MA means the prayer Migtsema [Tib. དམིགས་བརྩེ་མ] and mean Kumbum?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that the birth place was shown very clearly.   

**Q:**  Have you ever seen a vision in the lake?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Probably, it was shown like in the cinema and the Tra divination might be also similar. Once Kyabji Lhatsun [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུན] Rimpoche went to look in the lake for a vision on politics and when I asked him how was the vision, he told me, "I just saw some Khambas going back and forth carrying a something made from gold." When he came back, he heard that the Khambas were offering a golden throne to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Reting Rimpoche renovated Samye on a large scale. Not only Samye, but he is said to have done other renovation work in Lhoka as well, right?   

**A:**  He renovated Nyetang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. སྒྲོལ་མ, 2. གྲོ་མ] 1. The goddess Tara. 2. A woman&#x27;s name. 3. A wild sweet potato.">Droma</a> Lhagang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང་སྒྲོལ་ལ་ལྷ་ཁང] also.   

**Q:**  Sometime after this, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> resigned. What was the reason for his resignation? Trimön had become a bit mentally unbalanced. Was it before or after his resignation?   

**A:**  According to some people, a certain lama told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> that he was the reincarnation of a tertön [Tib. གཏེར་སྟོན] [hidden treasure revealer]. [NOTE: Tertön are mostly Nyingmapa sect lamas prophesied by Guru Padmasambhava to reveal his hidden treasures.]   

**Q:**  The name of the lama who told him that he was the reincarnation of a tertön was Dechen Chöngor <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡོངས་འཛིན] A tutor of a high lama or the Dalai Lama.">Yongdzin</a> [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་འཁོར་ཡོངས་འཛིན] Rimpoche. Later, he was kind of carried away [with this], right?   

**A:**  Yes. Since then it seemed he was a bit carried away by the thought that he was the reincarnation of a tertön, and sometimes he went around <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> wearing a white shamtab. People started saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> has become insane. But <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> told me that he never lost his sanity or become deranged.   

**Q:**  According to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, Tertön Sögyal [Tib. བསོད་རྒྱལ] of Kham in his letter to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had said that he was the reincarnation of one of the builders of Samye monastery and when Trimön came to Samye, he told him that he built the stupa in Samye.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> denies that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> became insane. He attributes Trimön's unusual behavior to his being the reincarnation of a tertön. But what everybody talked about and saw was a mentally unsound Trimön.   

**Q:**  Then the search for the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama was begun?   

**A:**  Wasn't <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s insanity after the "search" for the reincarnation?   

**Q:**  No, during the search for the reincarnation, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> was the senior shape and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had already resigned by that time. At the same time, the Panchen Rimpoche was in China and there was lot of talk about his coming back to Tibet. Could you tell me what you know about it?   

**A:**  At that time, Ngagchen Rimpoche [Tib. སྔགས་ཆེན] and the Drunyichemmo of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Monastery came to Lhasa to talk with the government regarding the Panchen Rimpoche's return to Tibet.   

**Q:**  This <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> was nicknamed as Ashang Nagbum [Tib. ཨ་ཞང་བརྣག་བུམ] ("Uncle Malicious"), right?   

**A:**  Among them there was also Tsagserkhang [Tib. རྩག་སེར་ཁང] and Ngagchen Rimpoche, who was a simple and honest monk who was reported to have agreed with most of the conditions stated by the government. However, the other officials of the Panchen Rimpoche did not like these conditions and they suspected him of siding with the government. Later, Ngagchen Rimpoche was excluded from their official circle.   

**Q:**  What did the government say and what did the Panchen Lama's side want?   

**A:**  They had to find a common ground to make a settlement.   

**Q:**  What differences did the government and the Panchen Lama have?   

**A:**  There weren't any differences between the governments.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there talks about the Chinese bodyguards who had come with Panchen Lama? According to the government's version, there were about 500 Chinese bodyguards with the Panchen Lama. Some people said they were his bodyguards, while others said they were his disciples.   

**A:**  I think there were quite a large number of them. In the end, when the Panchen Lama's belongings were brought back to Tibet and searched by the government, lot of military things and uniforms and weapons were said to have been found among the belongings. Out of these belongings, the government confiscated the army boots, army uniforms and pistols which had a silver letter label [Tib. དངུལ་ཡིག་ཅན་པོ] on them. These pistols were later auctioned to the public in the Lhasa market.   

**Q:**  What was the gossip about them in the monastery?   

**A:**  It was said that the flight of Panchen Lama to China and his subsequent relations with the Tibetan Government were all created by the officials of both sides. One example was Drönyerchemmo Apso. He was sent to a little known place as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>pön. This was the beginning of his career. Incidentally, there was a 'hot-spring' in this place and the Panchen Lama used to visit it. One day, Drönyerchemmo Apso received an arrow letter, 'dayik' informing him of the Panchen Lama's planned visit to this place with orders to make proper arrangements during his stay. Unfortunately, this dzong was very poor. Still he offered what facilities and services the area could afford. But the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> officials were not satisfied with his arrangements and ordered their men to arrest him. Apso too was not to be taken in easily. He escaped their arrest and went to the mountains. So the Tashilhunpo people sent a complaint petition to the 13th Dalai Lama saying that the dzongpön (Apso) did not offer proper arrangements and service during Panchen Lama's visit. Responding to this petition, the 13th sent an order to Apso telling him to come to Lhasa. However, instead of coming to Lhasa, he sent a detail letter explaining his case and the difficulties of his coming to Lhasa. The 13th Dalai Lama then sent another summoning order that said that he should report to Lhasa immediately. Apso had only two satin garments, a worn out garment for normal wear and a better satin garment for dressed up occasions. At this stage, Apso wrote a long petition seeking to resign from his post of dzong and further he returned his satin garment [Tib. གོས་སྟོད] along with the letter. The 13th Dalai Lama was very pleased by Apso's behavior and when his tenure of office expired, he was called to Lhasa and was given a promotion. So this was the cause of the rift between Tashilhunpo and Drönyerchemmo Apso. Gradually, Apso rose to the post of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> and wielded sufficient power to act harshly towards Tashilhunpo. And he did that. The second cause of the Panchen's 'trouble' was the 'Babshi' [Tib. འབབ་གཞིབ] tax levied on newly opened fields that was introduced by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>. When Lungshar and Khenjung Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས], who were charged with collecting the tax, went to Tashilhunpo to collect the Babshi tax, the Tashilhunpo officers refused to pay the tax on the pretext that they have land tenure documents, Katen [Tib. བཀའ་གཏན] (Katen was a sort of decree letter issued by the King or the government granting the recipient exemption from taxes and corvée labor, etc.). However, when Lungshar and his colleague asked them repeatedly to show the 'Katen,' they refused to show it giving excuses that it is prohibited from being taking out [Tib. ཐེམ་སྤང་མ]. Consequently, Lungshar said if this is so, we will come to your place to check it. Even then they didn't show it, saying that it was under the feet of the meditation deity [Tib. ཡི་དམ]. I heard that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> of Tashilhunpo were treated harshly. Naturally, drönyerchemmo Apso backed Lungshar who was agitated and together they carried out the collection measures strictly without exceptions.   

**Q:**  I heard that under the 'Babshi' tax, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> was asked to pay 1/4th of the Government's army salary [Tib. དམག་ཕོགས་བཞི་ཟུར].   

**A:**  Yes. The tax imposed on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> under 'Babshi' was so heavy that the Panchen Lama himself came to Lhasa and pleaded with the government that his monastery cannot pay such a huge tax. At that time, Drönyerchemmo Apso wielded much power and authority in the government. The Panchen Lama approached him with a gift of a small leather bag of gold coins and sought his help to get an exemption from the 'Bashi' tax. Apso made good use of this chance to take revenge on Tashilhunpo. He went straight to the Dalai Lama and told him, 'It seems Tashilhunpo can well afford to pay the 'Babshi' tax, because I, an old man pushing towards the end of his life, was offered these gold coins by them to buy my bread.' I heard all these things, but personally I feel such things seem to have been done intentionally to create misunderstanding and disfavor towards Tashilhunpo. So in any case, Tashilhunpo was not given an exemption from the tax. The Panchen Lama thought that if he sought the government's permission to leave, it would never be given, so he fled secretly.   

**Q:**  What did he do after escaping?   

**A:**  It was said that the 13th Dalai Lama told his attendants to bring him juniper leaves, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and other things and performed the incense ritual, a common ritual of propitiation of deities to seek protection during a journey. So, the Dalai Lama offered prayers for a long time facing towards the east and it was said that tears rolled down while he prayed. It was said that on the very same day that the Panchen Lama had left from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] [a Tibetan government official] was sent by the government to bring the Panchen Lama back.   

**Q:**  Was Tsögo able to catch the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  He had nearly caught up with the Panchen Lama, but then when the Panchen Lama reached a big river, he took a handful of water, prayed for awhile and threw the water back into the river creating a path [through the river]so he crossed the river and then prayed and the river closed back leaving Tsögo on the other side of the river. This was the beginning of the Panchen issue. Later, when the Panchen Lama was returning from China, it appeared that he tried to show off his might to the government and said that he was going to bring the Chinese soldiers. The Tibetan government also acted tough and the talks between the two sides resulted in a long deadlock during which Panchen Lama died. It was tragic that the master and the disciple [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཡབ་སྲས] [Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama] could not meet each other in the end.   

**Q:**  Finally, the Panchen Lama died in Ragshi Lungshö Monastery. A certain group of people say that Panchen Lama died from depression [Tib. སྐུ་རླུང], right?'   

**A:**  This might be true to some extent. What we learned from this Panchen episode was that it was the people functioning below the highest pontiffs who were the real creators of all the trouble. This was the theme of the Jungpo Thonyö Thondrub [Tib. གཅུང་པོ་དོན་ཡོད་དོན་གྲུབ], a popular folktale.   

**Q:**  Actually the Tibetan government, including Reting Rimpoche and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a>, wanted the Panchen Lama to return, but the main hurdle was the Chinese soldiers who had come with him.   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> kudraks were under some pressure to act tough with the government because they feared being suppressed if they lost in the bargaining with the government. I heard from the Simpön Khembo that the 13th Dalai Lama had made an artist draw an image of the Panchen Lama on the table in which the Panchen Lama was folding his hands when he could not pass a rocky path, predicting the Panchen Lama would not come up [return]. He was really the one who sees all the three times: past, present and future [Tib. དུས་གསུམ་གསལ་གཟིགས]. The Simpön Khembo told my teacher that if he wanted to, he could let him see this drawing, but my teacher told him, "Since the event is over, it would make me feel sad."   

**Q:**  This was the Fire Mouse year, 1936, and you had grown up quite well, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at the time of the Dalai Lama's enthronement, I was quite grown up.   

**Q:**  The Communist Chinese are reported to have come as far as some Kham areas in 1936 during their famous "Long March." Did this cause any serious fears or tensions in Lhasa? I heard that Kyabji Phabongkha also performed the fire exorcism against the Chinese.   

**A:**  Yes. It did. They had actually planned to come via <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> but one of the Chengdu leaders who happened to be in Dartsedo at that time destroyed the bridge which the Communists had to cross. Since they could not enter Dartsedo, they went to Gyarong and from Gyarong to Tau [Tib. རྟའུ] and Drango [Tib. བྲག་འགོ]. From Tau they escaped with the Kazakhs.   

**Q:**  The news of the Chinese coming into Tibet caused much fear and tension, right?   

**A:**  Yes, all kinds of gossip about the Chinese were widespread throughout Lhasa.   

**Q:**  But they didn't know where they were going, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Some said these Chinese were very poor and that they had no weapons with them. Others said they were like beggars and ate the meat of all kinds of animals like horses.   

**Q:**  At about this time, five German nationals including Dr. Ernst Schäfer arrived in Lhasa [1939] and the monks threw stones at them when they tried to take photographs during the Mönlam exorcism. Did you know about this?   

**A:**  Yes. Later the shengo and the chagdampa [monk disciplinarians] went to see them and apologized to them for the misbehavior of the monks. This must have been done because of orders from the government.   

**Q:**  After the demise of the Panchen Lama, one group of his followers returned with his body and the other group went back to China. How did this happen?   

**A:**  Yes. One group returned back to China because they no longer had any power or popularity.   

**Q:**  Did they say that they were defecting to China?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who were the ones that returned to China?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  Did the government give appropriate reception for the body of the Panchen Lama when it was brought back to Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, the government gave a good reception. The body was not brought to Lhasa but was taken straight to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [where Tashilhunpo monastery is situated] through Nagchuka.   

**Q:**  At about this time, Reting Rimpoche asked to resign and as a result of this, Silön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> had to relinquish his post and function as just a nominal head. How did this happen?   

**A:**  According to the popular gossip of the time, it was said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> was related to the Dalai Lama and the Dalai Lama himself taught him how to write, so all the official matters that were forwarded for consultation with the Regent and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> were handled and decided by the Silön Langdün without the consent of Regent Reting Rimpoche. Reting Rimpoche, who was the Regent, did not get a chance to assert his opinion and suggestions on such matters. So as a result of this internal difficulty between the two, Reting Rimpoche said that if such is the state of things, there is no need for me to be the Regent and that he should resign. Langdün understood the situation and offered to take a nominal position.   

**Q:**  How did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> know the reasons why Reting Rimpoche asked for his resignation?   

**A:**  They might have had internal talks between them?   

**Q:**  I heard the talks first came from the monastic side.   

**A:**  I don't think that is true.   

**Q:**  I heard that Dromtö Chöndze [Tib. འབྲོམ་སྟོད], the Töpa Abbot of Sera, had said that if there are such hurdles for Reting Rimpoche to function as the Regent, they should be removed soon. And it was reportedly said that Reting Rimpoche himself described his sharing of power with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> negatively by using the Tibetan saying, "Two Buddhas for one Buddhism" [Tib. བསྟན་པ་གཅིག་ལ་སྟོན་པ་གཉིས] Did you know about this?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard it was like one land having two kings [Tib. ལུང་པ་གཅིག་ལ་རྒྱལ་པོ་གཉིས]. Probably, that proverb regarding Buddhism was used by Dromtö Chöndze and they might have had internal talks. Then Reting's name was also changed. In the beginning, he was called the Sikyong [Tib. སྲིད་སྐྱོང] and later after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> was demoted he was called Gyaltsab [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཚབ] [actually both mean Regent]. Also on the day when Langdün was demoted, strange evil omens occurred. A violent dust-filled wind covered the sky and the abbots too were not in the monastery as they were at the time in the Tsondu. Such strange things happened.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that on the day they expelled the scapegoat, Lugong [Tib. གླུད་སྒོང], after the Mönlam?   

**A:**  Probably, it was. I was at the Mönlam Prayer Assembly that was done without serving tea [Tib. སྐམ་ཚོགས] and by the time that the morning tea ceremony, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཇ] The daily meeting of Tibetan government monk officials (tsedrung) at which tea was provided. However, unlike the collective meetings of monks in monasteries, there was no collective chanting of prayers at the Drungja. The event started at around 9 a.m. and lasted for about an hour. When the Tse ga (the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat) was in the Potala, it was held there, and when it was in the Norbulinga Summer Palace, it was held there. All monk officials in Lhasa were expected to attend.">drungja</a> was held, I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> had been demoted.   

**Q:**  After this, the tentative candidates for Dalai Lama's reincarnation were one from Kumbum [Tib. སྐུ་འབུམ] [the present Dalai Lama], the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོལ་གླིང] Dungsey and another one.   

**A:**  The Kumbum candidate was the main or the real reincarnation. Actually it has been already confirmed internally that the Kumbum candidate was the real reincarnation.   

**Q:**  How did they come to the conclusion that the Kumbum candidate was the real reincarnation of the 13th?   

**A:**  It was revealed in the sacred lake.   

**Q:**  But in the 'Lake' they just saw the three letters, A, Ka, Ma. It was not very clear.   

**A:**  Even the house in which the present Dalai Lama was born conforms to the one revealed in the 'Lake.' But in the beginning, they had to say that he was just a candidate otherwise there were lot of obstacles to bringing him to Tibet.   

**Q:**  It is said that from the very beginning when they were sent to go to Kumbum, Reting Rimpoche already knew that the Kumbum candidate was the actual reincarnation. How did he know it?   

**A:**  I wonder how? I also heard that the Dalai Lama told a lot of things to the Ketsang [Tib. ཀེའུ་ཚང] Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  Some say that Tsörujenpa, the deity of Phenpo Ganden Chöngor, explained in detail the meaning of the three letters, A, Ka and Ma which Reting Rimpoche saw in the Sacred Lake. After this, Reting came to the conclusion that the Kumbum born incarnate was the real reincarnation of the 13th.   

**A:**  I think the prophecies given by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> and other deities differ from the ones which they give to the inner circle or to the concerned individuals and the one which they announce to the general public. This is, I think, quite true. I also heard that when this Dalai Lama was to come to India, Nechung gave a prophecy saying that the Dalai Lama doesn't need to go, [Tib. འདྲེ་ང་ལ་ཡ་ང་མེད], but internally it was prophesied to go.   

**Q:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> prophesied, "I, the ghost will provide the ferry on the river" [Tib. རབ་མེད་པའི་ཆུ་བོ་ལ་འདྲེ་ངས་གྲུ་ཤན་རྟ་འགོ་བྱེད].   

**A:**  This must be later on.   

**Q:**  Do you remember about the reincarnation coming up [to Lhasa]?   

**A:**  We went to receive him at the field called Döguthang [Tib. འདོད་རྒུ་ཐང].   

