# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0000.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Setrong, Wangye [Tib. གསེར་གྲོང་དབང་རྒྱལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Setrong, Wangye [Tib. གསེར་གྲོང་དབང་རྒྱལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 73  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Setrong Wangye was a member of a rich shungyupa (government taxpayer) family [Tib. གཤུང་རྒྱུགས་པ]) in Tülung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང] district. His family had large land holdings with its own miser [Tib. མི་སེར] or bound peasants/serfs and also held the position of Gyatso gembo [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ་རྒན་པོ] for the district. He discusses taxes and an interesting law case between the miser and the district head [Tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] concerning harvesting Dechen district's fields including how the case was settled in Lhasa. He also details the duties of the district's tsodrag [Tib. གཙོ་དྲག] and dingpön officials and discusses Lungshar's reinvestigation of land and taxes.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0000_05/H_0000_05.mp3" type="application/x-audio">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**    

**Q:**  The uprising against Gabde was also just before the revolt, and it was a big peasant's revolt, right?   

**A:**  Yes. they formally appealed to the government. It was a big law case.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the revolt?   

**A:**  It must be something like that [an irrigation dispute]. I don't know the details. After the revolt the song and dance troupe did the a lot of performances about this.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us some other examples of conflicts between miser and lords and how they were settled?   

**A:**  I have had many experiences, although it is hard to find ones that were cleanly and easily settled to tell you about. One case was in Dechen district. It involved 40-50 households and the district head, who at that time was a monk official who was the shabdöpa of the Ex-Governor of Kham, the Doji Dzasa called Chamba Thubten [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཐུབ་བསྟན].   

**Q:**  He died.   

**A:**  When?   

**Q:**  He was the older brother of Phuntso Yügye's [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གཡུ་རྒྱལ] wife.   

**A:**  After he was imprisoned and released, he was in the Municipality Political Consultative Conference [Ch. shi zheng xie]. I heard that he is staying in Surkhang. It was the time when he was the district [head].   

**Q:**  This must have been in in 1947-47 just before the Chinese came, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was around that time. Actually, his term was 3 years, but he was removed after 2 years, one year before his term was over. The reason why he was removed was that when he was the district head, there was a large area of fields that belonged to the district. When it was time for the harvest, these 40-50 miser in the area had to come every year to harvest the district's field for 3 days. This was called the three days "lord's harvest" [Tib. དཔོན་བཙས]. During this three days, all of the people who were able to do labor had to go and in principle, the district's harvest would be completed in three days. They received food and a wage of 3 sho per day. The previous district head was Dombor [Tib. གདོང་པོར]. Since his household was rich, he slaughtered a yak at this time and gave all the meat to the miser during these three days, as well as an abundance of tsamba, dishes made from radish and potatoes and also very good tea. They treated the miser very kindly. Chamba Thubten, however, was too stingy. He was really ridiculous and didn't give food to the miser saying, "Now, the tsamba hasn't been ground, so first bring your own tsamba." Then I heard that the miser said, "If so, please give us tea." However, the miser were saying that he gave them a tea that was like the plain boiled water used for slaughtering pigs. I am not sure whether he had added tea leaves or not. Probably he didn't. He also didn't pay them wages. So in the 2nd year [of his term], when he summoned the miser to work, some of the household fathers [household heads] living below the Dechen District said, "We are not going to harvest because you treated us like this [badly] last year. First give us the last year's tsamba which is 4 dre and 3 phul for three days and the wages and of course you have to give us the tsamba for this year." He [the district head] said, "It would not be alright if you don't come to harvest." And then he pulled out a pistol and waved it at the miser and said, "Are you coming or not coming tomorrow." That evening some of the miser leaders came to me about this. I said I will try to help you tomorrow morning. So I went with them the next morning to the district. I met the district head and said, "You shouldn't do this. Give them last year's tsamba and wages. If you do not have the tsamba ready, if you give them barley it will be all right. You should give them the wages and good food. During the Dombor era, that was done. You should give them the tsamba and the tea with some more butter and I will make them harvest the fields." The miser had a list of people who went and it was about 200-300 person for three days. So that came to about 60 khe of barley [that they were owed]. However, the district head was too stingy and didn't want to give the barley, so he said, "I don't have the barley to give them right away. After the harvest, I will give it to them gradually. First, have them do the harvest." I said, "I can't say that." I tried to convince him, but he refused and said only that he will give the grain slowly later to them. So I went to tell the miser this and we discussed what they planned to do. That night there was a big discussion and they decided to send one person from each household to Lhasa to make an appeal. They asked me to come with them and I agreed, but I said there is no need to send one person from each household, 7-8 people will be fine. So they agreed. There was a person called Papa Trinley who was a tough person and I told him, "You should lead the miser and look at the fields and when the time comes to harvest, harvest your own fields and probably the district might not provoke you. In case the district again provokes you, just say you are sorry and do whatever you can do like running away, but do not get beaten. Just go ahead and harvest your own fields and leave the district's harvest." So the next morning we went to Lhasa riding horses. The miser left early that morning and there were 7-8 of us. I wrote a petition according to the system to be submitted to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  How would you submit the petition to the Kashag?   

**A:**  Usually Gadrung Dumra [Tib. བཀའ་དྲུང་ལྡུམ་ར] [one of the Kashag's aides] was a person who would always scold people a lot, but since I had to go to the Kashag many times, he would treat me very nicely and he was a nice person. So first I went to Gadrung Dumra and showed him the petition and told him about the case and I said, "Please submit this to the Kashag and I am going to come to the Kashag tomorrow."   

**Q:**  Did you have to give him one kind of gift?   

**A:**  Normally, all the petitions would be submitted through either the gadrung or the gandrön [two kinds of aides]. I gave him a khata and an envelope with some money and requested him to submit the petition. He gave me back the khata and money and said, "It will be alright, this is a case related to the miser, come tomorrow morning to the Kashag." The next morning, I went with some of the household heads of the miser to the Kashag. He [Gadrung Dumra] took the petition and asked me, "How many representatives do you have here?" I said we have this number of people. He said, "You people just go back right away as you have to do the harvest. I will make sure you have a response in 2-3 days." Then I told the others to go back and I will stay. The next morning when I went to Dumra. He said the case had been transferred to the Yigtsang [Ecclesiastics Office] so I should go there to pursue the case.   

**Q:**  It was because he [the district head] was a monk official, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So I went to the Potala to the Yigtsang Office and they said, "Yes we have the case and it will be decided immediately. Just wait for today, and we will make the decision."   

**Q:**  Who was the Yigtsang's secretary (Tib. ཡིགཙང་ཉེརཔ [ཡིག་ཚང་གཉེར་པ])?   

**A:**  He was the one nicknamed Kamtragla [Tib. སྐམ་སྐྲག་ལགས]. I knew him and he was also a nice person. So I went the next day and they said, "We have sent the edict. You are the Gyatso Gembo, so you go back and take the responsibility and make the district head pay the miser the wages and tsamba for the previous year immediately. As for the next district head, we will send a real person."   

**Q:**  Did Kamtragla say that?   

**A:**  Yes. He meant that Chamba Thubdenla was not like a human being.   

**Q:**  He really was not like a real man.   

**A:**  He didn't have any ability.   

**Q:**  But he was the boy friend of Jawtang [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང] [a famous Trunyichemmo].   

**A:**  That's why he was given to the Doji Dzasa and he got all the inheritance of the Doji Dzasa. That day I returned home and the next day I went to the district. That day the district's 12 nangsen were harvesting the crop and the district head was there overseeing them. I dismounted my horse and saluted to him by taking off my hat. He asked where have you been. I said to Lhasa. He said, "The miser are not coming to harvest, so I am planning to do it by myself."   

**Q:**  He was just saying that in a sarcastic manner, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then I said, "Sir [Tib. ཀུངö]! Most probably you will receive an edict from the Yigtsang. They made a decision about the harvesting." He said, "What happened?" I said, "I don't have any details to tell you. When the edict arrives, you will know." The edict came the next day. It had been sent through the post till Dongkar [Tib. གདོང་དཀར] and then through the pony messenger from one district to the next [Tib. rzdong skyel rta shad]. I got a message to come to the district. The district head was sitting reading the edict and he had a long face [Tib. ཞལ་རས་གློད]. I just went through the motions of asking him what was in the edict. He gave it to me and I read it. I said, "Oh, I see. If this is the case, will you give them the tsamba and wages for the previous year tomorrow or the day after that?" The district head said, "Well, first I will think about this." Then I told him there is not much to think about it because it is time to harvest the fields. Usually, many miser would harvest the district's fields, but this year they could just harvest a little bit. He asked me, "How shall we do the harvest for this year?" I said, "If you give them food, I will tell them to come, if not, I can't tell them that. You have to give them last year's barley first." Then on the next day, I counted the barley for last year which was 1 dre and 3 phul per day. The total was about 60 khe of barley. I made him pay that to the miser one by one. Then I told the miser that you have to do the harvest of the district tomorrow. The district head said that he hadn't ground the tsamba, and will pay you the barley [instead of tsamba] after the harvest. I will guarantee that he will pay it. The next day, early morning, I got it from the district head and gave it to the miser. This time they did the district and miser's harvesting simultaneously as it was late. The district head was withdrawn after his second year because of this, and then Gyentsen Phüntsola took over the district from him. Wasn't that the time when the district was managed by the government?   

**Q:**  No. This was long after that in 1954.   

**A:**  Oh yes. this was in 1954. Then probably the short monk official nicknamed Tsogrila came.   

**Q:**  What are the tsodrag's duties?   

**A:**  They were established by the 13th Dalai Lama. Although there used to be just a name of that, but they couldn't [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Under the tsodrag, there was the dingpön, right?   

**A:**  Dingpön was a term used in the border areas like Nyan [Tib. གཉན] and Lhuntse and it is equivalent to the Gyatso Gembo. The duty of the tsodrag is to be the miser's representative. If there is any trouble to be settled in that area regarding the taxes or law cases, in the edicts they would normally write that the district head and tsodrag should jointly make the decision. It was the person who would discuss things with the district. In our Tsede district, there were 6-7 households who were tsogdrag: The aristocrats Changöba, Ringang, Kündeling, and the Tshurphu and the Para Estate plus 2-3 from shungyupa households including me. But this is just said verbally and is written in the document, but in reality, the head of the district settles the issues himself. The tsodrag have no power. They were called for meetings, etc. They would call the tsodrag from everywhere when they do things like collecting grain from the babshi [Tib. འབབ་ཞིབ] tax. A district head or his representative would come from the district and they would make the tsodrag do the jobs like measuring grain and that stuff. The most power would be the district head or his representative. The tsodrag didn't have power at all.   

**Q:**  Did the tsodrag get a salary?   

**A:**  No. They also brought their own food.   

**Q:**  Under the district, there were the Gyatso Gembo and tsodrag, right? Who else were there?   

**A:**  The gembo (village headman).   

**Q:**  Are the gembo appointed by the dzong or the miser?   

**A:**  The miser would appoint them.   

**Q:**  I think the gembo was done in rotation.   

**A:**  No. There were different kinds of systems [for selecting gembo]. The miser would say that we should do it by rotation. But if the household whose turn came up didn't have a capable people, they will discuss it. Although at that time we didn't call it an election, normally most of the miser would request that an older and better man in the village be the gembo. This was done by the miser themselves. For example, nearby there was a village called Gyatö [Tib. རྒྱ་སྟོད] which had 7 tax fields or tregang (Tib. ཁྲལ་རྐང). They required a gembo for their 12-13-14 households and they got together and insisted and asked that one capable man called Tsedrug [Tib. ཚེས་དྲུག] be the gembo because they had trouble when they did the rotation. They decided to divide some portion of his gangdro [Tib. རྐང་འགྲོ] taxes among the other miser [as payment]. So he got a kind of wages for doing the gembo job and he accepted. Some of them also did it on rotation where the estate made the order of the rotation and they did the gembo in terms of a year. We government txpayer serfs or shungyupa [Tib. གཞུང་རྒྱུགས་པ] actually had two kinds of tax fields or gang [Tib. རྐང]. One was the "existing gang," or degang [Tib. བསྡད་རྐང] and the other was the 7, 33 "extinct gang," or donggang [Tib. སྟོང་རྐང]. The donggang had a little bit of concessions on the gangdro taxes because only the man and the land was linked on that and there wasn't any animal [transport taxes]. Regarding this, the aristocratic and religious estates used to complain that shungyupa had a lot of land, but they didn't have to work much for taxes. During Lungshar's time, he did an investigation and made a new tax called shiphar [Tib. ཞིབ་འཕར] which was an extra tax made after his investigation of the aristocratic and religious estates that involved a large amount of barley to be collected. They also set up an office to collect it.   

**Q:**  The Iron-Tiger Year Land Enumeration was not done by Lungshar, right?   

**A:**  Right. It was made in 1830. There used to be many land enumerations like the Fire-Sheep Year Enumeration, but those were partially done in some areas and weren't done completely, and it was inconvenient to impose the taxes and there was a lot of chaos among the miser. Then, after the 9th or the 10th Dalai Lama passed away, during the Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] Regent, he made the Iron-Tiger Land Enumeration. There were a few people who said that this was very good, but the majority were saying that it was not fair. Finally, Lungshar did a thorough investigation and, for example, he made Sambo pay 5,000-6,000 khe of barley for the [new] "babshi" [Tib.འབབཞིབ] tax.   

**Q:**  Did Sambo have to pay this as an extra tax each year?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So this became income for the government, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Similarly, the other aristocrats had to pay 1,000-2,000-400-500 khe of barley.   

**Q:**  So this was Lungshar's accomplishment, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Therefore, during the time when the 13th Dalai Lama was alive, the Kudrak couldn't handle Lungshar because he was capable and he could report whatever he wanted to the Dalai Lama. In the archives, I saw many of his reports to the Dalai Lama when he went to Tsang for the investigation [of land and taxes]. He would get the approval of the Dalai Lama for whatever he reported. He was a very capable person who thought about the government and probably there wasn't a single aristocrat who didn't have to pay the [additional] shiphar [Tib. ཞིབ་འཕར] tax. They set up an office called Shiphar Lekhung which collected large amounts of barley. Therefore, all of the aristocrats were badly hurt and as soon as the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, Lungshar was destroyed. Actually, Lungshar didn't do anything wrong, but there was a lot of talk saying that there were some internal and external [factors] [Tib. ཕྱི་ནང་གཉིས]. Finally, they gouged out his eyeballs and confiscated his property and decreed that his children were not allowed to become government officials. Lhalu was Lungshar's son, but they said that his father was Shelkar Lingpa [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་གླིང་པ] so he was able to become a government official.   

