# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0049.01  
##  : with Radö Labrang Chandzö [Tib. ར་སྟོད་བླ་བྲང་ཕྱག་མཛོད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Radö Labrang Chandzö [Tib. ར་སྟོད་བླ་བྲང་ཕྱག་མཛོད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 67  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Radö [Tib. ར་སྟོད] was from a family of bound peasants/serfs (Tib. མི་སེར) who became the manager (Chandzö) [Tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] of the well-known Radö Rimpoche. In this interview, he discusses his life and Tibet in the 1950's, starting from when the Chinese first came to Tibet in 1951. In particular, he discusses his first-hand account of the 1959 uprising in Lhasa.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0049_01/H_0049_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I wanted to ask you what you were doing from the 1949-50 to 1959, and where were you staying?   

**A:**  So during this period this is about my personal story, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Around 1949 and before that I was in Lhasa. Mainly, I stayed in Lhasa until the age of 16 years. The way of life in Tibet was quite unusual. My mother was from [belonged to] the Dekyiling [Tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང] family and my father was from [belonged to] the Lhalu family. So I was sort of a person with two lords [Tib. pön [དཔོན] with both lords sort of saying they wanted me. There was Dekyiling Kungö Gendün Chöyangla [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་དབྱངས་ལགས] who was a descendent of Dekyiling. His children were related to Trenthong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] and others such as you Kungö, since the mother was from Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག]. So Kungö wanted me as a servant. Later, he retired from government service and became a monk. The Lhalu family, however, didn't let things be, and at age 16 I was called back to Lhalu and put in the Gusung [Bodyguard] Regiment to fulfill their tax obligation. So I served in that regiment [as a soldier] for 2 years. Then, at age 18, the Bodyguard regiment was divided up and half were sent on leave [dismissed and sent home until needed].   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  When I was 18, it was before the Chinese came. So, Kungö, it was like this. The Bodyguard Regiment's Depön was Simbü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད], the father of Gompasar [Tib. དགོན་པ་གསར]. He was a capable man, but since he was the most powerful person in the regiment, the others did not listen to him and he sort of couldn't manage. At that time, they were giving the soldiers a lot of construction work. These were given separate salary [by Simbü]. They were given a lot of construction work. They built one house and sold it and then they built another and sold it. That's what Kungö did. This [the selection of who was to be able to leave] didn't hold well with the Kudrak and so half of the Bodyguard soldiers were let go. Who went home was decided by a lottery system for those whose homes were close to Lhasa. Then we returned to our village again. It was a very poor village. There was nothing there.   

**Q:**  Where was it?   

**A:**  The village was called Nyemo Barthang [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་བར་ཐང]. I had an elder sister there who was looking after the place so I returned hoping that I could be of help to her. Then I was called by Dekyiling Kungö [as a servant]. However, then the Dekyiling estate was given to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> [Tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] [the regent]. So I served for [Dekyiling] for about 2 years. During this time Radö [Tib. ར་སྟོད] Rimpoche was brought to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Rampa</a> Khangsar [Tib. རམ་པ་ཁང་གསར] house [that belonged to Dekyiling] and Kungö became a monk [Radö was his root lama. It appears Dekyiling gave the subject to his root guru, Radö]. While I was working [for Radö], the [ex-] Regent Reting returned [to Lhasa]. At that time, the regent was Talungdra. It was said that after 3 years the regency would be handed back to Reting. We didn't know if that was true since it was just street-talk, but Reting did come to Lhasa to take over the reigns of the government. When he came, we were recalled to the Bodyguard Regiment to participate in a marching drill in formation [Tib. རུ་སྒྲིག] along with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment. Usually the Bodyguard Regiment goes out only when the Dalai Lama moves about. [At other times only the other regiments like the Trapchi and the Police Regiments go]. During this time, I don't know why, but we were called. We were all assembled at the Möndrong [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོང] Bridge with the Bodyguard Regiment first, then the Trapchi Regiment, then the Gyantse Regiment and then the Police Regiment. All the Bodyguard soldier's hair was bangkali . When I was staying with Rimpoche, my hair was this long, so when we had to go for the military formation, I had to cut it. That evening, Dekyiling Kungö went to Lhalu and asked for a leave for me [from the Bodyguard Regiment] since he said that I was serving [Radö Rimpoche]. So Lady Lhalu Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ] [the family head tghen] was approached and asked about this. She said that we have gone through a lot of problems with this boy, so [it is okay] but please send a substitute [soldier]. If you do that, we will let him go [release him from that corvée duty]. So then I took leave from the Bodyguard Regiment. At that time the Depön was Kungö Phala [not Chemmo but his younger brother], the one who is presently staying in Switzerland. He was friendly with them [Dekyiling Kungö and Lhalu] and thus he gave me leave. In this way, I came to serve Rimpoche and remained in Lhasa and mostly served [Radö] Rimpoche and went together with him to the places he went. We did not go to very big places, but to areas such as Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར], and once or twice to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང], and to other places such as Phempo [Tib. འཕན་པོ] where Rimpoche went to give religious teachings. Then in 1956, we went to India for a pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  Where were you when the Chinese arrived at Chamdo?   

**A:**  At that time, I was with Rimpoche at Lhasa. When the Chinese came to Chamdo, I remember that there was Gadrung Dumrala [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར་ལགས] who often came to see Rimpoche. During this specific period, he came to see Rimpoche and requested a divination saying, "Last night the telephone was working at Chamdo, but since this morning, nobody is picking up the phone there." Rimpoche did the dice divination three times and said, "Never in my lifetime have I had such a bad divination since all three times the dice showed twelves." Actually, at that time Chamdo had already been lost.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it about this time that His Holiness, the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a>? Then the 17-Point Agreement was implemented. Then the Dalai Lama came up to Lhasa and right around then didn't a lot of Chinese soldiers come?   

**A:**  Yes. After the Dalai Lama arrived. The Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> from the 11th day of the 10th lunar month. I had been sent to the village and I left on the 10th. So when I got to Nyethang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང], they said the Dalai Lama is coming, the Dalai Lama is coming.   

**Q:**  So this was when the Dalai Lama was coming from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a>?   

**A:**  No, he was going to Tromo. At that time, there were some rumors, but the Chinese had actually not come.   

**Q:**  So during this time what were the people in Lhasa thinking?   

**A:**  Everybody was in some sort of fear, thinking that the Chinese were coming soon. That's about it, nothing really special, but just fear. The army was already sent down [to Chamdo) and they had already lost and returned, including their leaders. One of these may have been Jarig [Tib. བྱ་རིགས] Depön. And Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] Depön may have fought some there. The people [the Khambas there in Chamdo] probably did not think that the Chinese were going to bring them much suffering. There may have been feeling that they liked the Chinese more than the Tibetans. The people sort of revolted against the government soldiers and gave them some trouble. One problem was that there was no unity, so we lost. Then when the Dalai Lama went there [Tromo] that summer, the Chinese came.   

**Q:**  To Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. The Dalai Lama stayed at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> during the winter and around the 5th month the Chinese came [to Lhasa marching] in formation [Note: this was advance PLA unit]. It was around Spring {Note: it was Summer 1951]. They had come via Dechen [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན] and the Government made preparations for them at Magarsarpa [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ], "the new military camp." I don't think there were more than 2-300.   

**Q:**  The first ones, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and they came marching in formation.   

**Q:**  So what were people in Lhasa doing [regarding this]?   

**A:**  The people saw it as something quite majestic [Tib. གཟི་བརྗིད་ཆེན་པོ] and thought that we had fought against them and definitely can not match them. That's what most thought and there was no fear regarding that. It seemed like a show for the onlookers. We went together with a lot of people alongside [the troops] to Magarsarpa. There they [PLA soldiers] sat on the field and drank tea which looked like water. I doubt there were more than 300. So the people were like that and no deep thoughts occurred.   

**Q:**  So they came and stayed at the "new military camp." Where is that?   

**A:**  Yes, they were put up there. It's towards the southern side [of the city] near the Tsangpo [Tib. གཙང་པོ] river, close to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a>'s house [Tib. གླང་མདུན]. Langdün and were opposite each other. We are inside the Lingkor [Tib. གླིང་སྐོར], the circumambulation road around the city. They were given the "new military camp which earlier was a Tibetan military camp, That's where they stayed.   

**Q:**  Then when the Chinese started increasing in numbers, did the people's mind start changing - or, what happened? A lot of Chinese came, so how long a time passed [before the people had a change of mind]?   

**A:**  It took a lot of time.   

**Q:**  The 200-300 that came was after 1951.   

**A:**  1949.   

**Q:**  It was in 1951, right?   

**A:**  Wasn't it 1949? Was it 1951?   

**Q:**  No. The 17-Point Agreement has already been signed and that was in 1951. And the Dalai Lama has already come up from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a>, right? That was in 1951.   

**A:**  So for about 3 years the Chinese stayed like that.   

**Q:**  Their numbers were not more than that?   

**A:**  A lot more came in small batches. And many [Han Chinese] came on their own. Tibet was quite free then. The Chinese did not have full control. There were those Chinese who fixed bicycles and shoes, and those who did a lot of doiong tricks and entertainment [Tib. རྩེད་མོ] (maybe acrobatics, etc), and they ran restaurants and shops that sold sea food, etc, etc. So many Chinese people came.   

**Q:**  Not soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes. In Tibet they were called "Blue Chinese," (Tib. gyami ngönbo [རྒྱ་མི་སྔོན་པོ]). It seemed that they were idlers and jobless people. Since the Chinese did not have full control of Tibet, they had the freedom to come and many did.   

**Q:**  Later when they came, in which places did they stay?   

**A:**  They stayed in every nook and cranny. There was a place called Lhubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] where there was some empty land. It was full of tents. Other than that, the bicycle repairmen, cobblers, etc, were all over. All kinds of showmen with monkeys holding a plow and dogs plowing fields, gun shooters, wheel throwers, etc. were everywhere; in every nook and cranny. So they stayed for quite sometime. In 1959, when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had arisen, they were sent down [to inland China] [Note: This was in 1958].   

**Q:**  When the Chinese first came, what were they saying was their policy?   

**A:**  They said that they have come to help Tibet. So that's what they told the people. Then we became all familiar with each other, and the Chinese were very meek [Tib. སྙོམ་ཆུང]. The Tibetans would just bully them, saying Shishilala [Tib. ྾ཨི་྾ཨི་ལ་ལ] which means bad. .   

**Q:**  Yes. Some say that in the beginning if you hit them they didn't do anything.   

**A:**  Yes. At first they would just bear it. They were absolutely harmless, saying that they are helping the Tibetans. But they were nothing special. They did their own work; they did their construction. The traders benefited a lot, so we became so familiar that there was no fear as such. Neither were we conscious nor apprehensive at all that later we would be suppressed. So the way we thought in traditional times was strangely unique. There was a great gap between the government and the people. From the government side there was no policy as far as the people were concerned. The people saw the government as something oppressive and did not think that the government was ours and wish something good for the government or be concerned if the government lost. Such thoughts, nobody had.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came, the People's Association arose. How long was this after the Chinese came?   

**A:**  This was probably in 1953-54. [Note: the first Association started in 1952]   

**Q:**  I had heard that there were 2 People's Associations. There was one at first. So in Lhasa during this time, who was in it?   

**A:**  The ones who first started it were Alo Chöndze, Shelkar [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར] Chandzö who was from Tö [Tib. སྟོད] Shelkar. Then there was Chandzö Thamchö [Tib. དམ་ཆོས] who used to stay in Tsomöling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང]. They were the main ones mostly. From the government's side, among the government Kudrak there were also contacts. Secretly, there was Phala Kungö Drönyerchemmo and a monk official (tsidrung) of Magji Tsütrimla's [Tib. ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ལགས] household called [Kelsang Ngawang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ངག་དབང]. Their type were mainly "instigating" [Tib. འབོད་སྐུལ] then [against the Chinese]. The People's Association arose to as an organization.   

**Q:**  As I already mentioned, there was supposed to be two Associations and Alo Chöndze and so forth were supposed to be the later one [Note: It started in 1956]. Anyway, what was the group saying and why did they form this organization?   

**A:**  Alo Chöndze, I wonder if they were together or whether it was formed after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was formed. That I'm not sure. Anyway in the first one, Thamchö was there. Then there was somebody who died in Kalimpong. I forgot his name.   

**Q:**  The one from Sera.   

**A:**  Yes, I think he was from Sera. He had a restaurant in Kalimpong and died there. Then when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> [formed], they were supposed to be from the people, and a golden throne was presented [to the Dalai Lama]. That's when it first formed.   

**Q:**  When did it first start?   

**A:**  They said a golden throne was to be made. Then the organizations joined, I think. So I don't know whether Alo Chöndze was in the first one or not.   

**Q:**  So around 1955-56 there were a lot of problems in Kham. There were problems before that, but after that a lot of the Khambas came to Lhasa. So were you in Lhasa at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, I was.   

**Q:**  So at Lhasa, during a certain period, did a lot of them come?   

**A:**  Mostly Dome <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> [Tib. མདོ་སྨད་ཨ་མདོ] came. Since the revolt started there earlier, many Amdo people came to Lhasa. People have strange thinking, you know. They were fully aware of the Chinese system there and they fought and then they fled. Then when they came to Lhasa, they sort of thought of again "expanding" [Tib. རྒྱ་སྐྱེད] doing business. Some sent watches to their homeland [trading them], and that's how they stayed. The way they were going about it, I doubt whether they ever thought that the situation down there [in Amdo] was lost and the same thing would happen here. They had bought houses. People like Gungthang Tsültrim [Tib. གུང་ཐང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས] and their kind had bought a lot of grain, and sent it to the Northern areas and did a lot of trading. Some bought watches from India and sent them home [traded with them]. That's how they stayed and there wasn't sort of any idea of giving things this side.   

**Q:**  So when Khambas and Amdos came to Lhasa, were the Chinese saying anything. Finally the Khambas went to Lhoka, what was the reason?   

**A:**  Mainly, there was this Water-Mouse Year Chinese war [Tib. ཆུ་བྱི་རྒྱ་དམག] when the Chinese took hold during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama was in Kalimpong and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment and the people gathered the troops [Tib. དམག་གསོག་རྒྱག] in Drigutang [Tib. གྲི་གུ་ཐང] and all the people revolted. Something like that happened in the old days. Like that, they [Chushigandru] made Drigutang as the base, I think. Since it was successful earlier they considered it sort of lucky [Tib. ཁ་དྲོ་པོ]. And so it was said that that's what took place at Drigu in the old days.   

**Q:**  So during this time were you in Lhasa working for the Labrang?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So how was it during this time, the situation in Lhasa?   

**A:**  It was as I've mentioned. The Chinese were doing their own work and it was a good time for traders. And even the Chinese soldiers from their salary bought watches, etc. on the sly. And unlike staying in China, since the Chinese had to trick the Tibetans, the soldiers had some freedom and were better treated. So everything was sort of good and people didn't have that much doubt.   

**Q:**  So during this time were you trading?   

**A:**  No. We were not trading. Rimpoche went about and in Barthang we had an estate. Our late Kungö gave the main estate to Talungdra. There was a Barthang estate that was known as Peri [Tib. དཔལ་རི] estate that had about 27 miser. He collected kind of lifetime salary from this estate. So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and stuff had to be sent were sent to him.   

**Q:**  In 1954, the Dalai Lama went down to China along with Panchen Lama, right. So during this time what did Lhasa people do?   

**A:**  In the minds of the Lhasa people there was worry that the Chinese may not do good things [not treat him well]. That was everybody's concern. A lot of people cried and shouted slogans. During this time there were no bridges, so at the place was called Lhedong Shankha [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ], what is today called the Kuru Bridge, one crossed by coracles. In winter, there was a ferry, but in summer there were only coracles. So at that time so many people had come [to see him off]. Rimpoche and myself were there. Both the tutors to the Dalai Lama were there. I crossed over to the other side to help. the Dalai Lama also gave an audience to the people and also on the other side. So some of the older women were shouting, "Please don't go, it's no good" etc, and among the people there was a lot of shouting. So everybody was concerned and thought that the Dalai Lama should really not go because the [Chinese] might do something.   

**Q:**  So during this time in Lhasa do you recall any sort of agitation by the People's Association or any putting up of posters? Something saying hings like- Oh! There was some agitation or problem during the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] Prayer Festival, etc.?   

**A:**  There were some letters thrown in certain corners. There were some posters [Tib. ཚགས་པར] saying the people should rise up.   

**Q:**  Was it newspapers or did they just put up posters/flyers (on walls) ?   

**A:**  Mostly it was thrown. Once during the Mönlam, they secretly put letters in tin cans and threw them where the monks exited after getting their alms [Tib. བཤར་བཀག]. Then in the alleys everywhere. So mostly this was connected with the group that was in Kalimpong and those staying in India. They used to print these and then send them.   

**Q:**  What was in Kalimpong? Was there some sort of group?   

**A:**  Yes, there was. Most of them are now dead. There was Kungö Wangdüla [Tib. དབང་འདུས་ལགས] and Thubten Nyinjila [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟམ་ཉིན་བྱེད་ལགས].   

**Q:**  You mean Wangdüla who was up there; the one who died last year or before?   

**A:**  Yes, the one in store number 8 [he had a store in McCleod Gunj]. Then there was Champa Tsündrü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས]. He has also died. There were 3 monk officials who came to this side [to India].   

**Q:**  So they were in the same group with Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Gyalola?   

**A:**  Yes. And the one from Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ] who was called Kungö Khenjung Lobsang Gyaltsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན].   

**Q:**  The one who stayed at Ganden Villa in Kalimpong and was known as Ganden Villa Khenjung?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right? They bought that house.   

**Q:**  I see. Did the association buy it?   

**A:**  No, he bought it.   

**Q:**  So during this time you were not in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  No. But we went on a pilgrimage in 1956.   

**Q:**  So was there a relation between the Kalimpong group and the one inside [Tibet]?   

**Q:**  Yes, there was.   

**Q:**  So who did the work inside Lhasa? If there was a relationship, then somebody had to come [question not finished]   

**A:**  Among the People's Association, the work was done by Chandzö Thamchö, the Sera person who died in Kalimpong. Then among the higher echelon was Drönyerchemmo Phala, and the Khenjung. He went back and couldn't come out.   

**Q:**  So during this time were the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> involved with the People's Association?   

**A:**  During this time I don't quite know whether there was a relationship or not. Generally, they did things very conscientiously [Tib. ནན་པོ].   

**Q:**  Now regarding public opinion, what were the thoughts of the people regarding the Kashag? Did they have something to say about them? After the Chinese came, around 1951,52, 53, whenever?   

**A:**  There was nothing specific with regard to the people saying that the Kashag was not doing proper work, etc, since traditionally it was not the custom [to criticize]. But there were some songs that were composed.   

**Q:**  Do you remember any songs?   

**A:**  There was something about Shasur, and then there was something about the bearded <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> [Thubten Rabyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས]. Something about - he lost Chamdo and came back [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་བསྐྱལ་ནས་སླེབས་སོང]. There were a lot in the beginning, but during the last [portion] one song said, "If you need more stupid people, there are the fatty and the bearded one." [Tib. བྱབས་ཆུང་སྣོན་པན་དགོས་ན་རྒྱའུ་རྒྱགབ་ཡོད་རེད]. The fatty and the beard meant Shasur and the bearded monk Kalön. . I don't know who composed the song, but it was heard in this way. There were 20 odd women who carried water for the monks during the Mönlam Prayer Festival. So they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> songs in the alleys while carrying water. And since everybody heard them, then they sang them. A few composed it and quietly gave it to them.   

**Q:**  So, let's move to more important ones [matters to ask]. When the Dalai Lama came back from China in 1955. Did you go to receive him?   

**A:**  We went to Gungthang [Tib. གུང་ཐང]. So many people came and the Dalai Lama stayed a day at Gungthang. The soldiers came and said don't throw <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves, but we did it anyway. Nobody was listening and the vehicle could not even be seen [it was covered in scarves].   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to India, how did it go? [He] went in 1956, right?   

**A:**  When [the Dalai Lama] went to India in 1956 we were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང], just a bit ahead of him. Rimpoche had been invited to teach at Rong Jamchen [Tib. རོང་བྱམས་ཆེན] and then around Tsang. We met the Dalai Lama in Delhi.   

**Q:**  Did you go for pilgrimage?   

**A:**  Yes. When we got to Nepal, we heard that the Dalai Lama was in India. Then we flew to Patna and at Delhi we stayed for about 3 days and had an audience with the Dalai Lama. The Panchen Lama was also together [with the Dalai Lama]. I heard that there was some trouble on the way, but since I was not there [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  So during this time did you hear anything about the Dalai Lama staying in India or that he was going back to Tibet?   

**A:**  That happened after we got to Kalimpong. We finished our pilgrimage and the Dalai Lama arrived in Kalimpong. The people invited the Dalai Lama to Kalimpong. They asked the Dalai Lama to stay in Kalimpong and they tried to start some revolt. They made a lot of letters and sent them to Tibet. So for this, Jamyangkyil and they were there. The ones who were staying in India. So a lot of the traders implied that they were going to carry weapons and do a lot. Finally, it was said that India did not guarantee [his stay] and so he returned. So Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche told [Radö] Rimpoche that there was no hurry and so to come later. So we stayed in Kalimpong until the New Year was over. The Dalai Lama gave a long-life initiation [Tib. ཚེ་དབང] and that day we were there to receive it.   

**Q:**  So when the Dalai Lama was coming to India - When the Chinese first came in 1951-52, they were being nice and they had a diplomatic policy. Then slowly things got worse right until in the end. So things didn't work out? What happened? Why didn't it work out?   

**A:**  Most probably they were gentle [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] until the motor roads were completed. They left things to diplomacy and were tactful [Tib. མཁས་པོ] without exercising their power. Then after the roads were completed, more and more soldiers came and then they started saying you can't do this and you can't do that. So in this way, they got more and more forceful. Finally, after they had fully made the preparations for war, the real problem arose when they said that they were going to invite the Dalai Lama to a show. The one on the 1st day.   

**Q:**  Were you in Lhasa at that time?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So what happened? When the uprising arose, where were you? How did you hear about it?   

**A:**  We were at our quarters. [It was said] the Dalai Lama would be invited to a show tomorrow at the place where the Chinese soldiers were first kept, the Magar sarpa. That was where it was [going to happen]. That's where the preparations were being made. It was just next to us. Then the people started going around saying that tomorrow they are going to invite the Dalai Lama and this will never do. The people were quietly saying these things back and forth at night. Some were quietly saying these things. So at night a lot of the people went down to Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  So at that time were there people who were leading the people?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. During that time there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> Yöndala [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་ཡོན་བདག་ལགས]. Then maybe this Garpönla [Tib. གར་དཔོན་ལགས], the head of the Dalai Lama's dance troupe. I wonder if he's the one [not sure], there was a clerk, jola [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས].   

**Q:**  Was there anybody who is staying here in Dharamsala?   

**A:**  No, not any longer. Those are all finished. So at that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> Yöndala was there. They went down [to Norbulinga] at night. They closed the gates and said that you cannot take the Dalai Lama. So many people gathered. Then Chamdo Phakpala [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་འཕགས་པ་ལྷ], I think, went to Drungja that morning. Then he went down riding a bicycle and maybe he was armed with a gun. He was killed by the people. So from that time on, it really arose [the uprising]. So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Kungö came down [to Norbulinga] and couldn't enter because he was stoned and wounded. The car was also stoned. Then Surkhang came. The Dalai Lama had written about 3 letters [to the Chinese]. The first said that you had invited me to the show, but some of our people didn't understand and created commotion and so I am ashamed, something like that. The second was similar and was given through Ngabö. On one occasion Surkhang was sent and at that time the people sort of had some belief in Surkhang. It was thought that if the others were sent, they would be stoned or something [by the masses]. So Surkhang was sent and even to him the people shouted, "You cannot carry two heads." and a lot of other things.   

**Q:**  Where were you during this time?   

**A:**  At Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Not around <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, right?   

**A:**  No. I went to look and saw when they brought Chamdo Phakphala's body. It came through Jangsebshar [Tib. ལྕང་གསེབ་ཤར] to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> [Tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང]. They put it in a house called Omkhang [Tib. ཨོམ་ཁང], and that's where I saw it. The people were throwing dust on him. Then in the evening I went to see if <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> Yöndala had come up. He told me the whole story. He arrived like he was drunk and murmuring. When he took off his sash (belt) his gun fell down. He hadn't eaten.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came did any trouble break out, like fights between the Tibetan and Chinese soldiers. Did someone got shot and died, etc?   

**A:**  No, not much like that. After the Chinese had been in Tibet for quite some time, they pulled strings between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers and the Chinese.   

**Q:**  What do you mean pulled strings?   

**A:**  Trechung: [Tib. བཀྲས་ཆུང] [Had a] Tug of war.   

**Q:**  Tug of War, I see, the game.   

**A:**  So when they pulled, the Chinese lost and it almost ended up in a fight. When they lost there was a line, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers didn't stop at it and pulled them all the way kicking up a cloud of dust . Then the Chinese almost wanted to fight. Other than that, there was something about one or two Chinese that were caught. They may have been spies. When the Dalai Lama went to the Mönlam Festival, one Chinese was caught by the Tibetan soldiers at Gyambumgang. The soldiers were patrolling the roof tops and when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] oracle was coming into trance, a Chinese came through and he was caught by our soldiers. They say he was wearing an overcoat [Ch. da gua zi] made from serge and had a rifle with him. He was put in the Police Station and interrogated. Regarding this matter, the Chinese protested [to the Tibetans] saying that it is serious that you have interrogated him and then they asked, "In which regiment are you keeping him."   

**Q:**  Before the Dalai Lama left [for India], was there some gun or cannon fire?   

**A:**  Cannon fire. I think it was on the 6th day. We heard it at the Kyangthangkha [Tib. rkyang sthang kha] where during the 13th Dalai Lama time an electricity station was built. The shell fell behind that. I think there were about 2 shots.   

**Q:**  So after the Dalai Lama left then what happened around Lhasa and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>?   

**A:**  I was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> area around the 6th and also the 7th and the 8th. Rimpoche had come down. Before the Dalai Lama left, just after dark, we returned, Rimpoche and myself. So the Dalai Lama left on the night of the 8th. When we got back it was around 8 p.m. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers were sent out from the Chamko [Tib. ཆབ་སྒོ] bridge to the Jakpori [Tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] side suspecting that Chinese might be coming. There was a shimmering yellow as the soldiers moved [in the dark]. So on the bridge there was Depön Tashi Perala [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ་ལགས] and a Khamba. They were talking. They didn't recognize me. Then on the 10th of the Tibetan calendar, at night at about 1 a.m., the Chinese started firing cannons. Inside Lhasa, some thought there was going to be a war and people started digging wells and putting sand bags to block their doors. There was a lot of such commotion. During this time, whether one can call me a stupid man or not, there was no basis to wage a battle as I think of it now. As far as arms were concerned, the Tibetans only had guns, we didn't have even a bomb. As for them [Chinese], you could not even see one person. All the guns in the bunkers [Tib. སོ་ཁུང] were set in sections and they were ready to fire at all strategic locations. Right in front of us, in front of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Langdun, was this very long bunker. All over Lhasa [it was like that].   

**Q:**  Was it a long bunker?   

**A:**  Yes, it was built very high. Then down by Lubu, at the Yuthok bridge, there was another [bunker] built high. Then before arriving at Potala, just past the stone pillar (Tib. དོརིང [Tib. རྡོ་རིང]) there was another one.   

**Q:**  So on these [bunkers] they had large guns?   

**A:**  Yes, but mostly they were bren-guns and others. Then on the main roads, they were tunnels with large guns. So that's the way they were ready. So we had some people who could move about. but we didn't have such equipment. So there was no way that just [regular] people could match this. Our tenants were saying, people are digging wells and we are also doing this [in order to have a source of water in their own house compound]. So I said there is no need to do such things, nothing is going to happen. So they were saying such things to me. I said, we have a neighbor, Bumthang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང], so if you need water then I will ask him through our window, so there is no need at all to dig wells. At the most it will be just 3 days or so. Rimpoche gave our 5 or 6 tenants some 20 odd <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> [Tib. རྡོ་ཚད] and said to buy some food. I didn't even move any sand to the doorstep. Then on the 10th night, they fired. It was quite moderate. At first I was so scared.   

**Q:**  Was there much noise?   

**A:**  Yes, a lot of noise (dang, dang, dang), lots. It was mainly being fired from Trip [Tib. གྲིབ] [located on the other [east] side the Lhasa river]. How to say it, it was fired making the noise dang, dang, dang [rapid fire].   

**Q:**  Like lightning?   

**A:**  Yes, like that, the cannons.   

**Q:**  Where were they shooting?   

**A:**  At the Potala. In the morning they fired at Jakpori where there were a few Tibetan soldiers. Then the Chinese went into the Shugtri Lingka park [Tib. བཞུགས་ཁྲི་གླིང་ག]. They prepared the way with cannons and then in the ensuing cloud of dust moved in the Chinese soldiers in a haze of yellow. It did not even take the afternoon to take control of Jakpori.   

**A:**  There were Tibetan soldiers on Jakpori, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And by afternoon it was lost. Then in the afternoon, it [firing] subsided somewhat. In Lhasa, considering that there were no arms, there was a tremendous amount of fighting.   

**Q:**  They fought a lot?   

**A:**  Yes, a lot. No matter how much they were firing, the people didn't care and crept along the walls. Since they had no arms, they destroyed Chinese houses by dismantling the walls. They destroyed the Janglocen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] house. Chamdo Phakpala's house was just streaked with bullets. Janglocen's roof drooped a lot.   

**Q:**  What was the Janglocen [house used for]?   

**A:**  It had been bought by the Chinese and [Chinese were] staying there.   

**Q:**  Chinese were staying there?   

**A:**  Yes. The Janglocen house was destroyed. Then there were Chinese in Trenthong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང]'s House so some parts of it were destroyed. The Chinese kept running and collecting together. Then they [Tibetans] went into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> [Tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན]'s House. There were no Chinese in Trimön. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a>'s House, probably there were no Chinese. It's possible that there were a few guards. Anyway, the whole three-story house was brought down from the rear by removing the walls. In Tibet, if the walls are taken out, then that's it since there was no cement. So the Chinese had come right up to Surkhang. There were no Chinese at all in the northern side. They were in Surkhang and Pandatsang. A bit down, was the Kyitö [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད] [House]. In between these two there was just a tremendous amount of shooting. There was so much that when we were going on that side on the morning of the 14th, we had to trudge noisily through the piles of empty shells. So on the 10th and 11th there was quite a bit of shelling. On the 12th, the area around Ramoche [Tib. ར་མོ་ཆེ] was pretty much lost when the tanks [Tib. ཐང, ཧིན་ག་རི].   

**Q:**  Were they tanks?   

**A:**  Yes, but it was not the one with chains (tractor treads], but the ones with wheels and steel plating almost covering the wheels [armored vehicles]. So this managed to take it. From our side, from Trijang Labrang side, there was quite a bit of fighting. Some of the monks were firing. From the other side, at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Langdun, Tsag Serkhang [Tib. རྩག་སེར་ཁང] and the like, there were a lot of Chinese and near us there were so many battlements. Later, one became immune to gunfire. People didn't care and it was the same with us. On the roof tops there was nothing but the whistling of bullets and there was no fear, very strange.   

**Q:**  So who were the ones who were fighting? Was it mostly soldiers fighting the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, there were some soldiers. But mostly it was the people who had taken whatever arms they had. At one point there was the monk official from Thönpa [Tib. ཐིན་པ] who acted as a leader and fought hard. Later, he thought that it wouldn't be good to be captured so he turned his gun on himself.   

**Q:**  During this time were there some leaders, or something like the People's Association?   

**A:**  At this time, there was the Women's Association people like the nun Galingshar [Tib. དགའ་གླིང་ཤར] and others. They were doing some incense burning and yelling, "May God be Victorious." [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱལ་འཐེན]. At night they [Tibetans] came to Lubu. At Kyitö, if there was no cannon fire [people] would creep along the walls and set fire to the doors. The doors were blackened, but they didn't catch fire very well. Messages even came to us asking us to bring kerosene if we had any. Everybody had crept along the walls and burned quite a bit, blackening the doors.   

**Q:**  Which place?   

**A:**  At the Kyitö House, Samdrub Phodrang's house and [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Were the Chinese in those places?   

**A:**  Yes. They crept along the walls.   

**Q:**  Were there Chinese soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes. Soldiers were also there, armed. On top of Samdrub Phodrang they even had set up a mortar. In that area there were quite a lot. Then around 4 p.m., they [the Tibetans] came to the Lubu side. From there they fired cannons against the Yuthok bridge; about four or five shells. None hit the target. They fell into the vegetable garden. Then I was on the rooftop with a gun. I had two sizes. The larger gun I didn't have many bullets. The smaller one I rested on a stone and I was lying down. There was this house called Norzin Gyentsen [Tib. ནོར་འཛིན་རྒྱལ་མཚན]. On that rooftop, 5 Chinese soldiers were standing. Until then I had not seen any Chinese. There had been a lot of firing, but I couldn't see any [actual] soldiers [since they were in bunkers mainly]. On top of Norzin Gyentsen they had placed a bren-gun. I thought that a lot of the Tibetans were firing from this side and they didn't even know that the Chinese had come there. It occurred to me that I should not let them shoot. I had a Mauser pistol and took one shot. Then they all [all 5] laid down. After about 5 minutes, I saw heads popping up occasionally. Then they fixed two bren-guns. I had some bullets and I emptied them all whether or not they hit. Then all of a sudden they had crept along the walls and they came just outside Bumthang. I don't know how, but they knew where I was. Then from the battlement from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> [Langdun], they shot at me like anything. Our house was hit by only one bullet, but the neighbor's house was hit [many times]. Then gradually they came to our house and they threw 2 bombs at me. One exploded in the neighbor's courtyard and wounded some of the horses and mules. The other did not explode. There were some Khambas there, and I told them to throw the bomb away, but they did not. At the back was a servant of Lheding [Tib. ལྷ་ལྡིང], Phurbu Tseringla [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་ཚེ་རིང]. His wife was a relative of Trijang Rimpoche. He and a Ganden monk had rifles and the two fired quite a lot. It was at close quarters and they must have killed a few Chinese, but I don't know how many. The Chinese thought they would lose and left from there. So that night it was quiet. We had a companion, a Radö monk. Then Rimpoche asked who was it that fired the gun and they told him that it was me. So Rimpoche asked me to come down, which I did. He said that what I did will only bring problems upon myself; that they are so strong and one or two of our people won't be able to do anything. So I came down [from the roof]. Anyway. I was cold staying up there too. Then my companion went upstairs from the rear and he was looking with binoculars at something. The Chinese had come to Mentö [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད], which was their house. They were not there earlier. Whether it was shot from there or somewhere else, our man was shot in the back of the head and knocked down. The bullet came out the other end and hit the wall of Liushar's house. Then somebody from inside said that our monk went upstairs. So we sent one boy called Sonam [Tib. བསོད་ནམས] and another, instructing them to tell him to come down since Rimpoche was scolding [us about this]. When the boys returned, they said that he was unconscious. So we thought that he may not be dead and said bring him down immediately. I went up, but some of the people caught me saying do not go. So I said, then you please bring him down. There was no way that anyone could go up right then since there was so much shooting. So I told them to drag him by his feet and bring him down. So they brought him. He had not stopped breathing completely. Then we did the Tibetan custom of putting hot melted butter on his temple [Tib. རླུང་གསང་བཀག] and gradually he gained consciousness. Now there's this very interesting story about when I was putting on the melted butter. In Tibetan houses we have a rooftop opening for light with a small roof.   

**Q:**  Yes, with glass.   

**A:**  Yes. Then this maidservant of Lheding had come running. . Since there was no ladder, she entered from the rooftop opening. Her legs got through the opening, but her dress got caught she and couldn't get through . It was so funny. Some women said come soon as there are two legs up there from our kitchen. We went up and I looked. Poor thing, there were two legs and a piece of dangling shit. At first, I thought it was a boy . Later, on looking properly, it was shit . So I said hurry, pull her up because she won't fit downwards. So they pulled her up and since she was so frightened she could not even speak nor cry. Then after sometime, she cried. So when they pulled her, with the shake the shit fell .   

**Q:**  Yes, that's what happens when people are frightened. So how long did the fight go on?   

**A:**  It was over the next day. On the night of the 12th, we lost. The next morning the Chinese came to our roof. There was a loud noise and people said - now it is no good as the Chinese have come. So thinking that they would take Rimpoche, I thought that I would take him downstairs and hide him among the hay. I took him downstairs, but since the battlements were high up they spotted Rimpoche and immediately noticed. So I took him back to the room. They came and told us to put our hands up. I didn't put my hands up because I thought that if one puts his hands up, then it is surrender and then they will take you away. Their leader was wounded and had one hand in a sling and a pistol in the other. There were about 20 odd soldiers. I told the nun who was a relative of Rimpoche to open the door. I said there was nothing to be afraid of. One or two shots were fired. One hit our table, so I opened the door. They said they wanted to look around. They were so careful crouching along the walls [to make sure there wasn't any threat inside]. I said that there is nothing to be afraid of as there is nobody here to harm you. I said come in and do what you want. The man said, "Don't you lie to me, you. Yesterday you shot at me.". I said that I had not. "Don't you lie, yesterday you were on top here" and he pointed to the place. He spoke excellent Tibetan. Then I went inside and the one who was wounded was up. I said we just have a few lousy guns. Then one of the boys came up [and they said to him]. "You said you don't have any, do you want to die. Your teacher said that there were a few lousy ones." Then I said that I don't have arms that really belong to us. I have some that others left with us and some that are being kept as collateral. So what should I do, I asked him. "Whatever arms you have, hand them in" he said. Then I said if I give you them, then don't push me. Because if you pressure me, then I will get excited and I won't know where I kept them. So they were quite in agreement with this. One of the Chinese patted me on the shoulder and said "Good, good" [Ch. hao hao] . So I handed in the arms and the Mauser pistol that I used the other day, he loved it. He immediately said, "hao hao" and gave his pistol away and put mine in his holster. It was a new Mauser Pistol [German made]. Then I said to look around, and even if you want to cut my neck, that's all there is. So they left. From all the nearby houses they took all the men. It was strange that from our compound not one was taken; [it was] by the grace of the three jewels.   

**Q:**  Where were the others taken?   

**A:**  They were locked up in Po Linga [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ག]. They were locked up in Po Linga for about a week. Then they were taken down to Norbulinga. Then they [Chinese] came through our gate and looked around on both sides. Then looked around at our tenants. Inside there were a few families. They checked that. Then came down and once again entered and sat in the kitchen and smoked cigarettes. It seemed that they too felt relaxed. Then the two boys came complaining that they were drinking water from the ladle and putting the remaining water back into the well. "Let them do whatever they want, they have the power and we have lost" I said, and I didn't go down. By the grace of the three jewels, in our place there was 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་མ་རྒྱུད་པ] The name for the monks enrolled in the Upper and Lower Tantric Monastic Colleges in Lhasa (gyüme and gyütö).">lama gyüpa</a> monk, 1 khamba tenant, 1 small <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] An incarnate lama.">trüku</a> [incarnation], Sonam and others, and not one person was taken.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa did they enter all the houses and take possession of the arms?   

**A:**  Yes. All were taken.   

**Q:**  Then those who were to be imprisoned were locked up for 1 or 2 weeks?   

**A:**  They were put in Po Linga for a week. Then they were taken to Norbulinga. From there, they were separated according to their actions. The small children were let out - actually no one was let out, they were all sent to Ngachenphang [Tib. རྔ་ཆེན་འཕྲང] to do labor building the power station.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  At Ngachenphang, where they were building an electrical generating unit. The government officials and important people were not sent. The other "common" people [Tib. ཆབ་བེ་ཆོབ་བེ] were sorted out and sent to work.   

**Q:**  So during this time while you were in Lhasa, did you know that the Dalai Lama had left?   

**A:**  Yes, we knew. Rimpoche knew, but the people did not know.   

**Q:**  When did Rimpoche know that [the Dalai Lama] was leaving?   

**A:**  Rimpoche went down to make a request. During this time, Rimpoche was a student of both of the tutors and was somebody considered reliable. He didn't do any work as such.   

**Q:**  So even knowing that [he, you] remained?   

**A:**  Yes .   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  It was sort of a mistake at that time. I don't know what Rimpoche [thought]. I tried many times to bring Rimpoche [out], but he did not [agree with me]. I also suggested that he leave with the Dalai Lama, but he did not. At that time Rimpoche's mother was also sick and bedridden.   

**Q:**  When did Rimpoche know when the Dalai Lama was leaving?   

**A:**  He knew on the 6th day.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama left on the 8th, but was it decided on the 6th?   

**A:**  Yes. The decision was taken to leave [on the 6th]. At this time, what should I say -- this won't quite be in accordance with the Dalai Lama wishes. Could we put the tape off?   

**Q:**  [Note: with the tape off he explained that a few days before His Holiness left Lhasa in March 1959, he met alone with his two tutors to discuss whether to go or to stay. His Holiness said that it may be a good idea to consult the Panglung oracle [Shungden]. That oracle's medium was living in the Nyara valley just outside Lhasa. The tutors agreed, but then the question was how to consult him in secrecy without anybody knowing it. Then either Trijang Rimpoche or both the tutors suggested that they send Radö Rimpoche to consult the oracle. When Radö Rimpoche arrived there, quite a lot of other people waiting to consult the oracle, but knowing the importance of the request, all the others were asked to leave and the door was closed. Then the medium went into trance and after requesting a prophesy from the Shungden oracle, the answer came that His Holiness should leave and that this should be done before the 10th. Radö Rimpoche returned that same day in the evening and make a report about this.]   

