# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0235.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Surkhang, Wangchen Gelek [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང, དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Seattle, WA, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 26 September 1967  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Surkhang, Wangchen Gelek [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང, དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 57  
**Date of Birth:** 1910  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Surkhang, Wangchen Gelek [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང, དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] was one of the most important Tibetan government officials in modern Tibetan history. He served as a Kashag or Cabinet Minister (Kalön) from 1943-1959. In this interview, he continues to discuss the history of Lungshar including his arrest and sentencing.   

---  
### Tape   

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0235_04/H_0235_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  [Date of interview] 26th of September, the continuation of Lungshar.   

**A:**  Then they called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> [the Potala], and when he came to Tse, [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  First he went home, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he went home for a short time. They thought he wouldn't come and his partners would cause some disturbance. They were very scared, but he stayed for a short time and then went to the back side of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a>. If he came from the front, he would have to walk a lot, but when he came from behind, he could ride his horse right near to Tse. Since Lhalu was located at the north, a long distance from Tse, they sent people to watch there and asked the people there "Has he flee there [north]? If he had, he would have fled to Sera." But he didn't go to Lhalu, and came up to Tse, so then all of them were relaxed (Tib. ལོདེ [བློ་བདེ]) and said that he is coming up. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> came with two servants and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> bodyguard (Tib. aptru) who was said to be very brave and had a gun in the pouch of his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> [Tib. ཨམདྲ]. Lungshar had a friend who was a big Khamba trader and that man sent this bodyguard who would sacrifice his life for Lungshar. Lungshar's servants also had guns in their chupa's pouch. They dismounted their horses down there, and the Khamba didn't come up to Tse. But two of his servants accompanied him to Tse. I heard that first they didn't go to Shö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a> but went to the Kashag where Lungshar talked with the Sawangs on other matters. Although the Sawangs knew what was going on, they were very clever and acted as if they were his friends.   

**Q:**  On that day, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was not there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had already fled. He had asked the Kashag for leave on that day. People didn't know much about that and some said Trimön went to Drepung for pilgrimage, but the Regent and those people knew because Trimön reported to them that he can't stay here because his life is in danger. The Regent and the Kashag discussed this and they had already decided to arrest him [Lungshar] on that day.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> think that his life will be in danger if they couldn't arrest <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**A:**  A. No, he didn't think like that. This was his policy and [using English] propaganda to show that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> is even making a kalön unable to stay there. First, it was to [using English] show that Lungshar is bad and second, if the monks followed [Lungshar], it would be dangerous because the so called monks do not know the long run policy. When they found somebody who surrendered to them, they say he is mine [Tib. ཁོ་ངའི་མི་རེད] and would feel glad. But it was also not certain that Drepung will [stand on] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s side and Sera will [stand on] Lungshar's side. On the other hand, Trimön's son was a Drepung monk, and the abbots of Drepung was also close to Trimön. When Lungshar first came to Shö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a>, they told him to wait a little bit because they were little bit busy. So Lungshar came to the Kashag and talked with the Sawangs on other matters and the Sawangs gave him the answers. Just after that, the Sawangs told Lungshar, "we received a photo sent by the Indian Consulate saying that a European went to northern Tibet to spy and he has arrived in England. So what kind of person is he? So Lungshar went through the motions of looking at the photo and said we can recognize him right away because his eyes are blue. Actually, there was no reason to ask him about this, but they acted like they were friends. After that, when Lungshar came to Shö gaa, they received a message calling the Sawangs to come to Shö gaa so the Sawangs went to Shö gaa, and as soon as the Regent, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> and the two Sawangs, Chöthar and Nangchungnga, were seated there, Lungshar was called in to the Shö gaa and then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> went to the Regent and the order was given to the nendrön that said, "Lungshar is doing a lot of things unrestrained by law. Therefore, right now, you are demoted from all the titles and we are going to arrest you for the time being and shut you up in prison. And regarding this, afterwards, we are gradually going to question your colleagues." (Tib. lungshar gyis krims med 'di zhe drag byed kyi 'dug/ de 'dra yin t<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>/ de ring lam sang lung shar khyod rang gi go sa sgang ga gnas dbyungs yin/ khyod rang gnas skabs ring do dam byed kyi yin/ btson la 'jug gi yin/ de <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོ] A group, an administrative unit, a nomad group.">tsho</a>'i skor la rogs pa de tshor rjes la ga ler ga ler skad cha '<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི] A female yak.">dri</a> gi yin].   

**Q:**  Were there soldiers?   

**A:**  No, there was nothing.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had a gun, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but they were thinking that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> would not be able make such a disturbance (Tib. ས་ངི་སིང་ངི [ཟང་ངི་ཟིང་ངི]) because he had already came to a [using English] government house. When they gave the order and Lungshar bent his body and then they had to take off his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> [uniform]. This would be done by the Treasury Office (the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Legung [Tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག་ལས་ཁུངས]). So they said, "call the Tseja. They have to take off Lungshar's chupa." But the Tseja didn't come right away and after the order was passed down, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> went in the house and Lungshar was left there. There were 2-3 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a> of the regent. I heard then Lungshar went outside and they were inattentive (Tib. nangwa chung masong [སྣང་བ་བྱུང་མ་སོང], so then Lungshar ran out. So when they said Lungshar went out, the two simgag couldn't bear the responsibility and ran after him and ཏོལད་ལུངཤར, "སིར, don't go, Wait a minute." [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས། མ་ཕེབས་དང། ཏོག་ཙམ་སྒུག་དང], but Lungshar didn't listen to them and went towards the back door [Tib. ལྟག་སྒོ་རྒྱབ]. He had descended two stairs of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a>, when they said he is running away. Then the simgag arrived there. Lungshar had a gun in his chupa's pouch and Lungshar's servant tried to take out his gun, but Lungshar told him, "Leave it there! (Tib. ཡུག་ཤོག [དབྱུག་ཞོག]). Then the simgag went fast and caught Lungshar and dragged him inside saying, "Sir, this is not allowed. Come in" [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས། དེ་འདྲ་ཆོག་གི་མ་རེད་པ། ཡར་ཕེབས], and they took him inside. The two servants ran away. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> also ran away and he was never found. People were saying that on that day if Lungshar's servant had fired a gun, since the simgag didn't have guns, Lungshar would have had got through to down there, and if he run away and called his associates, there would have been a big disturbance (Tib. ས་ངི་སིང་ངི [ཟང་ངི་ཟིང་ངི]) and probably many people would have been killed. But this didn't happen, and Lungshar was taken inside. When he was caught, the Tseja came and took off his chupa (gown). He was wearing rainbow design boots called jachen [Tib. འཇའ་ཆེན]) and when they took off his boots, Lungshar put his hand in his boot and picked up a piece of paper and put it into his mouth. They said, "He is eating something." There were many people there and when they took the paper out of his mouth, on it was written, "Suppress <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> Norbu Wan<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ] A khamtsen in Loseling College.">gya</a>l" [Tib. བཀའ་བློན་ཁྲི་སྨོན་ནོར་བུ་དབང་རྒྱལ་ནན]. So he had been casting a spell [Tib. སྔགས]. He was making a sorcery curse (Tib. te gya [gtad rgyag] according to the religion for subduing [Tib. དབང་དུ་འདུ] Trimön. When this was discovered, everyone was suspicious and said, "Oh! Lungshar is very bad." And "He is casting an evil spell" [Tib. ངན་སྒགས་རྒྱག]. Then Lungshar was imprisoned in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> [Tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོག] [in the Potala] where the [using English] political prisoners were kept. Many people from the Tseja office were on guard. I heard that Lungshar told them, "Oh, this is very dirty, are there scorpions in here?" They replied, "There are no scorpions." Then the clerk [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས] called Champa La [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ལགས] said, "Kungö, this is the prison where Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> La was kept." So Lungshar laughed. At this time, it was well known in Lhasa that Lungshar had been arrested and Trimön had fled to Drepung. I heard that on that evening all the members of Lungshar's party held a big meeting down there carrying lamps. At that meeting, except for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, all the others were there. They said, "We shouldn't remain like this. We should go in teams of 2-3 people to Drepung and Sera so some lay officials and monk officials went to Drepung and some went to Sera. They [Sera] said, "This was done by the government. We met here for the people and you people have not been imprisoned. [Lungshar's arrest] probably is not because of holding the meetings. Lungshar was a big [using English] political figure [Tib. མི], so there might be some other reasons."   

**Q:**  Who said this?   

**A:**  Sera said this when those people came to Sera. And the abbot and the monastic officials in Drepung told them [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s=people], "You are extraordinarily bad! (Tib. གང་མིནཙེ་རེ [གང་མི་ཚད་རེད). You have caused such a chaotic situation (Tib. ས་ངི་སིང་ངི [ཟང་ངི་ཟིང་ངི]). Dewashung [the government] has arrested a Dewashung Kudrak. We, the great monastic seat [Tib. ཏྲས] are doing religious practices, not doing those things. If you still cause disturbances, we will arrest you and hand you over to Dewashung." Therefore, the ones who went to Drepung had to run away fast because they were in danger of getting arrested by the monks. At that time, regarding the monks called "representatives," when they were called to the Tsondu in Lhasa, they were famous and they joined with Lungshar. They were powerful, but they didn't have much effect at the meeting in the monastery when they were left as individuals, because they were usually doing trade and those kinds of things. Then the abbot also said, "This is not good. We are not allowed to say anything about whatever Dewashung does." So they [Lungshar's people] weren't able to do anything. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> and the Kashag send spies to find out who went to Drepung and who went to Sera, they heard all about this on the second day. So on the third day, the Kashag called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> and there were quite a lot of Kudrak. They divided them up and sent them to arrest all of those people [who went to Sendre]. Their houses were sealed. The Kashag told them [the drungtsi and Kudrak], "You must demote all the ringleaders who went to Drepung and Sera in their own houses. So after sealing their houses, take soldiers and arrest them and shut them in prison." One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, one tsipön and 2-3 Kudrak were sent as teams. Yuthok <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> was sent to Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] who was his friend in the past, although they didn't get along well regarding [using English] politics. Yuthok told me that he was very embarrassed and when they went there, Janglojen Gung was coming down and went through the motions of saying, "Oh! You Kungös. Please come in." [Tib. ཨོ་སྐུ་ངོ་ཚོ་ཡར་ཆིབ་སྒྱུར་གནང་དགོས]. When he told Janglojen, "Kungö, it is too bad and we are very embarrassed, but this is a government order, so we have no choice about doing it. We are here regarding the meeting." Then Janglojen went through the motions of saying, "Oh, it doesn't matter, of course it should be like this" [Tib. ག་གའི་བྱེད་ཀྱི་མ་རེད། འདི་ཚོ་ཡིན་དང་ཡིན]. Then the Kudraks said, "Untie his head knot" [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག་དཀྲོལ]." Quite a lot of them were placed in the prison in Lhasa called Lhogyü [Tib. ལྷོ་རྒྱུད] [which was in the Jokhang] where they incarcerated [using English] political prisoners. Some lay officials and monk officials were shut up in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> where Lungshar was. Altogether, about 8 of them were locked up. Among them there was Garjang Tempa La [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ་ལགས], Gyankhar Nangpa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་ནང་པ], Menriba [Tib. སྨན་རི་བ], and Dragtön [Tib. བྲག་ཐོན] who was an important person with Lungshar who had gone to escort <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> La to Kongpo. There was also a monk official nicknamed "Nepalese" [Tib. བལ་པོ] who was rich, a monk official nicknamed "Kongpo youth," [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྲུག], and Janglojen Gung Gusho. These 8 people were imprisoned. Lungshar was arrested on the 22nd of the 3rd lunar month and those people were arrested on the 24th or 25th. If they had stayed still, they would not have had arrested. On that day, people in Lhasa went to watch the spectacle (Tib. ཏེམོ་ཏ [ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ]) making the sound woo woo, and saying who will be next to be get his house sealed. When one person was arrested and had his house sealed, people would go to the next one. There was a lay official called Karchungnga [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང་བ] who later became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> when the communists came. I heard that the people were staying outside his house saying now they are going to arrest Karchungnga because he was also a [Lungshar] Party member. Karchungnga himself told me, "I thought that they will definitely seal my house and I was waiting until it became dark, but they didn't seal my house" Kungö Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང], the Jigyab Khembo who is in Dharamsala, also told me that he went to another person's house where he heard that they were all getting arrested, so he thought that he will be also arrested. If he stayed outside, they won't find him and it will be troublesome [Tib. ཅ་ཟིང་པོ], so it will be better to stay home so he went back home. He thought it doesn't matter to be arrested, but they didn't arrest him. The majority [of members] were not arrested. If they had to arrest all of them, there will be many people. One bad thing that happened was that Commander-in-Chief Tempa Jayan, who was famous and was among the main persons in Lungshar's party, in one day he changed sides (Tib. chinang log]. Although I didn't know for sure, probably just one or two days before Lungshar was arrested, he, being the Commander-in-Chief and being close to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Chöthar La, so one day the Kalön Lama Chöthar La whispered in his ears, "You should not do this. You should come over on this path. In the future, we have great hope for you." So Tempa Jayan might have told him, "So now I am going to leave their work." So Tempa Jayan became the [using English] favorite of the government on this side and left the other side and didn't have [using English] sympathy for Lungshar. Then Tempa Jayan became the favorite and became a drunyichemmo for 1-2 years and soon after, when the Kalön Lama died, he became the Kalön Lama. When I was a kalön, he was the Kalön Lama for little more than a year. He was a nice person and was very famous.   

**Q:**  At first, he was with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, right?   

**A:**  At first, all people were saying, "Tempa Jayan is a knowledgeable person and he was close with the Regent Reting [like [a member] of the same family. So everyone had hopes with him. However, the reason why Tempa Jayan went with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was because Lungshar didn't like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> La. When Tempa Jayan was a Kudrak in the past, Künphel La confiscated all of his wealth. When Künphel La was there, he [Tempa Jayan] was working under him as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> which is a high rank of the 4th rank. One day, when he was eating his food, a person came in and said, "Künphel la is calling you right now". He said, "I am having my food. I should have the time to eat my food" Those bad people told Künphel La about his. At that time, Künphel La was doing some construction work in the Potala and Tempa Jayan was working on that. He was among the bigger Kudrak in there, like the 1st or the 2nd. Later, the when a house in the Potala was not built well and became kind of crooked, the Dalai Lama got agitated and told them to demolish the house on which many millions had been wasted and had caused a lot of hardship for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>, so heads of the construction work were imprisoned and all of their wealth was confiscated. The main person in charge was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Parkhang [Tib. པར་ཁང]. He was sent into [using English] exile and all of his wealth was confiscated. He was the one in the Parju Ngadün [Tib. པར་བཅུ་ང་བདུན] [he is referring to the poem by Skyid zur lags on bribing the three kalön to get appointed as their head of Rimpung [Tib. རིན་སྤུངས] Dzong. Many of the Kudrak with same rank didn't get their wealth confiscated, for example, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> [Tib. གླང་མདུན]. But Tempa Jayan was treated specially and all of his wealth was confiscated and he was demoted to the rank of an ordinary monk official. So he had disliked Künphel La. Lungshar was picking up people who had hatred for Künphel La. So Tempa Jayan was glad when Künphel La was taught a lesson and therefore stood on Lungshar's side. Later, when the [using English] party who taught Künphel La a lesson became better and were doing the new things, all the representatives of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> were following them until Lungshar was arrested. They were powerful and all people were afraid of them. When the Kashag arrested Lungshar, the Tsondu Assembly was not held because they didn't have to since the soldiers were in their hands. When they didn't hold the Tsondu, there was nothing to do. No one could say that I am going to hold a meeting. Right after the Kudrak were arrested, they [the government] sent letters to Sera and Drepung and told Drepung that they had to hand over Sog Jiso. It was not good for the government to send people to Drepung to arrest him because the monks will fight. Even it is only one person, it was not okay for their [Drepung's] name or [using English] fame. And they did the same in Sera, telling them that they have to hand over Chamön. So the monks discussed this and said, "Arresting Kudraks is their business, but it is not at all okay to arrest people in the monastery. If we hand him over, it would be very shameful, so we can't hand him over." The government knew that they will not hand over those people, but this was just to give a [using English] warning telling them that Sog Jiso and Chamön were Lungshar's friend. When this was to told, they [Sendre] became kind of subdued (Tib. ཤོམ [གཞོམ]) because they didn't have the idea to many things. And they didn't hand them over.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did you think? If <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> could have gotten through [escape] this [Tib. ཐར], would the monasteries have supported him?   

**A:**  No, they would not have. What <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> hoped was that he didn't need the monasteries to support him openly (Tib. ngösu [དངོས་སུ]). He wanted to give the impression that he was supported by the monasteries and he wanted to take the power by himself and then give alms to the monasteries and treat them well and then he hoped to suppress everyone (Tib. གང་ག་ནན [སྒང་ག་མནན]). But he knew that when something happened, the monasteries would not support him because Lungshar thought the Regent and those people would not dare to do those things [arrest him]. He never thought that he would be arrested. So he gave the impression that he had many people [supporting him] in the monastery and thought that the Kudraks will be scared of him [because of this]. At that time, the Regent and those people did something brave. All of this [using English] political plan was made by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>. He said that it is not good for me to stay here. If I go to Drepung, [they] will have [using English] sympathy for us and everyone will be angry with Lungshar and will say that he is even going to kill a Shape. So that is why he [Trimön] ran away. It was for making [using English] propaganda. Probably this plan was made by Trimön and then they dared to do that. It was good that they did that, because it made the country have tranquility [Tib. ལྷིང་ལྷིང]. But at that time, Trimön called the Kudrak who were [using English] neutral to his house, telling them to come to his place for a few moments [Tib. ངའི་རྩར་ཁྱུག་ཙམ་ཤོག་ཨ]. He called many people like this. and I was also called. When I was called I was a young <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> official. Phala [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ] Drönyerchemmo was then a tsendrön. When I went in [to Trimön's house], Phala was coming out and I met him on the way and I said to him, "I was called, so I am going in." Phala told me that he had already been there. At that time, he [Trimön] was brainwashing us (Tib. ལེབ་ལུག [ཀླད་པ་བླུག]) because he didn't regard Phala and me as people having [using English] political power and he didn't trust us because we were like children. But in Tibet, the big households were important (Tib. ནེངག [གནད་འགག]) because if you say like Surkhang, there were many people who have [using English] sympathy for us and we have relatives where we had married off sons and daughters. Similarly, in Drepung, we had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> like Guge [Tib. གུ་གེ] and Pethu [Tib. དཔེ་ཐུབ], and in Sera we had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚྭ་བ] A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tshawa</a> [Tib. ཚ་བ] [Khamtsen]. These khamtsen will say that they will do everything that we tell them to do. We [Surkhang and the Khamtsen] were like one household. When he need some monks, if we tell them to send some monks, they will call us honorific household (simshag [Tib. གཟིམ་ཤག]) and they will do that. Therefore, the big households in Tibet were very important. When you [using English] vote, you have to go to each person, but in Tibet, if one could buy a person from the big households, it was okay even if he is a 5-6 years old child. Under this, several thousands of people were connected together. Therefore, this was Trimön's [using English] strategy to make himself stable (Tib. ཏེམཔོ [བརྟན་པོ]). He was calling us in order to tell us, "I trust you. I know you are not in Lungshar's [party]." He called us for this purpose, because if we were scared [of him], it is possible that we might go to Lungshar's side. So Trimön was telling people, "You are white (Tib. གརཔོ [དཀར་པོ]) [innocent] and now you are doing good so you should stay quiet and stable. You don't need to go to both sides, [using English] right and left." Trimön also told me, "I am glad that now you are doing good. You are a big household, so you should stay still and stable. As for me, I am old and going to die soon." He told all the people this pleasant sounding thing (Tib. kecha nyenpo [skad cha snyan po] which made people feel sad. Then Lungshar was arrested and then they held a Tsondu for punishing Lungshar.   

**Q:**  Was that a Tsondu Gyendzom?   

**A:**  No. It was a Tsondu Hragdu (Abbreviated Assembly). I was there in this Tsondu.   

**Q:**  From the monasteries, were the abbots and the ex-abbots (the khensur [Tib. མཁན་ཟུར]) there?   

**A:**  There were a several current abbots, but no ex-abbots. There were only 4 abbots from Drepung and 2 abbots from Sera.   

**Q:**  They were only the abbots who headed Colleges [Tib. ཏྲཙང], right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was a special Tsondu where the Kudrak were nominated and called to the Tsondu. It was already kind finished (Tib. tsangma sö [གཙང་མ་བཟོས]). At this Tsondu, the representatives of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> didn't come at all because they were not called. Furthermore, the monasteries were told to hand over the new representatives [from Lungshar's party such as Sog Jiso, etc]. So they [the representatives of Sendregasum] didn't dare to come. This Tsondu was held in Tse. It discussed what would be better to do regarding Lungshar.   

**Q:**  On what date did they hold this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>?   

**A:**  After just 2-3 days of discussing what would be better, the Tsondu said that we need to appoint an investigator (Tib. shibjöpa [ཞིབ་དཔྱོད་པ]) to [using English] do research on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> matter. The Tsondu told the Kashag to discuss this with the Regent and appoint the people. Then the Tsondu was adjourned. After 2-3 hours, there was nothing and all people had already become gentle (Tib. ཇམབོ [འཇམ་པོ]).   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the Tsondu?   

**A:**  There were only about 40-50 people, including the Kudrak. Of these, there were not many who talked because all had become calm [Tib. ལྷིང་པོ]. As soon as the Tsondu said this, the Regent and the Kashag discussed this and appointed 4 investigators: the first was Drunyichemmo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར]. He was a real enemy of Lungshar. The second was Tempa Jayan who was the Commander-in-Chief then. The next was the Gusung Depön (Bodyguard Regiment Commander) Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར]. He was related to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> who was a close friend of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la. The fourth was Lukhangwa.   

**Q:**  What position was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>?   

**A:**  He was 5th rank and was in charge of offerings and supplies in the Lhasa Nyertsang. They [the committee] was told to investigate what illegal things <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and his followers had done. Then Tempa Jayan asked for leave (from the job] saying, "You three Sirs definitely can do this. I can not be an investigator of this because I was involved in this. He was [using English] sure and he said that was to keep himself clean. He said, "I don't know what bad things Lungshar did. In the talk regarding reforming Tibet which people know, there were many people and I was also in this. So if we have to investigate this matter, it will not sound good [Tib. ལེན་པོ་ཡོད་མ་རེད] when people look at it". He was saying this officially. When he said that, the Kashag and the tsipön told him, "You don't have any fault. This is not the matter of reform. The person called Lungshar was instigating (Tib. ཏྲུག [དཀྲུག]) the country and doing the communist system (Tib. marpö lelug <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གུང] A high title in the Tibetan government.">gung</a> tren [Tib. དམར་པོའི་ལས་ལུགས་གུང་ཕྲན]).   

**Q:**  At that time, were you using the word "gungtren"?   

**A:**  Yes. They were using the terms gungtren and marpö lelug because there were communists in Yanan in China long before that --from 1928. For example, when the 13th Dalai Lama died, in his last will he wrote that the "communist system will flourish" [Tib. དམར་པོའི་ལས་ལུགས་ཆེར་ཆེར་དར་བས]. In Tibet, they used the word marpö (red) for communists because they knew clearly that the communist Russians had arrived in Dakhurel [Ulan Batar] and there were many Mongolian monks in Sendre who talked about that. So everyone knew that the communists were bad. They [Kashag] told Tempa Jayan, "It doesn't matter that you were involved in the reforms, you must do the investigation, so then he became clear [of conflict of interest]. Tempa Jayan was the Commander-in-Chief and was capable and famous so many people went there [to <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s=party] because Tempa Jayan and his friends were there. When they heard Tempa Jayan was there, many followed him. It is like if Robert Kennedy said something, then people will think there will no problem if we follow him. Lungshar was knowledgeable, but Tempa Jayan in an instant turned the screw (Tib. khyug tsam zhig la gcus phur zhig brgyab] and turned his [using English] arrow to the other side. I heard from other people that Tempa Jayan didn't talk much, but it was okay for him because he didn't have any danger and he probably didn't care what happened to his friends [who were in the party]. So his friends, poor things! Then they interrogated Lungshar and told him, "You made a sorcery curse against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Trimön." Tibetans regard casting spells as bad as poisoning and murdering someone, so they asked him who his partners were.   

**Q:**  What did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> say?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> told a lie and said, "I didn't do a sorcery curse. People just lied and made that letter/note.   

**Q:**  It is strange that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> made a sorcery curse because he knew about the outside world?   

**A:**  He knew the outside world's customs, but also believed strongly in sorcery curses, tantra and doing the divination by looking into a mirror (Tib. ཏྲ་ཕབ [པྲ་ཕབ]). He was strange and his sect was the Nyingma [Tib. རྙིང་མ]. He met many lamas and was kind of strange and knowledgeable. When he was young, he was skillful in Tibetan medicine and his writing was good. He was also eloquent and he was good in being deceitful (Tib. ཡོ་ཁེབོ [གཡོ་མཁས་པོ]) for example, he would drink <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> (beer) with his friends even if he didn't want to. Once Yuthok gave a big party where <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> came and drank chang and played music. He was skillful in all the music instruments like the lute [Tib. དྲམཉེན], the hoching and the dulcimer. At that time, the Dalai Lama [using English] punished Silön's Nendrön saying that it is not okay for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> to join the party because the silön is a high ranking, and it is not okay for him to drink chang with Lungshar. [laughter] The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> was a nice person and he was not at the party, but he was punished saying you didn't tell the silön [to behave well]. This was worse than whipping the silön because it was well known. At that time, in the party, Lungshar was the main person. Lungshar was a very strange person who could do that kind of things to all people. At that time, there was nobody from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a>, so Lungshar didn't have anything to do and all the main people among the Kudrak were arrested. And the remaining Kudrak sent people to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> and told him, "I didn't do that by myself, Lungshar brought me there." [Tib. ང་ཁྲིད་བྱུང]. The majority were [using English] neutral and were wondering what would happen. Everyone was scared of being arrested. Then they investigated for several days and there was no danger at all, but at that time, we had to hurry up on Lungshar's matters because a high Chinese high official called Huang Musung was coming from China via Kham to make an offering for the deceased Dalai Lama (Tib. gongtsog bükhen [དགོངས་ཚོགས་འབུལ་མཁན]). And before that, a Chinese called Zhang Cainyi and a wireless operator were coming via India and had arrived at Gyantse. Probably, that was on the 1-2nd day of the 4th lunar month. We heard that he arrived at Gyantse and he will arrive in Lhasa in about 7 days riding. So we thought that since they have a wireless set, the Chinese government may tell us not to make the decision on Lungshar right away. At that time, the Chinese Government needed two sides in Tibet. They wanted to help one side and put down the other side. They didn't like to have only one person in Tibet. According to their [using English] policy, they needed to have 2-3-4 people. It was so nice when they saw that there was one [using English] party, because they can make friends with them, Also, they [Chinese] might help Lungshar and if they say, "Please don't punish him for the time being." Then the order from the Chinese government will cancel it [the punishment] [Tib. ལུང་ཤར་ལ་ཁྲིམས་ཨ་ལེ་མ་གཅོད་རོགས་གནང་ལབ་ན། རྒྱ་ནག་གཞུང་གི་བཀའ་དེས་མེད་པ་འགྲོ་གི་རེད]. So they said that we should settle the Lungshar case before they [Huang Musung and his delegation] come. After this, the 4 investigators discussed the case in a hurried manner and made a plan and submitted it to the Kashag. I haven't forgotten this at all. We held a Tsondu on the 6th of the 4th lunar month and put forward the plan to the Tsondu. The Drunyichemmo read that plan which said that they did this and that. And then the plan said, "We are going to punish the 8 ordinary Kudraks later on, and the important thing is that Lungshar is very callous. So if we leave him like this and if he could flee, it is very dangerous. Therefore, he should be sentenced to capital punishment, but since the Dalai Lama passed away recently, it is slightly not okay to kill him, so we will gouge out both of his eyeballs and sentence him to life imprisonment in Shöl." [Tib. སྐུ་དྲག་བྱིངས་ཀྱི་ཉེས་པ་མཇུག་ལ་གཏོང་གི་ཡིན། གལ་ཆེ་བ་ལ་ལུང་ཤར་འདི་གང་མིན་ཚད་རྫབ་ཅན་རེད། འདི་འདི་འདྲ་སེ་བཞག་ནས་ཤོར་ན་ཉེན་ཁ་ཆེན་པོ་རེད། ཡིན་ཙང་ཁོ་ལ་སྲོག་གི་ཐོག་གི་ཉེས་པ་གཏོང་དགོས་ཡག་འདུག། ཡིན་ནའི་ད་རེས་རྒྱལ་བ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་གཤེགས་གྲབས་ཡིན་ཙང། གསོད་ཡག་འདི་ཏོག་ཙམ་འགྲིག་གི་མ་རེད། དེ་འདྲ་ཡིན་ཙང་ཁོའི་མིག་གཉིས་པོ་འདི་བཏོན་གྱི་ཡིན། ཚེ་གཅིག་ཞོལ་ལ་བཙོན་ལ་བཅུག་གི་ཡིན"]. This was made by the 4 investigators.   

**Q:**  What reason did they cite in the plan?   

**A:**  They wrote, "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> gathered many people and planned to demolish the old Ganden Phodrang government. This is a people's (miser's) rebellion. In the past, when Lungshar had power, he didn't do his work fairly and he instigated between the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama" [Tib. ལུང་ཤར་གྱིས་མི་མང་པོ་རུག་རུག་བཟོས་ནས། གཞུང་དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང་རྙིང་པ་འདི་མེད་པ་བཟོ་ཡག་གི་འཆར་གཞི་བྱས་ཡོད་རེད། འདི་མི་སེར་ངོ་ལོག་རེད། ལུང་ཤར་ཁོ་ར་དབང་ཡོད་དུས་ལས་ཀ་དྲང་པོ་བྱས་ཡོད་མ་རེད། རྒྱལ་བ་ཡབ་སྲས་གཉིས་ཀྱི་བར་དབྱེན་དཀྲུག་པ་རེད]. It is true that he didn't do his work fairly.   

**Q:**  What other crimes did they write?   

**A:**  The main one was that he had rebelled and demolished the government.   

**Q:**  Did they write about making the sorcery curse?   

**A:**  They also wrote that the letter was investigated for whether it was a sorcery curse and it was casting a spell [Tib. དྲག་པོ་མངོན་སྤྱོད] which is like [using English] murder.   

**Q:**  Didn't they write about demoting <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>?   

**A:**  They got the letter regarding this, but they didn't mention it because it involved the fighting between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> when both of them had power. So they might have said that this is a small matter, so just leave it. If they mentioned that, all people will know that the two of them fought and some people might think that because they fought, the Dalai Lama was very angry which caused his death. At that time, there was talk that the Dalai Lama died from anger. So they didn't mention about the two of them [the Kalön Lama and Trimön]. At that time, they knew about that and they had the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སམ་ཁྲ] The traditional rectangular wooden writing/message board. The message was written on the polished, blackened surface of the wood that was covered with a white chalk. A stylus was used to clear away the chalk leaving the shape of the letters, which appeared black. It was usually about 12-14 inches long and 2 inches wide. There was a lower board on which the messages were written and a top board which served as the cover. In many cases there were several additional writing boards between these two.">samtra</a> message board with this.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for not mentioning about the two of them?   

**A:**  It was because everyone didn't know how they fought in the Kashag. So it was good not to have their names mentioned, so they hid it [the samtra letter]. The Kudrak knew about that, but the people in the countryside didn't know about that. It was written in the plan that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> rebelled and did the sorcery curse and instigated trouble between the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama so his eyes will be gouged out. Consequently, everyone in the Tsondu was astonished and remained silent for awhile, but nobody said, "Do not gouge out his eyes." Who would say that? [Tib. སུས་ལབ་ཀྱི་རེད] There would be nobody who would dare to say that. So all said, "It is as you said" [Tib. ད་ག་རང] and drank tea and stayed silent for a long time just chit chatting (Tib. ཇོལོ་མོལོ [ཅོ་ལོ་མོ་ལོ]) and whispering to each other. I also thought, I wish they would not gouge out his eyes and many people might have thought the same. Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] was sitting next to me. Then they asked, "Isn't this plan good? Isn't this correct? [Tib. འཆར་གཞི་འདི་ཡག་པོ་བྱུང་མི་འདུག་གས། ད་ག་མ་རེད་པས]. People responded saying, "Yes. It is as you said." [Tib. ལོ་། ད་ག་རང]. Then the Tsondu said, "We don't know much. So you superiors, you the lama and lords, please do whatever you need to do. Whatever you do, we will abide by it. We will not tell you to do this and do not do that." The Tsondu didn't say, "Gouge them out! but rather said, "You do whatever you want to do." [Tib. ག་རེ་ཡིན་ནའི་ཁྱེད་རང་ཚོས་བྱེད].   

**Q:**  In the Tsondu, did the Drungtsigye say that?   

**A:**  The Drungtsigye would not say that because they were like a messenger, telling things up and passing things down [Tib. ཡར་ལབ་མར་ལབ]. When they asked, "Isn't this right?" Some said, "You the lama and lords, please do whatever you need to do. The Tsondu had a square seal and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> had three seals and these were needed for decisions. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> and the tsipön would write a note saying, "We all heard well and understood the contents of the plan, so in the future, do whatever you want to and we will not tell you that whatever you did is not okay. We are all the same on this matter." And then they read it and asked, "is this right? And all said, "it is right. It is well done!" And then they put the seals on it. And then it was finished and it was [using English] a success. Then they took the plan and submitted it to the regent and those people. This Tsondu took a long time dilly dallying [Tib. ཉ་རེ་ཉོ་རེ] and by then it was almost sunset.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  At that time, one didn't say clearly that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s punishment was well done They were still hesitating and wondering what would happen, and they were little bit scared. The Tibetan people have a great sense of compassion, so even though they were very angry with Lungshar, everyone was very scared when they heard about gouging out his eyeballs. From the religious point of view, they didn't say that this [punishment] is right. If they [the Tsondu members] didn't say that, and if the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> kind of forced them to do that, then it will become terrible (Tib. pe söpa re [dpe bzos pa red] because we didn't have that custom. The drungtsi would never say something like, "This is well done. Wouldn't it be good to say we agree with this [punishment]? [Tib. འདི་ཡག་པོ་བྱུང། དག་ཨ་རང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ན་ཡག་པོ་མ་རེད་པས]. They were just waiting and not being hurried. Then when they asked, "How about the discussion?", they said "yes," Like this it took a long time. When I looked at it, all the people wanted to make Lungshar powerless so that he could not stand up again in the future, but they didn't want Lungshar to have his eyes gouged out. They didn't want that at all.   

**Q:**  Did they make teams (sub-groups) in that Tsondu?   

**A:**  Yes. The Kashag nominated the Tsondu members. No one said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> [themselves] should discuss and send a representative.   

**Q:**  No, I mean did they divide the Tsondu members into teams?   

**A:**  They didn't. They didn't need to do that because there was no trouble in the Tsondu. There was Phala <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a>, so I think probably the Tsondu members were those people to whom <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had talked. Those were the big households who had big estates. In Tibet, the ones who had big estates had problems, but on the other hand they were good for the government because they would never cause big disturbances. They were kind of calm. The reason why the old government lasted so long was because their partners [Tib. རོགས་པ] were made to be like small governments and they joined hands with each other so all could survive. When one of them fell, they would help him to stand up. Like this, the government remained (albeit] like staggering [Tib. ཁྱ་རེ་ཁྱོ་རེ]. Similarly, the so called Labrang were also needed, because if 1-2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> disappeared it would not be alright. So in those early days, they were all helping each other. Even if the other labrang is their enemy, they would help him because they would think that next year our labrang might fall. That's how the Kudrak never get lost [eliminated]. Even when someone was demoted, they would make a new one to stand up. So all the Kudrak from the early times were all there. So it was decided to have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s eyeballs gouged out and then they showed the plan to the Kashag saying this is the Tsondu's plan. The Kashag was very glad.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Regent and those people had the power, so what was the reason for calling the Tsondu?   

**A:**  There was no problem with calling the Tsondu because the members were selected by themselves [the top leaders], and they wanted to use the Tsondu's seal. They called the Tsondu because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s affair was a big matter. So in the future, if people said that it was bad to gouge out Lungshar's eyeballs, they can say, "This was not done by 1 or 2 people. This work was discussed and done by the Tsondu." And they could even say, "We didn't know about that. We are not to be blamed because we were in danger. They would not talk about an abbreviated Tsondu and they just said the Tsondu did that. It was to place the blame [on the tsondu].   

**Q:**  What was the origin of the Tsondu [Assembly]? Was it made by the Chinese Emperor?   

**A:**  There was no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> in the very early times. I think the Tsondu was not made by the Chinese Emperor and that it was first held during the time of Pholhane. At the time of Pholhane, the Chinese had left 10,000 soldiers in Tibet, so Pholhane said that the number of soldiers should be reduced, but if Pholhane told Chinese Emperor to reduce the soldiers, the Chinese Emperor will be agitated with Pholhane. Therefore, Pholhane told the monks in the monasteries and the Kudrak and they gathered together in front of Pholhane and they said that it is difficult to have so many soldiers [in Tibet]. And then the Pholhane told the Chinese officials [Tib. རྒྱ་མིའི་དཔོན་པོ] that "The people and the Kudrak are not listening to me [and are saying they want to reduce the number of soldiers]." and then they all went together to the Chinese officials. At that time there was a Tsondu and it was just called Tsondu. Then the Dalai Lama Kelsang Gyatso [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ] said that he wanted to meet the Chinese Emperor, so Pholhane called many old Kudrak and the abbots and held a Tsondu and they went to the Amban and Pholhane didn't make the report, but he let the others report. This was the first Tsondu. Since then when there were some matters that caused difficulties for the government, they held the Tsondu which became more powerful.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, when the subordinates (Tib. ཝོག [འོག]) wanted to make a new custom, they would hold the Tsondu, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the beginning, the Tsondu was made to help the government from behind, but after a long time, the Tsondu had the real power. This happened many times in history. For example, the first Reting regent was overthrown (Tib. ཡུག [དབྱུགས]) by the Tsondu. So the Tsondu overthrew many people.   

**Q:**  The Tsondu could not overthrow the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They could never do that because of religion. It never happened in our history.   

**Q:**  It was said that the 13th Dalai Lama was killed, is that true?   

**A:**  No. The 13th was not killed. When the 12th Dalai Lama died, it was said that he died after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> official served him a yogurt. The Tseja was very friendly with the Dalai Lama and the Dalai Lama would go to his home in Tse. So later, they put a cangue on him and did a lot of things to him, but the Dalai Lama was not killed because of [using English] politics. The Tibetan people were saying that the Regents killed the Dalai Lamas because when the Dalai Lama became 20 years old, the regent's power would be lost. But I don't think so.   

**Q:**  Wasn't the age limit 18?   

**A:**  It was 20, but the 13th took the power at age 18. This age limit was made during the time of the Emperor Khangxi.   

