# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0078.01   
##  : with Tara, Tenzin Chönyi [Tib. རྟ་ར, བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་ཉིད]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Tsarong Paljor  
**Name:** Tara, Tenzin Chönyi [Tib. རྟ་ར, བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་ཉིད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tara, Tenzin Chönyi [Tib. རྟ་ར, བསྟན་འཛིན་ཆོས་ཉིད] was a monk official who worked in the Dalai Lama's Bureau Office in Beijing from 1952-5. Later, he headed the Nangmagang Office in the Dalai Lama's Secretariat. In this interview, he discusses being sent on an inspection tour of China and his experiences there. He also talks about how they were taught Chinese, Marxism, and Leninism, and emphasizes Phünwang’s lectures which said that the relations between China and Russia will never be damaged. He then describes the "Tribute [Visiting] Group" led by Liushar and how they praised the developments in China. Finally, he recalls how he suggested that the Dalai Lama travel to China and meet the leaders, how it became dangerous for him in Lhasa, and how he believed it was a good thing when the Guomindang was expelled.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0078_01/H_0078_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You said that you worked in the Dalai Bureau Office [Tib. ཏ་ལའི; Ch. ban shi qu] in Beijing, and you also told me about the government officials going for an inspection tour of China. Please tell me something about this.   

**A:**  In 1951, after signing the 17-Point Agreement between Tibet and China, they talked about setting up the office called the Dalai Bureau Office. It was formally set up in 1952 and six of us were sent from Lhasa as the officials in the Dalai's Bureau Office. The senior head of the department [Ch. qu zhang; Tib. བགྲེས་པ] was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> Theiji [Namgyal Wangchuk] [Tib. རམ་པ་ཐའི་ཇི, རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་ཕྱུག] and the junior head [Ch. qu zhang; Tib. གཞོན་པ] was Khenjung Lobsang Tenzin [Tib. མཁན་ཆུང་བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་འཛིན]. Among the staff, there was Janglojen Sey Wangchuk Gyalpo [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་སྲས་དབང་ཕྱུག་རྒྱལ་པོ], and I was the tsendrön. There was [also] Shöndrön Lobsang Thöndrub [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དོན་གྲུབ]. From among the lay officials, there was Gegye [Tenzin Dorje] [Tib. དགེ་རྒྱས་བསྟན་འཛིན་རྡོ་རྗེ]. We departed in autumn of 1952 from Lhasa, via Nagchu, to Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ], on horseback. At that time, the motorable road was built up to the other side of the Chamdo river, and trucks came to that place. We stayed in Chamdo [for] seven days and then we were driven in trucks for two days. Two of the department heads sat near the driver, and all the rest of us sat on the loads and we just put down some blankets there [over them]. At that time, three lay officials had their wives and children together [with them]. After travelling for two days, we were driven in mini-vans from Derge Jomda [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་འཇོ་མདའ]. The mini-vans were called [Ch. zhong che]. At that time, a guide was sent from among the People's Liberation Army. His position was director [Ch. bu zhang]. I forget his name. The interpreter was a young People's Liberation Army soldier who knew a little bit of English. He was called Li Zhongjin. From Lhasa to Chamdo, we carried the travel document of the Tibetan government [Tib. ལམ་ཡིག], and we imposed the horse corvée and the pack animal corvée taxes. We took responsibility for arranging the horse corvées, pack animals, and the accommodations. For example, tents for the Chinese military officer and the interpreter. From Chamdo, the two Chinese officials took all the responsibility of our trip. For example, the lodgings and food. At that time, the two of them took great care of us and helped us very much. We also treated them well and we got along very well on the way. Then we went via Ganzi [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས] and Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ], and arrived [in] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>. At that time, the chairman [Tib. ཞུ་྾ཨི] of Dartsedo was Tian Bao, who was Tibetan, and his Tibetan name was Sangye Yeshe [Tib. སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས]. He and some of the local officials came to receive us and gave us the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarfs. We rested for about 5-6 days there. There were several Tibetan monasteries there and we went for pilgrimage to those monasteries. From there, there was a big mountain pass called Erlang Shan [Tib. ཨེར་ལང་ཤན]. We were driven in four jeeps from Dartsedo. The jeeps were said to be Russian-made and they were very good. They were covered with canvas, but they were comfortable inside. When we reached the bottom of the mountain, we had the feeling that we [had] arrived in China because everything was different, like the houses, and the people's dress and attitude. In Dartsedo, the women were wearing Tibetan dress and black cloth aprons. They served us Tibetan butter tea and Tibetan food. On the other side, there were some houses in the countryside with grass roofs and some old Chinese were living there. They only had some hens and they were poor. After that, we arrived in Chengdu. This was a bigger city and there were all kinds of things like electricity, and we were also taken for a tour [there]. We were taken on a train from Chengdu to Chongqing. We stayed [for] a couple of days in Chongqing. There was the Northwest Nationality Office [Tib. ནུབ་བྱང་མི་རིགས་ལས་ཁུངས] there. They said that this was a branch of the main Nationality Office in Beijing. They did the entire reception for us and we stayed for a couple of days. There was a big Buddhist temple nearby where we went for pilgrimage. When we arrived in Chongqing, a strange thing happened. The evening that we arrived in Chongqing, the Nationality Office invited us to the party. At that time, it was winter and people were wearing cotton padded garments and trousers. At the party, we saw a Chinese woman wearing a blue cotton padded garment and trousers, and black cotton shoes. She was speaking very clear honorific Lhasan dialect. She said, "Kungö! Weren't you tired on the way [Aren't you tired from your journey]?". I felt very strange because she spoke [with] such a clear Lhasan dialect. She was the interpreter. After that, when we asked the Chinese woman who she was, she [said she] was actually from Lhasa and she was a wife of one of the Guomindang Chinese who were expelled from Lhasa in 1950, or something like that. Then we sailed for two days and one night down the Yangtze River to the city called Hankou. It was a big ship with 2-3 stories. At that time, I didn't have any problems, but some of our elderly felt dizzy and nauseous because there was the smell of the oil on the ship. Kungö Theiji had to sleep and couldn't eat food. Then we went to Beijing by train. When we arrived in Beijing, the Tibetan Tribute [tour] Group [Tib. རྟེན་འབུལ་ཚོགས་པ], led by Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར], sent by the Tibetan government and Pora Khenchen [Tib. སྤ྄ོ་ར་མཁན་ཆེན] from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Labrang, [was there]. There were also people from Chamdo in that group and there were Tibetan government officials. Altogether, there were 50-60 people. They had already arrived in Beijing.   

**Q:**  What do you mean [by] tribute?   

**A:**  At that time, the 17-Point Agreement was signed and relations between China and Tibet had become good. Therefore, the tribute was kind of a gift to Chairman Mao for celebrating the founding of the PRC. We met Liushar and those people in Beijing. Then the Dalai Bureau was set up. In the beginning, the office location was called Xueyuan Huodong [and] was arranged [located] on the west side of the Beijing wall. It was a house with a private courtyard and we held the office in that house in 1952. In 1954, [after] the Dalai Lama's trip to China was confirmed, it was said that we should move the office to a larger place. In 1953 [he meant 1954], we moved to a house which was known to be one where one of the relatives of the Chinese Emperor lived. The house looked like the Emperor's palace. It had a large fence, and it had many inner and outer rooms. We stayed there until the year 1955 when the Dalai Lama came back from China. We stayed there for three years. The Chinese called our office the Dalai Bureau. We wrote on the wooden board [which] hung on the door, "The Bureau of the Savior, the Dalai Lama [Tib. སྐྱབས་མགོན་ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མའི་དོན་གཅོད་ཁང]". At that time, the Chinese government appointed a Mongolian section leader [Ch. ke zhang] called Yi Kezhang who was in charge of our expenditures and also of supervising us, and there was an accountant under him. There were two cooks for us. While we were in China, the interpreter was a Chinese woman called Gyamo Aja la [Tib. རྒྱ་མོ་ཨ་ལྕག་ལགས]. She was a very old woman who had come to China long ago. And there was also her younger brother called Xiongdi. It had been many years since they had arrived in China. Both of them didn't get married and were living as a family. Her younger brother's health was kind of weak. Both of them were Buddhist, the younger brother was always doing his prayers. Aja la was almost 60 years old, but she was healthy. She spoke the pure Lhasan dialect spoken by the Kudrak, and her Chinese was very fluent. Whenever we needed to contact the Zhongyang Nationality Office and other offices, we had to do it through Gyamo Aja la. She would tell Yi Kezhang, and he would contact the offices and discuss the matters. There was also the Panchen Bureau [Tib. པན་ཆེན; Ch. ban shi qu], which was set up at the time of Guomindang, and it had been held continuously after the communist government started. We didn't have any specific work to do. We just had to do [handle] the reception for the people coming from Tibet, and help and guide them in China. At that time, we mainly had to study. Gyamo Aja la taught us one class of Chinese characters and language every day. There were six of us, the officials, and three wives. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> and Janglojen, each of them also had a servant and a maidservant. All of us were taught Chinese in the class. When there were political meetings in the Nationality Office, we had to listen to the lectures. At that time, meetings were called to listen to lectures [Ch. ting bao gao]. The leaders of the Nationality Office gave the lectures whenever some new events happened. All of the cadres [who] belonged to the Nationality Office had to go listen to the lectures frequently. Whenever we received some orders from the Kashag to contact the offices and do something, we would do it promptly and report what we did. We didn't have a main task, we just had to make friendly relations with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  When you studied, did they teach you the socialist system of Marxism and Leninism?   

**A:**  Yes. Normally, on one side, they taught the language, and on the other side, they would teach those things. They would teach us [that] socialism originated in Russia. Gyamo Aja la would explain those things and sometimes, Baba Phünwang La [Tib. འབའ་པ་ཕུན་དབང་ལགས] would come to give political teachings. He spoke Tibetan fluently.   

**Q:**  He taught you the ideology of Marx and Lenin, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he taught us that Sun Yatsen, Mao Zedong and Chang Kaishek studied Marxism and Leninism and it was correct. We had to listen to his teachings. Even now, I remember clearly one point of Phünwang La's lecture. I've also told some other people. One day, Phünwang La told us, "Nowadays, there are two different ideologies in the world. One side is capitalism, mainly the Americans. And the other is socialism, mainly the Russians. The so-called system of socialism is meant for the benefit of the masses. This is very precious and [has] became dependable. China and Russia hold the same ideology and the same line of work, and the final goal is also the same. So nowadays, China and Russia are like water mixed with water, and [they] have a very close relationship trusting each other. The relationship between Russia and China will never become damaged because they have the same ideology and they are going on the same path, and their future goal is also the same. Since they are compatible with these basic points, the other matters are just small matters. As you can see, nowadays, in all the factories, the main instructions are given by the Russian experts. Russia is supporting China without ulterior motives [Tib. སྒེར་སེམས་མེད་པ]. If the Russian didn't do that, it would be difficult for China to stand up right away. So after 10-15 years, definitely, China will become a powerful nation linked with Russia. All of you should have a clear understanding about this and our Tibet should make close relations with China and follow China, and wholeheartedly go on the path shown by the Chinese. We should think about achieving the development of Tibet through acting jointly with China. China and Russia will never have hostility [Tib. འཁོན]. In case the impossible becomes possible and Russia and China were to have hostility [between them], it would be very difficult for the communist ideology and the socialist system to exist in this world. The two of them will never have hostility [toward each other] because they have the same ideology and the same line of work. Their differences on small matters will never affect their relationship. Now, both Russia and China are helping each other make progress. Nobody can stop this." This was what he told us. At that time, I thought it was true because, actually, people should look after the benefit of the masses, and it was said that Russia and China were going on this path. This is really correct and they would develop in the future. At that time, the first Chinese I got together [with] was a People's Liberation Army officer, and then I saw the leaders of the Nationality Office. At that time, I found that the older Party members' way of thinking, and their work style and taking care of public affairs—it was really amazing. I thought it would be good in the future. When Phünwang La told us about that, I thought he was right. Later, when Russia changed, then I knew that the situation was not at all like Phünwang La said. You asked me what my opinion was when the inspection tour came to China. The Tribute Group was the first inspection tour group and they went everywhere. They also went to Inner Mongolia. They probably didn't go to Xinjiang. After that, an inspection tour group was also led by Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] and probably <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག]. After that, a youth inspection tour group led by Surkhang Khenjung also came. The two of the latter inspection tour groups didn't tell me anything about their viewpoints and we didn't have any documents about that. Later, a document was printed regarding the inspection tour led by Liushar. In the document, they mentioned what they saw in China and said that at that time, China was developing greatly. "So we, the Tibetans, will take China as an example, try our best not to fall behind, and we shall act jointly with the Chinese and do our work." He probably really had that kind of viewpoint. Later on, after Liushar came to India and [after] we had gotten together for a couple of years, I asked him, "You had praised the Chinese a lot regarding the developments in construction and their line of work in China. Was it your real viewpoint, or, at that time, [did] there need to be something pleasant sounding at the front of the Chinese? So did you just say [things] that were kind of false [lies]?". He said, "This was not false [a lie]. I really had that kind of viewpoint and I thought that there would be hope for the future. So I said what I felt and praised China a lot. After that, when there were a lot of talks regarding whether the Dalai Lama should go to China or not, I said, 'It would be good for him to go because he can meet the new leaders of China and if he can see the developments in China, this would probably be useful in the future.' At that time, the other Tibetan government officials were saying that the Dalai Lama shouldn't go to China. All the people were afraid and didn't like the ideology of the Communists. Therefore, they said that it was not certain whether he could come back or not. Even if [he] would [have] come back, there would have been a Communist influence on the Dalai Lama's way of thinking. So they said very strongly that he shouldn't go to China, but I put forward my opinion that the Dalai Lama should go to China. Therefore, I also faced a serious danger for awhile. They said, 'This person called Liushar went for the inspection tour as [part of] the Tribute group and recklessly praised China. Now, on the matter regarding whether the Dalai Lama should go to China or not, he openly said that he should go. So this person has already become Chinese.' They had a very bad expression and it was really tense [to the point] that my life was also kind of in danger. Some people told me, 'You should be careful. It is not impossible that something reckless will happen to you.' But I was sincere and honest." This was what Liushar told me. When I stayed in China for 3 years, I thought it was good and I didn't see any errors or mistakes in China. After that, when the Dalai Lama went to China, except [for] some retinues for the Dalai Lama, the other group of officials was sent for an inspection tour led by Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] and Rimshi Mentöpa [Tib. རིམ་བཞི་སྨན་སྟོད་པ]. All of the other 5 officials of the Dalai Bureau wanted to go with them for the inspection tour. So I said, "All of us can't go. I will stay here and you people can go." So I didn't go for the inspection—except we went to Shanghai, Hankou, and Tianjin in the winter before the office was set up. It was the time when the Guomindang was expelled and the Communist had just stood up. And they were kind of fresh and did not get old and corrupted. I thought that they were very good and I had a feeling of relaxing. In 1955, the three-year term of our office was over and we asked for leave, and three months after the Dalai Lama came back, we also came back. This is one chapter.   

