# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0024.01  
##  : with Lukhang Jamjung [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་ལྕམ་ཆུང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** September 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Lukhang Jamjung [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་ལྕམ་ཆུང]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 62  
**Date of Birth:** 1931  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lukhang Jamjung [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་ལྕམ་ཆུང] is the daughter-in-law of the famous Sitsab Lukhangwa. In this interview, she discusses her home in Marlampa, her schooling in Lhasa, and her journey to Lukhang as a bride for Lukhang's son, the gandrön. She discusses how her husband worked in the Kashag and then went to Eastern Tibet to prepare for war. She also discusses Sitsab Lukhangwa.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0024_01/H_0024_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1949-50, where were you?   

**A:**  You mean Kungö Chemmo [the sitsab]?   

**Q:**  No, yourself.   

**A:**  I came to Lukhang in 1950, the same year when the Chinese first came.   

**Q:**  And before that?   

**A:**  I was at Nyemo. I am from the Marlampa [Tib. སྨར་ལམ་པ] family. We were one household, but we had a section staying at the estate and another at Lhasa. We were the ones who were staying at the estate. Until the age of 9 I stayed at Nyemo, then I went to school in Lhasa. My late maternal uncle was a gadrung. I stayed in school for 3 years and then I returned to Nyemo. Then at the age of 19, on the 3rd month, 4th day of 1950, I went as a bride to Lukhang. About 3 months after I came, Kungö Chemmo was Tsipön and my late husband was in the Kashag Shöpa [Tib. བཀའ་ཤག་ཤོད་པ], a smaller office of the Kashag. Lhalu was returning from his 4 year term as Governor of Eastern Tibet (Tib. Dome Jigyab [མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]). So we were told to go as Ngabö's staff [Tib. ལེཇ] [Ngabö replaced Lhalu]. My late husband had the rank of acting fifth rank (Letsen Letsab [Tib. ལས་ཚན་ལས་ཚབ]), though there were various other positions. So we were all to go. This was just 3 months after I arrived at Lukhang. Now since there was the disturbance on the border, Ngabö left suddenly earlier. According to earlier custom, there should have been a procession of many leja and horses and soldiers marching in formation. In the old days, there were no cars. I saw Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] leaving [he held the position before Lhalu]. At that time, there was a large procession and they also fired a kind of cannon [Ch. da pao]. So Ngabö left first and we were young at that time and late mother-in-law said that both of us were young and so we should not go. I was also pregnant. I said that we are already here, and it's better to go with the large group because if we go with about 10 persons, bandits will not hesitate to rob us. They rob whole tents of nomads and so what is 10 persons. At that time, bandits were infamous and since I was only 19, that left quite an impression on me. So we had all agreed to leave together. Then all of a sudden, Ngabö received a telegram and the staff left suddenly. With all the disturbances down there, there was no way we could go. This was before the 17-Point Agreement. They actually went for war, with the late one and the monks of the 3 monasteries.   

**Q:**  The sermag [Tib. སེར་དམག], right? [monk militia].   

**A:**  Yes. The old sermag was during the time of the Reting, but this time the government supplied with all the 3 monasteries with guns.   

**Q:**  This was before the 17-Point Agreement right? Ngabö was down [at Chamdo] and Lhalu had sort of come to Lharigo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Lhalu had come somewhere there. I think he may have just arrived at Lharigo [Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ].   

**Q:**  At that time they were making preparations for war.   

**A:**  Yes, they left with war definitely on their minds. The 17-Point Agreement was not done and the Chinese had come, so they left with war on their minds. They left suddenly, all the officials and the monks of the 3 monasteries. At that time, my late mother-in-law said (we were young and did not know much)-she said, "Today it's such a time of emergency and regarding the child, it is said that if you can leave on a certain date then it's good, if not, then there is danger to your life." This was told by some drunyichemmo. So later, she was not happy. So arms were even handed from up there [the government] and they really went to fight. We had just come and they left knowing that they might never return. A few days later, my late mother-in-law began to have second thoughts and said, "Oh my, whatever it is today I have this small diamond ring given by my parents. I specially wrapped it for the occasion, but before leaving there was such a rush and I was so unhappy that I neglected sending it." So the late mother-in- law said that it is better to swallow a diamond and die than to be alive and suffering from wounds after getting shot. So when they left, the late mother-in-law had the same Khamba chupa made for both the kungös and servants with fox hats. The chupa were made from jin . So they were able to go as far as Lharigo. When they reached Lharigo, the disturbance had already begun, and it was over and the time had come for the Agreement. I don't know what the reason was, but they stayed at Kongpo Giamda [Tib. ཀོང་པོ་རྒྱ་མདའ] for 1 year. When Lhalu came up, he stayed at Kongpo for a while. Before they came up, Lhalu arrived earlier and a section stayed behind and so he stayed there for a year. So that's what happened. When my husband went down, Kungö Chemmo was Tsipön. I came in the 3rd month day 4 [as the bride] and in the 6th month preparations began for him to be a leja of Ngabö. Then on the 25th day of the 9th month, they left Lhasa. He was Tsipön then. Then in the 11th month it was said that late in the evening Kungö Chemmo has to go to the Potala. Late at night he did go and then returned and there was a lot of talk going on [at home]. Then it was said that the Dalai Lama was going to go to Tromo and that there was danger of the Chinese coming. And so Kungö Chemmo and Kungö Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] were to be the sitsab, that they were handed the seals. A few days later, there was a ceremony. So this was the work of Kungö Chemmo [Lukhangwa].   

**Q:**  When they went down what was the talk at that time? It seems that Ngabö was saying that it's best not to fight. Was that it?   

**A:**  Yes, it seems so. After he went down he thought that it's best not to fight since it would be a loss to this side [central areas]. Chamdo was already lost and the ammunition dump was burned and it seems that he was thinking that if one makes an Agreement then there won't be damage and looting [Tib. ཇག་བཅོམ] in the central areas. Until 1959, the Chinese were really doing too much, however, the Dalai Lama was always thinking and trying his best to calm things down, isn't it. Finally, it happened like that. Our Kungö Chemmo, whatever the Chinese said, he used to fight back and so this did not go well with the Chinese and they told the Dalai Lama that he is not appropriate for our peaceful relations and so he must resign. So the Kashag also said that it's best that he resign since there is even danger to his life. So this is what was said. So the Dalai Lama gave them leave. He gave them a huge photo with scarfs and blessed pills and he was told that they can attend the large ceremonies, but not the others.   

**Q:**  During this time, the Dalai Lama was at Tromo and Ngabö was negotiating the 17-Point Agreement. So when this was going on, what was the thinking of the two sitsab? Were they being consulted or was Tromo acting directly? Did you hear anything?   

**A:**  At this time it was said [she was told by family members] that except for very important matters, they should just go ahead and decide. I don't know if they were or were not consulted regarding the 17-Point Agreement?   

**Q:**  After all the talks were concluded, Zhang Jingwu arrived at Tromo via sea, right? Then he came to Lhasa. So did the two sitsab have to meet him? Some say that the Chinese said that the reception was not good, and things like that.   

**A:**  At that time, Kungö Chemmo did not do such things like looking up to them with respect [Tib. གུས་འདུད] very much. He was not the type to do such things. Even at home, the Chinese leaders used to come very often, very often, so in our house we had the traditional style and did not have chairs. Our late mother-in-law and the children's father [her husband] expressed some concern and said that he was going to borrow chairs from Demo Labrang [Tib. དེ་མོ་བླ་བྲང] since the Chinese use chairs, but Kungö Chemmo used to say that there was no need to borrow chairs since we have our own mattress and carpets. We will just pile up the mattress [Tib. འབོལ་གདན] and if they sit on it that's it, if not, then it's too bad. We have to do with what we have and according to our own customs. So that's what he said. And regarding snacks, we didn't have any biscuits and candies, but only roasted soya beans, dried peaches and walnuts, roasted turnips, etc. In our house it was never customary to have biscuits and candies.   

**Q:**  Generally, what should I say, he was saying that one should do our own Tibetan traditional customs, right? For example in our house we have candies and a lot of foreign things, right? So unlike that, he wanted he stuck to tradition.   

**A:**  So that's what he gave to the Chinese and nothing else. We young ones used to quietly eat on the sly because we could not eat in the house. When we were in the house we could not wear leather shoes since he would say it is foreign. So we were young and our society was sort of a bit different and we used to leave our shoes with our tenants outside [downstairs on the ground floor]. When we get there, we would take off our Tibetan woolen boots [Tib. ཟོན་བ] and wear leather shoes and go to town and places and when we returned we took off our shoes and wore the woolen boots. He was very strict and would not stand for any [new things].   

**Q:**  After Zhang Jingwu etc came, there was the problem regarding the hoisting of flags and the changing of the army into the PLA and things like that. Now regarding these, there must have been quite a lot of talk.   

**A:**  When they said that they wanted to hoist the flag, it was this matter that he argued a lot [Tib. རྩོད་བ་ཞེ་དྲག] and so at that time the flag was not hoisted. There were a lot of arguments at home as well as in the Ewang [Tib. ཨེ་ཝམ] in the Tsuglagang.   

**Q:**  The Chinese leaders used to come to your house right? Who came?   

**A:**  Yes, they came often. At that time there was Phünwang Buzhang [Tib. ཕུན་དབང Ch. bu zhang] and Zhang Jingwu.   

**Q:**  You mean Baba Phünwangla?   

**A:**  Yes. Later he became a rightist [Tib. གཡས་ལྷུང].   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  When we say rightist, it means towards our side, supporting us. He was punished and put into prison. So at that time Phünwangla was there. Then there was Tan Buzhang, Tan Guansan.   

**Q:**  Then there was another one-Fan Ming, right?   

**A:**  He also came. When these leaders came they brought with them about 30 soldiers all riding on horses. About 10 soldiers were posted on the roof top. About 10 on the floors and about 10 in the courtyard. At that time, Kungö did not know Chinese and a monk official used to come and interpret. At times one could hear them banging their fists on the tables. Other than that, we could never go where they were.   

**Q:**  Do you hear anything [eavesdrop]?   

**A:**  One heard just a bit, but we could never go there. One could hear fists banging on tables.   

**Q:**  So things like tea and all that was done by [his wife] Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ].   

**A:**  Yes. She received them and the servants were there. Snacks were given and sweet tea was made.   

**Q:**  Did you later perhaps hear what happened at the meetings?   

**A:**  Kungö was not the type to say much. Leave aside us, he also said to Lhajam, "You all do the house work and the Tibetan government business in not your concern" . They used to say things like that in the old days. If there were important letters to be written, he would stay alone and write it and no one will go there. If there were smaller ones, then he will write a draft on the samtra writing board and have my late husband copy it.   

**Q:**  So there were meetings not only at the house, but also in Ewang, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He said that there was a lot of trouble [at the meetings] [Tib. ཞེ་དྲག་དེ་གནག་པོ་བྱུང་སོང]. At that time, he used to go to the meetings late at night.   

**Q:**  At the Ewang, were only the two sitsab and the Chinese there?   

**A:**  Ngabö was also there. At that time, the two of them really confronted [Tib. ཐུག] them. Ngabö had to sign the 17-Point Agreement because the differences in the strength of the Chinese and us was too great and he didn't have any choice to but to sign it. So he must have said why did you do it [sign the agreement]-maybe it was something like that. He went often for the meetings. When he returned it was always around 1 at night [1 a.m.] At that time the meetings were in the Ewang and we did not have any soldiers. Ngabö had Chinese troops. When they were "hitting each other" [Tib. གཞུ་རེས་ཐུག་གནང་དུས] [attacking each other--banging their fists], it was said the soldiers used to barge in. At that time, Kungö said, "Yes, it's alright, there's no need for you to bring guns. I'm an old white-headed man. All you have to do is just blow and I will fall down". Earlier Ngabö was Tsipön and so was Kungö Chemmo. Suddenly Ngabö was appointed Doji and left and Kungö Chemmo became the sitsab. Besides both being Tsipön together, Ngabö and Lukhangwa were also related and they had good relations. Even after he left for Kham, I was sent to give snacks to Ngabö's children quite a few times. After the disturbance in the eastern border the two were at odds. They had such an argument in the Ewang that Kungö Chemmo told Ngabö: "You have darkened your own country, and made the other's country like the break of dawn." [Tib. རང་ཡུལ་འདི་ས་རུབ་པ་འདྲ་བོ་བཟོས། མི་ཡུལ་འདི་ནམ་ལང་པ་འདྲ་པོ་བཟོས]. This is what I was told he said. So very often the meetings took place. We had no soldiers. We rode our horses. We were rather stupid because it was considered to be very dangerous. Every one was saying "Be careful, be careful." We took the kerosene pressure lamp and rode our horses and servants, children, women we all went to receive him. He come from there with the kerosene pressure lamp and riding a horse. I and the late Lhajam stayed at the house. When we looked out the window, far away one could see the sight. I closed the gate and watched the gate. The late Lhajam kept a look out from the kitchen. At first I was so frightened that even if there was no one knocking at the gate, one tended to hear something. Later I was so used to it that I could not even get frightened [laughter]. All the children, old, and young used to go to receive him. Servants too. He came riding on a horse with a kerosene pressure lamp. [one or two servants may be there]. He went often to Ewang.   

**Q:**  He went many times?   

**A:**  Yes, many times.   

**Q:**  How many times?   

**A:**  He returned only around 1 a.m.[in the morning]. Now I don't remember how many times he went, but it was very often. So it was said that the two argued a lot. [Ngabö and Lukhangwa].   

**Q:**  I see. So at that time he was not getting along with Ngabö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The two were at odds.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, when I sort of think that from the Kashag side they had to get along with the Chinese. The two sitsab were doing something else and so I thought that maybe they had secretly agreed to do that. Anyway, so they didn't get along?   

**A:**  No they did not. The Kashag used to accommodate the Chinese while Kungö used to speak out straight.   

**Q:**  Later, what was the relationship between the families of Ngabö and Lukhangwa?   

**A:**  It was not that much.   

**Q:**  Yes, but did you visit each other?   

**A:**  Then he did not come to visit at all.   

**Q:**  And from your side no one went to visit.   

**A:**  No, none. Later Ngabö returned and did Kashag work right? At that time, our late one [her husband] also worked in the Kashag. So the two had good relations and at times, Ngabö used to give him money. Our household's [economic] condition was not that good, so for this reason Ngabö used to give him money quite often. This is what my late husband said.   

**Q:**  During 1952, the Water-Dragon [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག] Year People's Association was started in Shide. There were people like Thamjö Sonamla [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས་ལགས] and Tsha Trunyila [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལགས] in it. An organization had started. It was said that when the Kashag and the Sitsab went to the Potala, the members of the People's Association met them and they advised that it would be very good if such an organization began. The Chinese say that the two sitsab instigated the people. Today who cares whether they did or they did not instigate, right? Did they ask advise?   

**A:**  They may have asked them.   

**Q:**  During this time, it is said that Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང] had connections with the People's Association. Did you hear anything about this?   

**A:**  That I did not hear clearly. Namseling left for Lhoka before the uprising. Before 1958, the Chushigandru did a little bit of raiding at the villages and so Namseling was sent to advise the Khambas. So when they were talking, the uprising started here and so from Lhoka he left for India.   

**Q:**  Did other officials or People's Association's representatives, ever come to your house?   

**A:**  Yes, the representatives came.   

**Q:**  Like Thamjö Sonamla?   

**A:**  Yes, their type. They did come and meet him. Then Andru Gombo Tashi [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was friends with Kungö from a long time ago. He came very often and the two talked. Even the servants used to consider it like a holiday saying that Gombo Tashila was coming and so the two will be preoccupied.   

**Q:**  I see, the servants too were not to be present since the secrets might get out.   

**A:**  Yes, something like that. The servants used to say that since the two will be occupied it's a holiday for us.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  was around '51-'52.   

**Q:**  Was Andru Gombo Tashi there?   

**A:**  Until the uprising, Gombo Tashila was at Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Chushigandru went to Lhoka in '58 and they started their organization in '57. About the time the Dalai Lama went to India.   

**A:**  It seems it had already begun.   

**Q:**  He came before that?   

**A:**  Yes. he was coming. They were friends and used to come a long time ago. Even when I just came to the house [as a bride], he came often.   

**Q:**  Later, there were a lot of problems and the two sitsab were given leave, right? Then during this time did he just stay at home?   

**A:**  Yes. Ever since he was relieved of his work, he just stayed at home and said his prayers. He never went anywhere and he would really stay at home. He never went anywhere, like picnics, etc. During important ceremonies he attended and wore whatever dress his rank entitled him to. After he was relieved of his work, he continued to get his salary because as far as the Tibetan government was concerned, he did not deserve any punishment. When he came to India, even until the 1959 uprising, the government continued to give him his salary. He went to India in '56 and had his salary until 1959. The government gave grain which was sold and the money sent. Until the 1959 uprising, whatever he was entitled to he got. He came to India in 1956. In that year there was the 2500 Anniversary of Lord Buddha. He said that he was going for this occasion. At that time, the Dalai Lama had already left for India. When the Dalai Lama was returning they met at Tromo [1957]. So that was the reason he left from Lhasa. We were young and he would not say anything right? Even to the late lhajam [his wife] he would not reveal [things in general]. So whether he went for pilgrimage or not, he told the Chinese as well as us that he was returning in 3 months. The Chinese escorted him with a car and a truck for his belongings. Kungö Chemmo, Lhajam and the elder chöndzela had a smaller car. Then it was said that the belongings were too heavy for the larger car and so from Paldi [Tib. དཔལ་དི], another smaller car was sent. So that's how he left. Phünwang Buzhang came also. Up to Tromo they took responsibility for his safety. This I remember clearly. The doctors came and did a check up and all that. So the Chinese escorted him and they also said that they will also escort him on his return. He said he was going to come in 3 months. They came to enquire very often. After 3 months, they said that he said that he was returning in 3 months and so have you received any letters? So for one whole year they continuously came to ask this. Then after a year they did not ask.   

**Q:**  Didn't they ask you to write to him?   

**A:**  No, they didn't say that. The message from India was that he went on a pilgrimage and that he was under medical supervision since he was not keeping too well. So that was the message we always got. So that's also what we told [the Chinese]. We said that he was under medical care. In our traditional customs, we younger ones were not told anything. He told us and he told you too that he was going for a pilgrimage and that he was returning after 3 months. So the present message said that he was under medical care. So after a year they did not come to enquire. Otherwise they came very often.   

**Q:**  Later, what did you hear that he was doing in India?   

**A:**  The Chinese always said that in India he was inciting trouble [Tib. ངན་སྐུལ]. That ever since he went to India, that was obvious, but that even before that, they were saying that he was in collusion with foreigners.   

**Q:**  Yes. In Kalimpong there was Kungö Shakabpa, Kungö Gyalola and Ganden Villa Kungö Khenjung who started the Welfare Committee (Tib. Dedön Tshogpa [Tib. བདེ་དོན་ཚོགས་པ]) in 1954-the Jenkhentsisum. Later, it seems that they were all working together. Did you hear anything with regard to this?   

**A:**  I see. It was said [mostly probably by her husband] that now Kungö Chemmo has gone to India and so that was obvious, right? But also in this organization they said that my late husband was in it too. It was said that he [her husband] received a letter, and so regarding this, he had a lot of problems in prison. They even made a lot of trouble for me too. For about a year.   

**Q:**  On the Kalimpong issue?   

**A:**  Yes, that he was in the Dedön Tshogpa. It seemed that they were implying that they did some secret things and my late husband received messages and sent replies to them to India. It was obvious that he received a lot of trouble in prison, but even I was told for up to one year after 1959. I said that I don't know anything at all. They said that he has admitted it. This was their style, saying that they knew when they didn't, saying that someone said it even though no one said it. This was their custom. They said that he had admitted to being in the Dedön Tshogpa, but you are not admitting this. You were in the organization. To this, I replied that if the person concerned has admitted it, then that is the best. But I don't know anything at all, really. So in this way, after a year, they stopped this enquiry. But they also asked me a lot of questions. They said that I was definitely in the Dedön Tshogpa.   

**Q:**  At that time he [husband] was not in India?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  So they were saying that he was receiving letters from India?   

**A:**  Exactly. That he was in the Dedön Tshogpa. They may have had some information that he was in it. So regarding this, there were a lot of problems. During his 12 years in prison, this issue was not solved. Finally, after 12 years they decided that he would get 20 years. Otherwise, in the prison, the worst punishment was execution during ceremonies. The second punishment was 20 years, then 10-15 years. etc. So for 12 years, they made no decision. During this period, if there was urgency, then execution could take place. After the 12th year they decided and made it into 20 years. So whatever meeting took place, the execution period was over after 12 years. Later when he got out he said to me, "The reason I was in for so long was because of this reason [being in Dedön Tshogpa]. And regarding this I had to tell them that I was not in it, because if I said that I was in it then there was nothing left but execution and so that's how I was languishing for 12 years.   

**Q:**  Yes. So for 12 years they asked about it.   

**A:**  Yes, that's all they asked about and that too under the gun.   

**Q:**  When I ask around here now there seems to have been a secret group in Tibet with Phala, Tseja Gyentsenla [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས], Depön Tashi Perala [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ་ལགས] and Namseling -- about 5-6 persons. They had connections with Andru Gombo Tashi and Jenkhentsisum and they took their instructions from drönyerchemmo Phala. So when Jenkhentsisum had connections [in Tibet], Kungö Sitsab came to Kalimpong. Then Drunyichemmo Angula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] went to receive the Dalai Lama but also stayed in India. Then Yuthok Sawang Chemmo also went and stayed in Kalimpong. So what some were saying is that the government secretly talked and kept them there. So there is such talk. So regarding this have you heard anything?   

**A:**  Regarding this, if they had some secret thing we would not know about it right? On the outside, I did not hear anything regarding this. The Chinese were saying the same thing that they were inciting [trouble in Tibet].   

**Q:**  Yes, the Chinese had spies everywhere and so they knew everything .   

**A:**  Yes, they were very sharp. When he was relieved from his sitsabship, he was at home and attended larger ceremonies. But he was consulted often from up-down [means from the Potala, from the Gag. Probably Phala, maybe Dalai Lama]. In the old Tibetan tradition there was the samtra witting board. so letters came in this fashion. So this was covered and sealed and the stablemen [Tib. ཆིབ་གཡོག] from the stables [Tib. ཆིབས་ར] brought it. So during such times apples, peaches from down there [Norbulinga, I presume] were sent. The replies were written on the samtra and sealed and sent. So when he was at home there were consultations. Things like that we know since the chibyog comes with the letter.   

