# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0027.01  
##  : with Pandenla Trijang Labrang [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་བྱང་བླ་བྲང]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Pandenla Trijang Labrang [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་བྱང་བླ་བྲང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Pandenla Trijang Labrang [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་བྱང་བླ་བྲང] was a servant/attendant of the famous Trijang Rimpoche. In this interview, he first discusses his life as a student and later a servant. He talks in general about the arrival of the Chinese and the conflicts in Kham. He describes the Dalai Lama's trip to Yadong, Ngabö's work on the 17-Point Agreement, and the view that America would intervene on the Tibetan's behalf. He discusses the role of the sitsab in politics disputing Zhang Jingwu and the sitsab's eventual demotion. He also details the attitudes in Kham towards the Chinese and the quality of life in that area. Additionally, he discusses the gradual restrictions on religious expressions such as teachings and blessings and the role of the Khambas in creating a revolt.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0027_01/H_0027_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Kungö, you please ask me the questions and what I know, I will of course tell you.   

**Q:**  Yes. I don't have anything very detailed to ask you now, but let's say during the period from 1949-50 to 1959 where were you and what were you doing? Especially since you were with Trijang Rimpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]   

**A:**  Since the time when I was 9 years, I had come to serve Trijang Rimpoche. I was like a student in the labrang and he taught me how to write and I also went to school. So in 1949-50 period I was an attendant [Tib. söpön] of Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  Was this at Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. Trijang Rimpoche stayed mostly at Lhasa since he was the Dalai Lama's dialectics debate partner [Tib. ཙེནཤབ] and [then] tutor. Around this time he was the tsenshab.   

**Q:**  So during this time, there were talks that the Chinese were coming and all that. When was it exactly?   

**A:**  From around 1947, the Chinese were saying a lot of things through the radio. Mainly the old government of Chiang Kaishek and the communists did not see eye to eye. So later, finally, when the communists were victorious then finally- Since a long time ago the Chinese were saying that we were part of China. We said that we were independent. So after the communist won, from Chamdo they also made proclamations that Tibet has always been a part of China and cannot be separated. So to relate the matter, Taktse [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར] Rimpoche, I think it was in 1949, they told him that you are Dalai Lama's brother and so you have to advise him to work together with the Chinese and have our motherland to become that [united]. So that's the reason why he came [to Lhasa]. When he came here he was not going to do what the Chinese told him to, right? He was going to think about Buddhism [Tib. བསྟན་པ] and the Dalai Lama's deeds [Tib. མཛད་འཕྲིན]. So he did come earlier and like the Chinese told him, that you have to be under China and must work together - so Taktse Rimpoche came. And Amdo Geshe Sherab [Tib. ཤེས་རབ] Rimpoche, a very learned man came up to Nagchu. But at that time, we were not accepting any Chinese and so he (Geshe Sherab) had to return.   

**Q:**  Geshe Sherab Rimpoche was not able to come? They didn't allow him to come right?   

**A:**  The government blocked it. They didn't allow him to enter Tibet [in 1950]. The reason he was to come was regarding Sino-Tibetan good relations. He came to advice about the policies of the Chinese. Then Geda [Tib. དགེ་སྟགས] Trülku came up to Chamdo and spoke with the Doji Lhalu but he died. Some say [died naturally]. Others say he was poisoned, others not. Whatever it is, he died at Chamdo, right? So whatever they were taught [to say to the Tibetan government] did not come about. Then from our side, we acted differently and through foreigners like Sir Ford, we said that we were not part of China through the wireless. We did that at Chamdo and from Yadong. From our government, they did not want to accept [being part of China] and so Geshe Sherab Rimpoche and Geda Trülku were not able to come. They were to come to Lhasa, but they could not. But Taktse Rimpoche, being the Dalai Lama's brother's came. He was sent, but did not do accordingly. He did say what they were thinking and what they told him.   

**Q:**  According to the Chinese they say Ford killed Geda Trülku. What happened?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying this. He died there, but the reason is not know. We were also in Lhasa. The Chinese are saying that he was poisoned. What we said was that he took ill suddenly and died. The real reason we cannot say.   

**Q:**  During this time, when did the Dalai Lama go to Yadong?   

**A:**  The Chinese were coming from Chamdo and down there [from the east] and when it was getting dangerous so the oracles Nechung and Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] were consulted and then in 1950 the Dalai Lama took over the religious and political reins of the state. After that, at Chamdo, Ngabö and company were under the Chinese, and so the Dalai Lama went to Yadong thinking maybe he could go to America or India.   

**Q:**  So at that time, how was the decision made to go to Yadong? Were there some who said he shouldn't go, and others who said he should? Was Nechung and others consulted?   

**A:**  There was the Kashag, the Yigtsang, the tsipön and other important ranking officials who discussed this and they said that since the Chinese have already captured certain parts of our country, for his [the Dalai Lama's] personal safety [he should go]. Likewise for the sake of the Religion and politics (the Tibetan State) and it would be catastrophic if the Dalai Lama comes into Chinese hands and so the Dalai Lama must leave and go somewhere. They asked him to go and he agreed. And Sitsab Lukhangwa and the Sitsab Lama Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] were appointed and also acting kalön were appointed.   

**Q:**  How long did the Dalai Lama stay at Yadong?   

**A:**  I think he stayed until May or June, but I can't be sure.   

**Q:**  When did the Dalai Lama go to Yadong from Lhasa?   

**A:**  After he took over the reins of the government. It was towards the end of 1950.   

**Q:**  So he stayed for a few months?   

**A:**  Yes, he left somewhere around the 10th Tibetan month and stayed. He spent the New Year at Yadong.   

**Q:**  So at Yadong, what political talks did they have?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama was at Yadong and had relations with the two sitsab. With the Dalai Lama was the kalön and the Kashag, and Yigtsang. The whole government was there. So from down there, since Ngabö was captured by the Chinese, so from Drugu [Tib. གྲུ་གུ] Monastery came Tsendrön Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས] and the lay official Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང], who were sent by Ngabö. They came to say what should we do since there was no alternative but to accept the 17-Point Agreement. Then after consultations, it was said that whatever is to come out of it we have to do it because it would be a type of method that should be taken [Tib. ཐབས་ཤེས་རྣམ་གྲངས]. So Ngabö went from Chamdo to China and from Yadong, Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ] Magji Dzasa and Drunyichemmo Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར] and some interpreter came to China from Yadong. They were sent as delegates to sign the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  At Yadong, there was a meeting in which they discussed whether the Dalai Lama should go to India or return to Lhasa. How did that come about? Who were involved in this?   

**A:**  This; Take for example the two of us. Even if we are Tibetans, we have our own opinions, isn't it? Supposing it was me, I would say-Oh to go abroad we won't manage. but someone else will say if we go abroad then there will be other countries that will help us. So there was the Kashag and Yigtsang officials and they consulted and Phala Drönyerchemmo and others were there. So the ones who said that the Dalai Lama should go, that side, abroad towards India were mainly the Yabshi Kungö. Kungö Gyalo Thondupla [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ] and Taktse Rimpoche and probably Surkhang [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Was Shakabpa there at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, he was a tsipön.   

**Q:**  So they were saying we have to go that side?   

**A:**  Yes, to India, and have relations with foreign countries and try to get independence for Tibet. Inside, the Kashag, the Yigtsang Drunyichemmo and the Jigyab Khembo and others said that if you go abroad you won't accomplish anything. Instead, it's better to return.   

**Q:**  So those who said that it's better to go abroad, were they saying that they have backing?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that. So at that time, we were sort of kids and thinking about America. We had this notion that America would sort of come right away in a plane and take the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Finally how did they finally go back?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama and the ranking members discussed this and since there was no agreement, a senriy divine lottery was cast in front of the thanka of the Shri Devi [Tib. ལྷ་མོ] that the Dalai Lama always brought with him when travelling. He also did divination, and then the decision was made. However, Ngabö in China signed the 17-Point Agreement and it was pretty much finished. Just a handful of the Dalai Lama's entourage were at Yadong wondering whether to go abroad or not. The Chinese had in fact moved their feet and were firmly rooted in Tibet already.   

**Q:**  During this time what were your thoughts?   

**A:**  We didn't have any ideas at that time, being young. Just wondering what was going to happen and what they were going to land us in. Personal ideas about what is and what is not did not occur.   

**Q:**  Trijang and Ling [Tib. གླིང] Rimpoche and maybe the monasteries are in this so what were their thoughts?   

**A:**  Most of them thought that it's better to return. If we went abroad we would have a small refugee government and they were pessimistic about receiving help. So that's what I think they were thinking, judging by the conversations of Trijang and Ling Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  Then they returned, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the 17-Point Agreement was signed. The ones who went to "sign" it, Künsangtse and Lhautara Drunyichemmo and others came from Shanghai to India and then to Yadong. With them was the Chinese representative, Zhang Jingwu and Alo Buzhang. That is where they first met to make sure that the Dalai Lama was going to return and they went ahead.   

**Q:**  So when they went, Zhang Jingwu went ahead?   

**A:**  They met at Yadong and he left earlier after he spoke with the Dalai Lama regarding the 17-Point Agreement and we pretty much decided to go back. We had done divination and the senriy lottery, and it was decided. However, Zhang Jingwu and Alo Buzhang were to go first, and then we went later.   

**Q:**  So when they returned then what happened? The Chinese had come and so what was the situation like?   

**A:**  So when we got there, there were not that many Chinese. However, as far as the public is concerned, [it was a situation] where the Chinese had oppressed [Tib. བཙན་གནོན] us and not one where we decided to be friends with the Chinese. Therefore, we did not like them, but we had come under them even when we didn't want to. Even if we went to that side [India], there weren't foreign countries that were going to help us. Even if we ended up with the Chinese, all us people regardless of whether rich and poor, thought that the Chinese will never do good things. We thought that their policy will get tighter and tighter so that we will not have power and suffer under them. But since it was our land, we thought to return. The idea that we will get together with the Chinese and be happy was something the majority of the people did not have.   

**Q:**  So in 1951-52, after the Chinese came, were the people showing some expressions [Tib. རྣམ་འགྱུར]?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes! The people didn't like Zhang Jingwu who was staying in Trimön House. People were agitated and went there, kind of to harm [Tib. དགྲ་བྱེད] them. So the Chinese also had to be on guard. The sitsab also spoke very harshly to the Chinese representatives Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and those who arrived earlier [Zhang Guohua actually came later in 1951]. Yes, they were very adamant [Tib. གྱོང་པོ]. When the Chinese said that they have peacefully liberated Tibet and accomplished great things and so what do you think? Kungö Lukhangwa said, "We have just received a head wound and the blood is still not dried. Kungö Lukhangwa and Kungö Sitsab and they said, "In our Lhasa the Chinese also picked up all the feces, burned all the bones and disturbed the deities and the nagas and made the country worse." So the people did not at all like the Chinese,and called them, "He, Chinese corpse" (Tib. ཁོ་གྱརོ [ཁོ་རྒྱ་རོ]) and "Chinese fellow-townsmen corpse" (Tib. གྱམི་ལཨོཤང་གྱརོ [Ch. lao xiang; Tib. རྒྱ་རོ]) .   

**Q:**  What did you say they did? Something about bones?   

**A:**  Yes, they burnt bones and picked up feces to use in the vegetable gardens.   

**Q:**  So this is something that people didn't like it, right?   

**A:**  [We] wouldn't like that. They were doing something that we normally didn't do. The characters [of the Tibetans and Chinese] were incompatible. They were saying that they have come to serve the Tibetan people, and in the streets and alleys of Lhasa they were collecting feces and cleaning up and putting the feces in the vegetable gardens and planting vegetables and said they were doing development. So whatever they did we only saw fault and not as a good thing. Our outlook was different. The final aim of the Chinese was to take (eat) [Tib. ཟ] Tibet. Our hope was to try and get out of it and be independent. And then people like Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག] and Shigatse Trunyi Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག], Bisu Jola [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས] and Jampa Sonam [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསོད་ནམས] and the people's representative like Alo Chöndze came and they opposed the Chinese and delivered a petition to the Chinese and posted and distributed flyers. They did a lot of things like that.   

**Q:**  Now they say that there were two People's Associations, Alo Chöndze and Bisu were in the later or something like that. Who was in the first one?   

**A:**  There was Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] and Bumtang Trunyi and Shigatse Lhabju. There were a few of them like that.   

**Q:**  Were they mostly from Ütsang?   

**A:**  Yes. Khamba and Amdo people were not in these at first.   

**Q:**  The People's Association was supposed to have 6 point memorandum.   

**A:**  Yes. A petition like that were given to the Kashag and to the Chinese. What the Chinese were saying is that was that you, the Kashag, instigated all this and they didn't do this on there own. So they said all kinds of things like this and didn't allow the sitsab to remain. the Dalai Lama and the Tibetans thought it was important that the sitsab remain.   

**Q:**  The two sitsab were very outspoken, right? Much more so than the Kashag. Why?   

**A:**  On the one hand they had greater responsibility. Then they were more dedicated or sincere [Tib. ལྷག་བསམ་རྣམ་དག], and the Tibetan people also believed in them.   

**Q:**  Then during 1952-53, where were you?   

**A:**  At Lhasa. Wherever the Dalai Lama and Trijang Rimpoche were.   

**Q:**  Then till when, in 1954?   

**A:**  In 1954, [the Dalai Lama] went to China.   

**Q:**  Did you go too?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes. I went everywhere -- to Beijing, Shanghai and I toured all over.   

**Q:**  So when you went down to China, what was the situation in the Kham area? You know, they were saying that democratic reforms were going to start.   

**A:**  Yes. They were doing a lot of things, however, it did not look [to me] that the people were in agreement with the Chinese. It was clear that the Chinese were oppressing and using them. When we went down, it was close to the opening of the National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་འདུ] and it was also summer and areas like Kongpo, Powo Tramo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་སྤྲ་རྨོག] are very high rainfall areas so it was very dangerous with rocks falling, and mud sliding and so the Dalai Lama and all of his retinue experienced a lot of difficulties.   

**Q:**  So when you were there, did the people come to see the lamas?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So did they have the opportunity to meet?   

**A:**  Not in any relaxed way, because the Chinese really pushed us hard and bullied us, saying that this is the place to stay overnight and it's time for the meeting and so we have to go now, and so they didn't allow us to stay according to our wishes. Even in places like Triu Ganze [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་དཀར་མཛེས] Monastery and Targye [Tib. དར་རྒྱས] Monastery, the larger ones, except for places where there were Chinese institutions, they allowed us to only go in for just a while. There was absolutely no opportunity to give a teaching or an audience and advise to the people. The people hoped, since we Tibetans are very religious, to get a chance to see the Dalai Lama and his tutors leisurely and receive teachings and ask for favor and divination, etc, so it was really a situation where we were not going nicely, but literally being pulled along. It was not leisurely. [They] had a lot of hardship.   

**Q:**  What about on the way up [back]?   

**A:**  Even in China, the way they were received, and fed, etc., were very good. They were giving the Dalai Lama's entourage clothes, money, and spending lavishly. That year there were a lot of Takor Tshogpa [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ] or tour groups from Ütsang, and the Kham side, and everywhere. They spent money without concern. For example, even though we were junior members of the Dalai Lama entourage, we also got cloth for making clothes, skins for making wool-fur dresses, and money, shoes, hats and even socks. Whole sets of clothing for both summer and winter. We were not happy to receive this. It was just luring us [Tib. བསླུ་བྲིད]. Later, it was going back into their hands. They were going to get (eat) Tibet's products like its agricultural inputs. We were just a few to whom they gave cloths and gifts. We know all this.   

**Q:**  So when [the party] was returning, in the Kham areas had the trouble already started? How was it? This was around 1955.   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama came to China, up to Shanghai Trijang Rimpoche and us were together. The Dalai Lama was invited to areas in Southern Kham like, Ba [Tib. འབའ], Chantreng [Tib. ཆ་ཕྲེང], and Litang. The Chinese did not allow him to go, so Trijang Rimpoche went as the Dalai Lama representative to these places and Karmapa went to Nyarong [Tib. ཉག་རོང], Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ], etc. Mindröling Jung [Tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང་གཅུང] Rimpoche and some lamas were also sent as representatives. Trijang Rimpoche took leave at Shanghai and went to Chantreng, Ba and Litang. During this time, though we didn't want it, the Chinese sent bodyguards, saying that there are reactionary and bad people, so we cannot bear the responsibility because Trijang Rimpoche is a representative of the National People's Congress and very important person and therefore he needs a bodyguard. We said we don't need bodyguards at all, as we have no enemies. They didn't listen and they sent 20-30 Chinese soldiers and we had to take them much to our dislike. So in the Kham areas [Trijang Rimpoche] quickly visited here and there and was not even able to give any teaching leisurely. From the Dalai Lama there were letters and photos for the monasteries and money for the alms, and we also gave alms to the monasteries and some short teaching were given there. But not to our satisfaction, nor to that of the people's. It was like showing a movie and the time was up just like that. And in the Kham areas where we went, it there was only Chinese oppression, otherwise it was not a situation where the people liked the Chinese. The revolt was imminent. So later, after the 1959 uprising, the Chinese said Trijang Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས] incited the people to revolt and gave protective talismans [Tib. མཚོན་སྲུང] to the people.   

**Q:**  Oh, were they saying that? That he went everywhere and [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes, that as the representative of the Dalai Lama he came to these areas to advise the people to revolt. They did not say that as representative to the Dalai Lama he went to give teachings.   

**Q:**  So during this time, what was the thinking of the people? They must have come to have an audience with Trijang Rimpoche.   

**A:**  They wanted religion and freedom, which they couldn't have. They were all apprehensive and worried that it would not be happy at all. All thought that way but with varying degrees.   

**Q:**  When they came for audience didn't they say that they were suffering, etc?   

**A:**  Yes, they would say that. They did say that. They showed that things were not going to be good.   

**Q:**  So during this time, there wasn't a full revolt already, right?   

**A:**  No, they had not revolted. In 1954 the Dalai Lama came up and in 1955, the latter part, they went through the motions of starting the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region (PCTAR) [The PCTAR started in April 1956, not 1955]. Chen Yi and a group of representative came from China for this, and representatives came from other provinces also. They started that. There were a lot of meetings of the Tibet Autonomous Region and it did a lot of expansion.   

**Q:**  Then, in 1956 for the Buddha Jayanti, were you with [Rimpoche]?   

**A:**  The Buddha Jayanti, yes, I was.   

**Q:**  Which places did you go to?   

**A:**  First there were lot of hindrance regarding coming. The Panchen Rimpoche, as far as the Chinese were concerned, could go anytime he wanted. The Dalai Lama had a wish to go to India for pilgrimage. However, the Chinese, thinking that we would want to contact other countries, did not wish to let the Dalai Lama leave. So they were blocking his leave and said that the Dalai Lama cannot leave and instead his tutor Trijang Lobsang Yeshe should go as his representative. So it was like a Chinese appointee and it was more or less decided that Trijang Rimpoche would go. However there was a lot of pressure from the religious organizations saying that the Dalai Lama himself should come and then the Dalai Lama was to go. They had no wish to let [the Dalai Lama] to go. They could not trust him thinking that we would do things from the political side. You know its very different if the Dalai Lama goes; even just the name, the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  So what places did you go to? You were together?   

**A:**  Oh Yes! Wherever, in cars, trains, and everywhere I went together. At first from Gangtok, to Siliguri, then by plane to Delhi where the Buddha Jayanti meeting were to take place. So after the meetings were over, then we went to all the larger cities in India like Bombay, Poona, Bangalore, everywhere, even around Mussoorie, Dehradun and Baranangka [Nankal Dam] and the pilgrimage sites, Bodh Gaya and Varanasi.   

**Q:**  So in 1956, the Dalai Lama has mentioned in his book that during this time it seems that there was a lot of talk about maybe staying, with some saying that he should return. So who was there?   

**A:**  Yes, that talk was already more or less there earlier.   

**Q:**  It was there earlier? When did it start?   

**A:**  Well those who were living here in India like Yabshi Kungö and you know other kungö living in India. Then from our government side, Kungö Wangdüla [Tib. དབང་འདུས་ལགས], Champa Tsündrüla [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ལགས], Thubden Nyinjila [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད་ལགས] left Tibet for political reasons and came to start some work[in Kalimpong].   

**Q:**  Who was it now, Thubden Nyinjila?   

**A:**  Thubden Nyinjila, Champa Wangdüla.   

**Q:**  Oh, Champa Wangdüla, the one who died last year or the year before?   

**A:**  Yes, now all three have passed away. Champa Tsündrüla has also passed. They ran away to India and came to start work.   

**Q:**  They were also together?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes. Wherever the Dalai Lama went they came along. They were not part of the Indian government invited entourage but where ever the Dalai Lama went they took the opportunity and came. Then there were the representatives of the people, and the representatives of the three monasteries were there, not in an open display, but internally they could consult and make their views/requests.   

**Q:**  From the monasteries?   

**A:**  Yes, Yes.   

**Q:**  Like who?   

**A:**  The Ganden [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན] representative was Lobsang Dawala [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཟླ་བ་ལགས]. He died later in Kalimpong. Other than that there are a few around.   

**Q:**  So who would know things, among the monastic representatives. Is anyone alive?   

**A:**  Lobsang Dawala has passed away. And well, there are not many around. The people who did things during this time, now, none are around.   

**Q:**  So were they saying that the Dalai Lama should stay?   

**A:**  Yes. He should stay abroad, make relations with foreign countries, and try and get full independence for Tibet and try and get the Chinese out of Tibetan lands, so that's what they were thinking. However, this was not possible because of the differences in size. On the one hand Tibet was from the start a small country and in opposition was the large Chinese country with a large population.   

**Q:**  So, of those who said we have to go back, Ngabö had also there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Ngabö was in the entourage.   

**Q:**  So who were among those who said that [the Dalai Lama] should go back?   

**A:**  You mean those who said that the Dalai Lama should go back to Tibet?   

**Q:**  Yes, just like in Yadong there were opposing sides, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was also there in Delhi where the Dalai Lama met Chou Eli and [the Dalai Lama] spoke quite strongly [Tib. གྱོངབོ]. The Chinese were met and told that they need to change their policy somewhat and we need to have some more power [Tib. དབང་ཆ] [in matters]. During this time, the Chinese were saying pleasant sounding things, saying,"Oh, nothing is going to happen and things like democratic reforms can be postponed for a few years and there is no hurry regarding this. If the conditions are ripe. It has to be done according to your pace of development." Otherwise, setting up the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region and democratic reforms were decided in 1955-56, but when the Dalai Lama came to India for the Buddha Jayanti and met Chou Eli, they said that they have postponed democratic reforms by 6 years or something like that. So it wasn't going [as planned].   

**Q:**  So during this time what was Ngabö supposed to have said?  

**A:**  He was not saying that we have to be real Chinese. He was also the one who signed the 17-Point Agreement and he was pressing Surkhang and others who wanted to stay like Phala Drönyerchemmo saying,"what kind of confidence [Tib. གདེང] did they have.   

**Q:**  In 1957, was Surkhang Sawangchemmo among those who wanted the Dalai Lama to stay?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the main one, with Phala and the like. So at this time Lukhangwa, Shakabpa and there are others. It was called Jenkhentsisum; the older brother Gyalo Thondupla, Tsipön Shakabpa and others.   

**Q:**  What were the two tutors thinking?   

**A:**  They were thinking that in Tibet we would not be happy and have freedom of religion, however, here we can't be definite about [outside] help.   

**Q:**  Those who said that [the Dalai Lama] should stay, were they saying that they had definite help? What were they saying?   

**A:**  They spoke like they sort of had something, but they were not saying anything definite that they have confidence in. For example, when Ngabö pressed them they were not being clear about it. So it was not possible to be assured by what they said.   

**Q:**  So did Ngabö say that if you had such things then show me?   

**A:**  Yes. This he definitely said it. It was said in Delhi.   

**Q:**  Yes, that you people are saying that you have help, so what do you have?   

**A:**  Right, what do you have [he said]. If we don't return, and show our backs to the Chinese then what definite can we do for the future. So this they could not say much because they never had any.   

**Q:**  What was the Dalai Lama thinking?   

**A:**  He most probably had the wish not to return. However, there were the opinions of many others and the Dalai Lama himself was religious so even in 1957, the deities were consulted and the senriy diving lottery was done so were oracles like Nechung and others consulted, so even when [the Dalai Lama] came to Kalimpong he did the senriy divine lottery.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, a lot of senriy lotteries were done.   

**A:**  Yes, many.   

**Q:**  And so all these [question not finished]   

**A:**  It fell on [the answer] of returning [to Tibet].   

