# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0071.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Taktse Rimpoche, Norbu Thubden Jigme [Tib. སྟག་རྩེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ, ནོར་བུ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་འཇིགས་མེད]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Indiana, USA (phone interview)  
**Date of Interview:** 18 January 1996  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taktse Rimpoche  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Taktse Rimpoche was the oldest brother of the Dalai Lama. In this interview, he describes Tibet’s involvement with the CIA. He discusses his trip to the U.S. and his work as an interpreter for the CIA. Additionally, he talks about how Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa had connections with the CIA and how they (including Rimpoche) asked the CIA for training and arms support, but kept this request a secret from the Dalai Lama.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0071_03/H_0071_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Hello Rimpoche, I am Penjor.   

**A:**  Oh! How are you?   

**Q:**  I am fine. Thank you. I have to ask you something about 1956. In that year, the Dalai Lama came to India, right? At that time, you came with the CIA and introduced them to Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa. What was the CIA saying? Was the CIA person with you asking whether they could find people for training?   

**A:**  We had talks regarding how we could find people to be trained.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, did they [CIA] start to ask you, or did Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa ask them whether they could train people or not?   

**A:**  Yes. We asked them whether they could do the training or not.   

**Q:**  This was asked from the CIA side, right?   

**A:**  Yes, from the CIA side. They also asked us, "What help do you need?" So we told them that we needed to get people trained.   

**Q:**  At that time, you came with the CIA man to India, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Before you came to India, you might have discussed this, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we had talks here [in the U.S.].   

**Q:**  How did you start the talks?   

**A:**  When I first came to the U.S. [in '51] I said that "The Chinese are oppressing us in Tibet, so I came here. In what way can you help us?" I asked them that.   

**Q:**  At that time, you asked them this, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you meet them often?   

**A:**  Yes, we met a few times.   

**Q:**  Do you remember the month?   

**A:**  I don't remember the month. I came to America in 1951. From that time on, there was talk about what we [the U.S.] could do to help Tibet.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were asking that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I asked them "If the Dalai Lama comes out, can the U.S. government help?"   

**Q:**  This was the talk in the years 1951-52-53-54, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In '56, you came to India, right?   

**A:**  In 1956, it was the time the Dalai Lama was invited to India for the Buddha Jayanti. I think it was in '55 that Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa were introduced to the CIA.   

**Q:**  Not when you came to India?   

**A:**  When we came to India, they knew them already. In 1955, I told them that we had such and such a person coming. Yes, in '55.   

**Q:**  Your coming to India, was that because the Dalai Lama came or was it because there was the disturbance in Kham in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes, there were the disturbances, but at that time, I asked them about training people if we sent them there. There was always talk from '55 and '56 about training people and asking "What can you [the U.S.] do?"   

**Q:**  I think the Dalai Lama came to India in December in 1956.   

**A:**  Probably, that was in winter.   

**Q:**  When did you come?   

**A:**  I came around the 10th or 11th month.   

**Q:**  You said that you had contact with Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa before 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So when you went there, they already knew about that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa already knew when we came to India.   

**Q:**  When you came there in 1956, was the CIA asking them, "Can you find people?"   

**A:**  No, they were saying that "If you can find people, then we will help you and try to find a method [Tib. ཐབས་ཤེས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཡིན] [find a way]." So we told them that we would find the people.   

**Q:**  Was the first initiative from the American side?   

**A:**  No, it was from our side.   

**Q:**  This was because you were asking from a long time ago, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In 1956, when the Dalai Lama was coming and when the CIA man came, did he tell you that it would be good if you went?   

**A:**  Regarding '56, I told them [CIA], "I am going, and so one of you come. I can't make any decisions and so you come and talk with Gyalo Thondup, Shakabpa and Gyadotsang. If you speak with them about that, they can definitely make the decisions and tell you what people you need."   

**Q:**  Was that CIA man called John Reagan?   

**A:**  [His] first name was John, but I don't remember the last name. But most probably, that is the name. I almost forgot it.   

**Q:**  Did you come with the CIA man?   

**A:**  No, we came separately [separate planes, same time].   

**Q:**  When you went there and talked with him, at that time, had you had talks about the training?   

**A:**  Yes, there was talk regarding the training. It was decided at that time that after speaking with Gyalo Thondup, Shakabpa and Gyadotsang, if they would send people, then they would be trained [by the u.S.]. This was decided.   

**Q:**  In '56, you came and the Dalai Lama was in India. So when was it decided? Was it after the Dalai Lama left, about to leave, or before leaving?   

**A:**  They had decided to train [people] even before we came to India.   

**Q:**  Do you mean before the Dalai Lama returned to Tibet? The Dalai Lama went back in 1957, right?   

**A:**  No, it was in 1956.   

**Q:**  He went to India in December in 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  He probably went back in January or February in 1957.   

**A:**  Oh, yes, it must have been in January.   

**Q:**  Was the training decided before the Dalai Lama went back?   

**A:**  At that time, there wasn't any talk about the Dalai Lama going back or not.   

**Q:**  No, I mean the time. Was the training decided [question not finished]   

**A:**  Regarding training, it was probably decided in two, three weeks in Calcutta [in 1956], and it was to find the people and send the people.   

**Q:**  You mean about three weeks after you came to India?   

**A:**  Yes, it was three weeks after I came to India.   

**Q:**  So they had agreed [Tib. ཁས་ལེན་བྱེད] to provide training during a 3 weeks time period?   

**A:**  They had agreed a long time ago. They said that they would provide training, and so we went to India.   

**Q:**  You mean they had agreed before you went to India?   

**A:**  Yes, it had nothing to do with the Dalai Lama coming to India or not [the Dalai Lama's trip was not relevant to that decision].   

**Q:**  Nobody in the government knew, right?   

**A:**  We only told Phala. No one else.   

**Q:**  Why didn't you tell anybody else? You didn't tell the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Not one word [was said] to the Dalai Lama. I have never spoken one word to the Dalai Lama regarding the CIA. I don't know what Shakabpa and Gyalo Thondup did.   

**Q:**  You told Phala Drönyerchemmo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Why did you tell Phala?   

**A:**  Because he would stay in Tibet and go back, and he was working with Andru. What I know is that Phala knows and Andru probably knows, and no one else.   

**Q:**  When you went to India, you talked with Phala, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I did.   

**Q:**  What did Phala say?   

**A:**  Phala said, "If something like this can be done, then it is very good." That he would help.   

**Q:**  Later, there were many talks about the returning of the Dalai Lama, whether he would stay in India or not, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, he went back because it was said that there wasn't any proof from the American side [that they would help], right?   

**A:**  I didn't know what they had decided.   

**Q:**  Did Phala ask what the Americans could do?   

**A:**  Nothing so much like that. But, we had a talk about whether the U.S. could train [people or not]. And I told him that the U.S. was going to train [people] and so people needed to be sent, and that this was to be the responsibility of Kungö Phala, Andru and you people [in India and Tibet?].   

**Q:**  So Phala knew everything before he went to Tibet, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he knew.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there any talks regarding whether [or not] Taiwan would help?   

**A:**  [There was] no talk about Taiwan assistance at all. I know nothing about this. I don't know about those who were in India, like Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa.   

**Q:**  At one time, the U.S. had the thought of collecting information about the situation in Tibet, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Some of the CIA said that if they were to escalate the work of gathering intelligence, collecting information and giving the military support, the U.S. [would] probably need a direct request from the Dalai Lama. Was it like this?   

**A:**  I didn't know [about this] at all.   

**Q:**  Some say that the training was done in Okinawa and Saipan, and some say it was Guam. Which place was it?   

**A:**  They did the training many times. The first was done in Okinawa and [on] the small islands like Saipan and Guam. The second and third trainings were done on these islands like Guam, and also in the U.S. What do you call the place?   

**Q:**  Do you mean Colorado?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you mean both Guam and Saipan?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Litang Athar and those people went in a plane from East Pakistan, right? Where did they stop?   

**A:**  I do not know where they stopped after East Pakistan.   

**Q:**  Their destination was Okinawa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, from Okinawa they went by plane.   

**Q:**  Did they stop in Thailand and those places?   

**A:**  I don't know where they stopped.   

**Q:**  They gave money for the training in 1956, right?   

**A:**  The training didn't start in 1956, it started in '57 or '58.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you have discussions about paying money?   

**A:**  Regarding money, they must have discussed it in India. I was not there. Obviously, they would have needed money for expenses, right? I don't know what Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa discussed.   

**Q:**  You were the person who contacted the first [person] and you introduced them in India, but later, you were not involved in the meetings?   

**A:**  Later, I didn't get involved. The reason being that the U.S. was doing this just for their own benefit and not to help Tibetans. The arms dropped were all old. They didn't give [us] new arms. So I left [working with them] saying that this was not alright.   

**Q:**  I am asking about '56.   

**A:**  Yes, I was there asking if the U.S. could help, and how and what [they could do].   

**Q:**  At that time, you might [have] had many talks about the training, right?   

**A:**  I was just talking about how they could help us. Other than that, regarding money and details—I had no discussions [with them about this]. This responsibility must have been done by those in India and not me.   

**Q:**  Did Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa, who were in Kalimpong, have connections with the [U.S.] Embassy in India and the CIA in 1956 before you came to India?   

**A:**  I don't know. Shakabpa had connections with the U.S. Ambassador and the Consulate. I don't know how they introduced the people.   

**Q:**  Before you came to India with the CIA, did they have connections?   

**A:**  Yes, before I went there, Shakabpa had a connection with the U.S. Ambassador in 1951.   

**Q:**  Before you and the CIA went to India, did they [Shakabpa and those people] ask for the training and arms support?   

**Q:**  Yes, they did ask.   

**Q:**  Was it before you went to India?   

**A:**  Yes, they talked many times long ago.   

**Q:**  You are talking about you asking, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. Yes. I was told to ask them and it started in 1955.   

**Q:**  Were you asking or were Gyalo Thondup and Shakabpa asking from India?   

**A:**  I was asking and they also were asking [the U.S.]. They would ask me to ask, and so I did.   

**Q:**  You were in the first and second training [groups], right?   

**A:**  I was only in the first, not in the second.   

**Q:**  You mean by the first, when Athar and those people were there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What happened after the first training [session]? Some say that they didn't treat you well. Some say that they didn't pay enough. Why did you leave that?   

**A:**  I left because, as I told you right now, the U.S. was only doing this for their benefit and was not really doing it to help the Tibetans. So I thought it was useless to do it and I did not go for any other training.   

**Q:**  Was this in 1957-58 when you left?   

**A:**  That was probably '58 or '59.   

**Q:**  Athar and those people went there for training in '57, right?   

**A:**  Oh! Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  This was the first group, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After this, you left, right?   

**A:**  After that, I didn't go to training, but I was still involved in some of what the Tibetans did.   

**Q:**  The U.S. government was probably asking a lot about what plan the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government had. For example, if the Dalai Lama would stay outside, they would help with that.   

**A:**  This was long, long ago.   

**Q:**  This was the talk about whether he would stay in Thailand or wherever, right?   

**A:**  This was from 1951.   

**Q:**  Did the U.S. say that if the Dalai Lama stayed out and if the Tibetans fought the Chinese, then the U.S. would help with arms? At that time, there was a talk about revolking the 17-Point Agreement, right?   

**A:**  I have never heard this and I don't know anything about this. It seems that in '51, Shakabpa had a great conversation with U.S. Ambassador Henderson in Calcutta. I don't know anything [about this].   

**Q:**  Litang Athar said that when he departed from Okinawa, he was to contact Phala and ask what plans the Tibetan government had. But, at that time, Phala was kind of suspicious because the Chinese were there and he didn't say anything about their plans. Then he went with Andru and Chushigandru [to Lhoka], was it like this?   

**A:**  I don't know what they did in Tibet. When the Dalai Lama came out, Athar and Lotse were also outside. I didn't know about what contacts they had.   

**Q:**  What did you say to Athar when you were in Okinawa? Did you tell him to contact Phala and Andru and find out what plan the Tibetan government had?   

**A:**  I didn't say anything about this. I told Athar that when he went to Tibet, he should do what Andru and Chemmo said. Nothing else. I don't know what the CIA told them.   

**Q:**  At that time, they didn't know English, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You were the interpreter, right?   

**A:**  I was the interpreter, and there was also Geshe Wangye [Tib. དབང་རྒྱལ].   

**Q:**  What you remember is that you told them to go to Tibet and do whatever Phala and Andru said, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and I also told Athar and Lotse that "You have to work with the many resistance groups in Tibet and find out what they are doing."   

**Q:**  Didn't you tell them that they had to tell you what plan the Tibetan government had?   

**A:**  Nothing was said about the Tibetan government's plans.   

**Q:**  That's all for today. May I ask you when I have some further questions?   

**A:**  That will be okay.   

