# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0071.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Taktse Rimpoche (Norbu Thubden Jigme) [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ; ནོར་བུ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་འཇིགས་མེད]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Indiana, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 14 March 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taktse Rimpoche, Norbu Thubden Jigme [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ, ནོར་བུ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་འཇིགས་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 71  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Taktse Rimpoche was the oldest brother of the Dalai Lama. In this interview, he discusses how the Chinese told him to convince the Dalai Lama to cooperate with them. He talks about how he later came to the U.S. through the Committee for Free Asia, and then his trip to Calcutta with the CIA to meet the Dalai Lama and Jenkhentsisum. He also discusses his meeting with Dean Rusk of the State Department to discuss plans for the Dalai Lama to come out and stay in Thailand. Additionally, he talks about Tibetans being sent to be trained in Okinawa, and the wireless connection between Litang Athar and the CIA. He also discusses how he felt the U.S. was just using Tibetans to get information and what he heard in Kumbum about the Chinese opposing Tibetans’ religion, but also how in 1950, the people of Tibet were still hopeful that something could be worked out with the Chinese. And finally he talks about the Dalai Lama's visit to India in 1956 and his decision to return to Tibet in 1957.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0071_01/H_0071_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1950, Chamdo was lost and the 17-Point Agreement was signed. About this time, the Dalai Lama went to Yadong. So in 1950 and 1951, where were you?   

**A:**  In 1951, I was in Kumbum [Tib. སྐུ་འབུམ]. In 1950, I was in Yadong, I think [He is a bit mixed up]. I left Yadong in 1951, on the [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  It was before this, I think, when you were staying in Kumbum, that a Chinese official came and said something about offering you the governorship of Tibet or something.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes. They said that I had to convince the Dalai Lama and the kudraks to work with the Chinese. At that time, they were very scared that the Dalai Lama and the officials would escape to India. So they told me that if I could convince them well and tell them to cooperate with the Chinese, as a reward, they would offer me the governorship of Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Didn't they say anything else?   

**A:**  They said, "If the Dalai Lama does not work well with the Chinese in five years, you can kill him." So I had such talks.   

**Q:**  When you went, did they say anything about sending soldiers?   

**A:**  Yes. That I had to go to Tibet to convince them to work with the Chinese. I said that "I will not go because, [first of all,] I am the Dalai Lama's relative. Secondly, I'm Tibetan and if I did such things, then the Tibetans definitely would not be happy and there would also be danger to my life." They said, "If that happens, it doesn't matter, we will send 3,000 soldiers. You don't need to worry about your life."   

**Q:**  Then did you go later?   

**A:**  Yes. They told me to go on so many occasions. From July 1949 to March-April 1950, they kept telling me that I had to go. So I said that, "If I have to go, in Amdo there are many trustworthy lamas and chiefs, pönpo [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]. If you send some of those people along with me, then I will go." So they asked me to give them a list of such people. I gave them a list of many people and out of that they chose two, Shar Kalden Gyatso [Tib. shar skal ldan rgya mthso] and Serkok Shaluwa [Tib. ?]. The rest they said they would not send since they had a bandit ideology. The Chinese always call those who do not like them, bandits. So along with the two, I came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Which Chinese came along?   

**A:**  I have forgotten his name. Anyway, he was a soldier. I think he may have been some sort of military officer. There was a Chinese woman who may have also been a military officer. Along with them, there were five or six radio operators.   

**Q:**  So when you came up, the Dalai Lama was staying at Yadong?   

**A:**  No, the Dalai Lama was in Lhasa. What shall I say, in Nagchu, I arrived in the 10th Tibetan month. You know the Changji [Tib. བྱང་སྤྱི](the Governor-General of Northern Tibet]?   

**Q:**  Oh, yes. I heard something about you meeting the Changji.   

**A:**  I met Changji Thubden Sangpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བཟང་པོ] and told him about the situation. The Chinese were stopped—the radio operator and the two Chinese soldiers were sent somewhere else. Us Tibetans and the others were sent to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did you tell the Changji about what the Chinese told you and why you had come?   

**A:**  Yes, I told him everything.   

**Q:**  When you told him, what did the government [question not finished]   

**A:**  The Changji said, "It would be good if you informed the government [about] whatever you saw and heard. You should write a petition and send it to them." So I sent a petition to the Kashag, but it landed up in the Tsondu Gyendzom. So there was no reply to it.   

**Q:**  Then you came up and then what happened?   

**A:**  At that time, it was decided that the Dalai Lama was to go to Yadong. This was I think in the 11th Tibetan month. So the Dalai Lama went to Yadong and the Yabshi family members also went. So I went with them.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay?   

**A:**  In Yadong, I stayed from the 11th month to perhaps the 4th Tibetan month. [For] about six months. At that time, the government had petitioned the UNO and there was talk about receiving a reply. Ngabö had gone to China, so there were discussions about whether the 17-Point Agreement was to be signed or not.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you hear about what was discussed?   

**A:**  What they discussed, I didn't quite follow. Some were saying that the Dalai Lama should not go to India because they might hand him over to the Chinese. That the Indians would not allow him to enter India. So there were such talks, and I did not hear anything clearly [about] what decisions they made.   

**Q:**  You did not have any discussions with the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  No, nothing.   

**Q:**  The representatives of the 17-Point Agreement were arriving by sea along with Zhang Jingwu, right?   

**A:**  When I was in Yadong, I heard that the 17-Point Agreement was signed. It was at that time that I thought, "Oh. Now I should not stay." That I should go abroad because once the Chinese came, then there would be trouble for me.   

**Q:**  So it was before the [representatives] arrived?   

**A:**  Yes, as soon as they signed the Agreement, I decided to leave.   

**Q:**  So you wanted to go before they [representatives] came?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Once you were in India, did you stay around Kalimpong and Darjeeling?   

**A:**  Yes, I stayed in Kalimpong for a while. At that time, the late Kungö Panda [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] was there. Shakabpa was there too.   

**Q:**  At that time, was there some political organization [Tib. སྲིད་དོན་ཚོགས་པ] in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  There was nothing at that time. I didn't see any. After I came abroad—actually, I had thoughts of leaving even when I was at Kumbum. I had a Mongolian friend by the name of Telopa Huthogthu [Tib. ཏེ་ལོ་པ་ཧུ་ཐོག་ཐུ]. We were good friends. Telopa Rimpoche told me a long time ago that the communists were going to come to power in China. He said, "Once that happens, then for sure, they will not leave Tibet alone. If the Chinese come to Tibet, then you better think because once they come, they will not leave anyone at ease." This was in the second or third month of 1949. So he sent me such a letter from Beijing. He said that he was going to the States and that I should think carefully. And so in this way, I came to India. Once the 17-Point Agreement was signed, then it was very clear. It was only a question of what the Chinese could do, and the Tibetans had nothing [they could do]. Kungö Shakabpa was there and he used to go abroad. So I asked him to inquire for me about visas. He knew people in America and he asked them. It was said that I needed a sponsor and that then it would not be difficult to go to the States. Kind of like an application, and personal data and a picture were needed. Kungö Shakabpa took the photo in Yadong and we did all the paperwork there and sent it [in]. I sent a copy to Telopa Rimpoche who was at Berkeley. So in this way, I came to India. In India, I asked Kungö Panda, and he helped me and I went to Calcutta. At the U.S. Consulate, I met some people and my application was there, right? They said that I could go to the States and that the Committee for Free Asia would sponsor me. At that time, there was an organization called the Committee for Free Asia. Then I went to the States. When I was in Calcutta and after the 17-Point Agreement was signed, Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར], Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ], our depön—they had come from China to Calcutta with Zhang Jingwu.   

**Q:**  Yes. Rinchenla was there too. Maybe he came later.   

**A:**  Is that right? I don't remember Rinchen La, but I do remember them, Lhautara, Künsangtse, and Depön—because I was in Calcutta and they knew that I had come. So they said that Zhang Jingwu was there and that I must meet him. Our depön was insisting very much. So I met Zhang Jingwu at their consulate.   

**Q:**  Did Kungö Depön know that you were going?   

**A:**  No, I did not tell him that. I was not keeping very well and so I said that I had come to see doctors. [Note: In his book he says Depön was shocked to hear that he was leaving for the States.]   

**Q:**  Around this time, I don't know if you have heard this or not—I think it was in 1951—the Americans were telling the Dalai Lama not to accept the 17-Point Agreement, and they sent a letter to that effect. The letter was delivered to Yabshi in Darjeeling, maybe the Dalai Lama's mother was there. Do you know who took the letter and what the reply was?   

**A:**  No, not at all.   

**Q:**  After you arrived in the States, then how did you make relations with American Intelligence [the CIA]?   

**A:**  This was started from Calcutta. When I told the consulate that I was going to the States, they said that there were some of their people and that I had to contact. They told me that the Committee for Free Asia would sponsor me and that when I arrived there, [I was] to contact such and such people. So that's how it started.   

**Q:**  Before this, was there contact with the U.S. government through Kungö Shakabpa or Gyalola?   

**A:**  No, nothing prior to this. Kungö Shakabpa definitely had connections. He had connections with—what was the name of the Ambassador? I can't remember.   

**Q:**  Ambassador?   

**A:**  Yes. Do you know who the ambassador was at that time?   

**Q:**  You mean Henderson?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, Henderson! That's right.   

**Q:**  I don't know if he was the ambassador, but I have heard that name a lot.   

**A:**  Yes, it was Henderson. It was through him that such things as not accepting the 17-Point Agreement and sending people to the UNO [happened]. I heard a lot of things like that. I can't be sure. At that time, I don't know exactly what the connection was with the intelligence [agency], but my relations with them started in Calcutta.   

**Q:**  The U.S. interest in Tibet had already started by then, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who made the first connection?   

**A:**  Must have been Shakabpa. After I was connected with the Committee for Free Asia, I met Dean Rusk. What was he at that time? The Under Secretary of East Asia or something?   

**Q:**  Something like that from the State Department.   

**A:**  I met him. He said that the Tibetans always had ideas of revolting against the Chinese. That they had no wish to be with the Chinese. So he said that. And he said that "We strongly support you."   

**Q:**  When you met them, like Dean Rusk, how was the first meeting arranged? And how were you introduced?   

**A:**  I was a refugee from Tibet, right? Is it called a political refugee?   

**Q:**  Probably.   

**A:**  Yes, in this way, I was introduced. I was introduced as one who escaped from Tibet and as one who did not want to live under the Chinese.   

**Q:**  When you arrived in the States, who from the Committee for Free Asia was sent to receive you?   

**A:**  Bob Ekvall was hired. He was my interpreter. When I arrived at the airport, he was there.   

**Q:**  Now, how did this take place? In 1957, there were some who were trained to be dropped into Tibet. Athar and six of them went from Kalimpong to East Pakistan and then [question not finished]   

**A:**  Dacca.   

**Q:**  They went from Dacca?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then it is said that they flew, but [they] didn't know where. To somewhere in Thailand or something.   

**A:**  Yes, Thailand.   

**Q:**  From there they went to?   

**A:**  Okinawa.   

**Q:**  From there to Guam.   

**A:**  Yes, that's correct.   

**Q:**  Most of the training was in Guam.   

**A:**  Exactly [Note: It actually was on Saipam Islamd].   

**Q:**  Things like the wireless, et cetera.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How was this connection started?   

**A:**  This is how it happened. I came in 1951 and met them [Americans], and it was like this until 1955. In 1956, the Dalai Lama went on a pilgrimage abroad. So we asked how it would be if certain people were trained. At that time, Kungö Shakabpa and Gyalo Thondup were in Kalimpong. So we spoke with them and said if they could find some people, then how would that turn out. Was it possible? That's how the relations started. In 1957.   

**Q:**  In 1956, the Dalai Lama came for the Buddha Jayanti, right? So during this time, what [question not finished]   

**A:**  At that time, I went with one CIA man to India. I introduced him to Shakabpa and Gyalo Thondup.   

**Q:**  How was the relation with the CIA started? The Committee for Free Asia was in it?   

**A:**  The CFA was not in it. They were my sponsors and looked after me and my expenses. At that time, the State Department people used to come quite often. We used to meet throughout '51-56.   

**Q:**  Like [during] '54, '55, '56, what were the discussions about?   

**A:**  That the Dalai Lama should come outside [of Tibet]. That if he stayed in Tibet, then one would never know what the Chinese could one day do. So if he came out, in what manner would he be able to do that? If he came out, then where could he go? Where would he stay? At that time, the Americans were thinking that if the Dalai Lama came out, then he could go to Thailand. There was such talk. That it was not easy for him to go from Tibet to India because in India, Nehru and others did not like the idea of the Dalai Lama coming out. If they were to bring him in a plane, then how could that be done? How could the plane land and where? How cold is the weather during winter? How thick is the ice on the lakes? So we talked a lot about such things. After this, they were thinking [wondering] if certain people could be sent and in what ways one could make it uncomfortable for the Chinese to stay in Tibet. So we talked about such things. Everything came to naught—we bumped our noses.   

**Q:**  While there were such talks—and in 1956, you came to India when the Dalai Lama came. At that time, was there talk about training people?   

**A:**  There was such talk during that time. They were asking if people could be trained and whether there were people. Later, when Kungö Shakabpa and Gyalo Thondup were asked to find people, they found [people]. So I think Athar and them were the first ones.   

**Q:**  When you came to India, how did the first talks begin regarding all of this?   

**A:**  They were in Calcutta.   

**Q:**  Was Shakabpa there?   

**A:**  I did not go to the meetings. I don't know well who was there. They had rented a house in Calcutta.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  Gyalo Thondup and Bai Xiansheng [Lhamo Tsering], and there were other workers—like Tashi Tsering [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང], you know, the one who went to Tibet?   

**Q:**  Jola [Tib. ཇོ་ལགས] Tashi Tsering?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was he in this too?   

**A:**  Yes, they were there. Then there was this Shelkar Chandzö [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་ཕྱག་མཛོད] or something.   

**Q:**  [Did he] have crooked eyes or something?   

**A:**  The one-eyed one. He was there. So these guys were talking. Maybe Gyadotsang was there. So how much money was needed and what the expenses were, they decided.   

**Q:**  They and the Americans were connected, right?   

**A:**  Yes, of course. But the relationship was not open and prior arrangements were made as to the time, place and the type of the car, color of the car and how to meet later, etcetera. So it was very secretive.   

**Q:**  Regarding the wireless, [if] a message was sent from Tibet, who picked it up?   

**A:**  The CIA.   

**Q:**  But it had to be sent in Tibetan, right?   

**A:**  No, not in Tibetan, but [using] secret code numbers, I think.   

**Q:**  People like Athar were sending the codes in Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes, codes like 1,2,3,4,5 6. It was all numbers.   

**Q:**  I thought it was sent in Tibetan.   

**A:**  No. No, not Tibetan. But they would write some letters in Tibetan. When this was done, then I translated it and so did Geshe Wangye, who was the main translator.   

**Q:**  How many workers were there? You, Geshe Wangye and who?   

**A:**  [They were] not really workers. If a letter arrived, they would telephone and say a letter had arrived, and [would ask] if I could come and translate it.   

**Q:**  I see, letters were sent in Tibetan.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  All of this training from Pakistan to Okinawa and Guam, how was that planned?   

**A:**  The Americans planned the whole thing and told us to go here and there.   

**Q:**  In Okinawa, what work did you have to do?   

**A:**  Just interpreting, and that was about it. No other work.   

**Q:**  Athar and all met you there?   

**A:**  Yes—interpreting during the wireless code [while receiving the message], that's all. I was there for the first and second [trainings]. After that, Geshe Wangye went.   

**Q:**  To Okinawa?   

**A:**  Yes. [I] must have stayed for about four months the first time. The second for about five to six months.   

**Q:**  And where did you live?   

**A:**  Oh, they had amazing places to stay. You couldn't go with your own name. Only under a different name. .   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. I'm asking you all of these secretive things.   

**A:**  No, no, they were so well organized. The natives worked there. They didn't say that we were from Tibet. They either said we were brought from the Philippines or from wherever. They were so careful. You couldn't have shirt labels because they went to the laundry. All the labels were taken out. One could not wear clothes made on the market, only those that they made. When one went from [one] place to another, one was blindfolded. I think they do a lot of these things .   

**Q:**  What kind of training was done in Okinawa?   

**A:**  Ambush [training], assembling, cleaning and disassembling guns.   

**Q:**  What about explosives?   

**A:**  Yes, that was in the ambush [training]. What should I say—honestly speaking, they just fooled us. In reality, they needed to know what arms the Chinese had and what they were up to. To that end, they used us .   

**Q:**  On the one hand, they were making it difficult for the communists from all sides, right? Vietnam and Korea?   

**A:**  Yes, exactly. They needed to know how they were operating in Tibet and what arms they had. And so we were fooled, we villagers.   

**Q:**  Then, in Guam, wasn't the main training there?   

**A:**  The first and second trainings were done in Guam. Later, they were done in the States themselves. In Colorado. Lobsang Samden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན] and our servant Gyentsen [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན] went [there].   

**Q:**  It's said that Gyentsenla was there in East Pakistan.   

**A:**  Yes, he was there for the first group. Otherwise, there wasn't anyone else. So we thought that if Gyentsen went, it was good. He was here in the States and he went to Pakistan, to Karachi, then Dacca. From Dacca, he took a helicopter to—what's below the Kalimpong area?   

**Q:**  Below is the Siliguri area.   

**A:**  It is said that there is a river and once that is crossed, one reaches land [Pakistan]. He went up to the river and waited there.   

**Q:**  If I were to ask you a general question, when you were working with the Americans, did you feel that something could be done? Did you think that they were sincerely helping for Tibetan independence or did you think they just used [Tibet]?   

**A:**  No, they didn't do it with good intentions. They just used the occasion. As I told you just now, for their own information needs, they used us. It was for their own information. Nothing so that it would be helpful for us.   

**Q:**  Did you know this from the start or later?   

**A:**  Later. At first we were hopeful that with American help, we might have been able to do something—the time when I left from Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Later, how did you come to find out?   

**A:**  Later, it seemed that our work was just to fool each other. Wasn’t it? You know the saying, "You scratch my back and I scratch yours"? Yes, it was like that. This was not helpful. Yes, it was July 1949 that the Chinese came to Kumbum. It was the first time that they came to the Tibetan border. Then I stayed with the Chinese for six months. During this six month period, as I listened to what the Chinese were saying, all the signs pointed to making things worse for the Tibetans, and there wasn't a single thing about doing anything good. Within five years, starting from 1949—they said that they were going to destroy the Tibetan culture and ways. That the Tibetan custom of offering butter lamps was bad. That the butter was being wasted. That instead, if this money was collected and sent to China, it could support the war against the Americans in Korea. That one soldier could be supported. They said that "If you have no food to eat, do you think that praying to the Three Jewels is going to get you bread?" Then there was this talk about killing the Dalai Lama and all of those [people]. So with all of these, it was not agreeable and I used to think that I had to get out of this situation. So that's how I got to Lhasa. So many Amdos had great hopes for Lhasa. When I left Amdo, the tribal chiefs requested help from the Tibetan government since they wanted to fight the Chinese. They were fighting at that time. Then I went to Lhasa and after that, the 17-Point Agreement and then my petition got very good publicity. Then I thought that it would not be good at all to stay, and so I left. I told Kungö Chemmo that it may be better to leave. [I asked him] what he thought if I went abroad. He said it was good to go and that I should leave. Then Shakabpa said it would be difficult if I stayed. That it was better to go. So that's how I came.   

**Q:**  So in 1956 [question not finished]   

**A:**  I came to Lhasa in 1950, right? I told them that if the Chinese came they would not leave their necks alone. Everybody said that I should not say that—that such things would never happen. What should I say—they were very hopeful in Tibet. They said that the Chinese were humans and if you talked with them, then they would understand. That such bad scenarios would never happen. Tibetans immediately called to mind [brought up] that the three great monasteries, Sendregasum, were still here, and so was the Dalai Lama. So such things would never take place in Tibet.   

**Q:**  So they were saying these things?   

**A:**  Yes. Everybody [was].   

**Q:**  After the 17-Point Agreement, it seems that the government was thinking of making things work.   

**A:**  [They were] not really thinking about making things work. But Tibetans are such that they hope for things when there is no reason to hope. Saying, "It may be okay. It may be okay [Tib. ཨའུ་ཙམ་མེན་འགྲོ] that the 17-Point Agreement was signed. So it may be okay, [it] may be okay. Things happened like that at the time of the Manchus and the English, so it may be okay." Actually, there was no such thing as far as the Chinese Communists are concerned. They would immediately kill and cut. Tibetans did not know that. If you told them that, they would all get angry. But even today, they think in the same fashion, "It may be okay." Today, we have to live in another's country and say, "Oh, it may be alright, it may be alright." And say, "Yes, yes, as you [have] said." That's not correct. That's what I think.   

**Q:**  In 1956, you went to India and when the Dalai Lama arrived, you must have gone to receive him.   

**A:**  I did.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did you talk about? Kungö Gyalola must have been there.   

**A:**  Yes, he was. At that time, [I] was [telling the Dalai Lama] that he should stay now that he was outside. That if he returned, then one day the Chinese were going to do this [Tib. འདི་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རེད]. That was always what I had to say. I always said how the Chinese were going to make us suffer and I didn't have anything good to say about them. So that's what I was saying all the time. At that time, Gyalo Thondup was saying the same [thing]. I think Kungö Shakabpa also must have said the same.   

**Q:**  I heard and I think it was the Jenkhentsisum who tried to prevent the Dalai Lama [from returning] by trying to start a war in Sharsingma and Yadong.   

**A:**  That I don't know about at all. I never heard about this until this morning.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama went all over the place, and the Kalimpong group with Khenjung and all must have gone along with them.   

**A:**  Yes, of course Kungö Khenjung was there.   

**Q:**  Did you go to any of the Jenkhentsisum meetings.   

**A:**  No, I did not. At that time, Kungö Ngabö came from Lhasa to India. At that time, they had meetings in Delhi, Mumbai, Calcutta and in other [places]. I don't know what was decided. Anyway, it seems that those people staying outside in Kalimpong and the outside were requesting for the Dalai Lama to stay, but there was no proof, right? If the Dalai Lama stayed, then what was the guarantee [that something good would happen]? There was nothing. So those who came from there [Tibet] needed a guarantee. But there was none. Something like that must have taken place. Anyway, this is just my thought.   

**Q:**  I also heard something like that. That Ngabö said that "If you want the Dalai Lama to stay, then what guarantee do you have [that nothing bad will happen to him or Tibet]?"   

**A:**  Yes, they asked, "What do you have to show [regarding foreign help]?" But that was not there.   

**Q:**  So when they talked of these things, did you [question not finished]   

**A:**  No, I never went to even one meeting.   

**Q:**  Athar said that he met you at Bodh Gaya. It seems that you were writing some report and taking photos.   

**A:**  I don't think it was that. At that time, there were talks about the national flag and the national anthem. [We] were working on these things.   

**Q:**  How did this talk about the national anthem and the flag arise? Did this start in 1956?   

**A:**  There was talk about it. The Dalai Lama was arriving and what kind of national flag and anthem did we have? When they performed some shows, we had to carry it. At that time, nobody had anything to say clearly about politics. Regarding the national anthem, Kungö Shakabpa and Jola Tashi Tsering were moving about here and there at night and they made it. It was made in Calcutta. The present tune they sing now. It must have been that. Otherwise, there was nothing. I have said forcefully that the Dalai Lama should have stayed since this was a good opportunity. That I did say.   

**Q:**  So you must have met the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  What talks did you have?   

**A:**  What should I say, the Dalai Lama could not decide. He's not to blame since he had to go along with so many, like the Tsondu, consulting the Nechung [deity] and doing the senriy (lottery).   

**Q:**  Nechung must have been consulted.   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  You must have told the Dalai Lama to stay, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And what did he say? That nothing had been decided?   

**A:**  He said that it was difficult to decide.   

**Q:**  When you came to India in 1956, had the training for the six people been decided, or were you talking about it at that time?   

**A:**  It began at that time.   

**Q:**  Where was it being discussed? From the Calcutta area?   

**A:**  Yes, from the Calcutta area. One of their [CIA] men had come to Calcutta.   

**Q:**  Where were the talks taking place? In Calcutta?   

**A:**  Yes, in Calcutta, and these guys used to come wherever we went.   

**Q:**  I see. In '56, in India, they came wherever you went?   

**A:**  Oh yes, they did. They suggested where to meet, when, the place, date and time.   

**Q:**  Now there were connections with the outside and people were even being sent. What were the Americans saying? People like Athar were sent to Samye. And he was to contact Drönyerchemmo Phala and Gombo Tashi.   

**A:**  Yes, I think that was it.   

**Q:**  So what was the connection with Phala, Gombo Tashi, Jenkhentsisum and the Americans? How did this first begin? How did Phala and those people become involved in this?   

**A:**  Kungö Phala, from a long time ago [A side of tape finished].   

**Q:**  Yes, in 1952, the first People's Association rose, right?   

**A:**  Yes, when the People's Association first rose, Kungö Phala [was there]. Then, later, when Alo Chöndze and others rose up, it seems that Kungö Phala was there. Phala, I think, was the one who was perhaps advising them [the People's Associations]. There was Kungö Phala and one ex-abbot of Gyüme [Tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] by the name of Ngawang Lengden [Tib. ངག་དབང་ལེགས་ལྡན]. He was in Wisconsin and died there. You don't know him, [do you]?   

**Q:**  I don't know.   

**A:**  He was in Wisconsin and died there. Ngawang Lengdenla. You don't know [him]?   

**Q:**  No. In Wisconsin?   

**A:**  Wisconsin.   

**Q:**  Where Geshe Söpala [Tib. བཟོད་པ་ལགས] is?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I've never met him.   

**A:**  From Tibet, he came to Kalimpong and then went to France, and then to the States. He stayed with Geshe Söpala and then died there. Keep in mind, Ngawangla is one person. You should ask Gyadotsang, he knows everything.   

**Q:**  Gyadotsang is alive?   

**A:**  No. No, not Gyadotsang. Gyaltang. The one in Canada. He knows [about] this clearly. In this way, the connection was made. In Kalimpong, there was Kungö Shakabpa. In Tibet, there was Kungö Phala. I was in America, and so back and forth—that is how it was discussed.   

**Q:**  So this aid from America, was there talk with Shakabpa or did you [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes. They and Shakabpa all spoke. I was the middleman saying to meet this and that person. That's all. I did not go when they met.   

**Q:**  You didn't run the whole show? Weren't you the chief organizer?   

**A:**  No. No . I was nothing. I had nothing in this.   

**Q:**  In 1950, Kungö Gyalola went to Taiwan, right?   

**A:**  He went from China to Taiwan.   

**Q:**  Then from Taiwan to [question not finished]   

**A:**  To the States.   

**Q:**  Did you meet him?   

**A:**  Of course. We stayed together for quite sometime.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  Fairfax, Virginia, Falls Church. It's close to Washington.   

**Q:**  At that time, did [you, he] meet the U.S. Ambassador and those people?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  You didn't go with him? Virginia is very close to Washington.   

**A:**  Yes, it's very close.   

**Q:**  No government people were met?   

**A:**  I have no idea if he did [met them] or not.   

**Q:**  I was thinking that he came earlier—there was some video taken.   

**A:**  Is that right?   

**Q:**  Some monk in New York had taken one, and there is an account of how he went to Taiwan and then to the States. I was thinking that there may have been some contacts made at that time.   

**A:**  I don't know what contacts were made at that time.   

**Q:**  So the connection with the CIA was around 1956, right? When the Dalai Lama came to India?   

**A:**  Yes, it was from that time.   

