# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0071.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Taktse Rimpoche, Norbu Thubden Jigme [Tib. སྟག་རྩེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ, ནོར་བུ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་འཇིགས་མེད]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Indiana, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 15 March 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Taktse Rimpoche [Tib.. stag 'tsher rin po che]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 71  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Taktse Rimpoche was the oldest brother of the Dalai Lama. In this interview, he talks about meeting Dean Rusk and the plan concerning the Dalai Lama. He discusses, in detail, the involvement of the U.S. and the CIA in Tibet, including the Committee for Free Asia, training Tibetans, and the CIA’s connections with various Tibetans. He also discusses how he viewed the help of the U.S., his feelings of how once the Chinese invaded, nothing could be done because of the Korean War, and how some suspected him of being a spy. Additionally, he describes his daily routine in Okinawa [actually in Saipan] while being the interpreter for the CIA training program and the revolt that took place in Amdo in 1949. Finally, he discusses his conversation with Zhang Jingwu in 1956 who told him to return to Tibet and how Zhou Enlai also told Gyalo Thondup that he could stay in India and work in the consulate or in the U.S.S.R.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0071_02/H_0071_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Rimpoche, you did not have a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཐབ་འཛིང] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etc. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">thamdzing</a> in Tibet, right? So today, this will be your thamdzing with all the questions that I have to ask you .   

**A:**  No, I never had a thamdzing—[I] only heard about them.   

**Q:**  The U.S. was saying that they were going to help Tibet. From 1951 on, what were they going to offer?   

**A:**  To bring the Dalai Lama out so that he did not have to stay under the Chinese. They were very hopeful about this.   

**Q:**  At this time, what were you telling them [the Americans].   

**A:**  I was saying that I was quite sure that the Dalai Lama would like to go out [leave] if he had some guarantee that there would be a place to go because the Dalai Lama did not have a wish to live under the communists and cooperate with them.   

**Q:**  From the time you came to India and when you went to the U.S. consulate in Calcutta, did the Americans have the idea of helping Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. Otherwise, they would not have let me go to the U.S. Prior to this, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and others seemed to have had some talks about helping Tibet. What's his name—Ambassador Henderson—yes, people like him.   

**Q:**  In 1951, as you mentioned yesterday, you met some State Department people.   

**A:**  Yes, we met many times.   

**Q:**  It was in 1951, or '52?   

**A:**  Yes, in 1951.   

**Q:**  So what were they saying?   

**A:**  They were asking if the Dalai Lama would come out if he was invited. So this was mostly what they were saying. That if he went against the Communists and came out, then they would guarantee help. So this they were saying very strongly.   

**Q:**  At this time, it seems that they could not actually send a letter, isn't that, [right]?   

**A:**  Regarding the letter, there were discussions about sending it through the consulate and to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Panda. I don't know if they did it or not.   

**Q:**  Did you send any letters?   

**A:**  No, I did not.   

**Q:**  No?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  When you were in the States, where did you meet the people?   

**A:**  In Washington.   

**Q:**  [At the] State Department?   

**A:**  No, at their residences, their apartments.   

**Q:**  You did mention it yesterday, but you met Dean Rusk, and so what was he saying? How long did you two meet [for]?   

**A:**  When I first came to the States, he was the first person I met. We met for about 30 minutes. There were the two of us. As an interpreter, Mr. Ekvall was there and [there was] said to be some State Department people—though I don't know if they were State Department or CIA. There were four or five of them. I was introduced at that time.   

**Q:**  So you met together?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was said?   

**A:**  Dean Rusk said that "We are very happy that you have come. "That "We welcome the Dalai Lama's fight against communism." That's what he said.   

**Q:**  Looking back at it now, [do] you think they had a whole plan by around 1950?   

**A:**  It seems that there was definitely some plan to help. Mainly it seems that they wanted to know what actions the Tibetans were going to take. Because they were saying that if the Dalai Lama said that he was going to come, then they would bring him out and arrange for him to stay in Thailand along with some 30 people or so [number not sure], that they would then pay all the expenses. So they did have a plan. So, as one looks at it, it seems that at that time, they were fighting the communists in Korea. In southeast Asia, many liked the Chinese and communism, and so if they could bring the Dalai Lama out then they had something to show to them [the Southeast Asians]—a kind of a weapon to show how bad the Chinese were. At that time, in Ceylon, the communists were very strong. So, they would think only of what was beneficial to them, right? So they had, it seems, a lot of plans made, and I don't think they did it out of treating the Tibetans with compassion [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ]. So this is as I think about it in hindsight. I think it was like that.   

**Q:**  If you were to consider [things] from 1950 onwards, when did the U.S. interest increase? Did things increase after 1955?   

**A:**  In 1956.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama came to India. How the support got stronger was that the training of the people [Khamba] began.   

**Q:**  In 1954, the Dalai Lama went down to China and then he returned, and a little after that, in 1955, the uprisings in Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> began. So when you were in the States, what news did you hear about this? Did this have some effect?   

**A:**  They knew for sure that the Tibetans never liked the Chinese.   

**Q:**  So do you think that this uprising had any special interest?   

**A:**  I don't remember anything specific regarding this.   

**Q:**  There was this uprising and so maybe they thought about greater support?   

**A:**  The uprising did take place, but, really, there wasn't any. But this would have an effect because they would know that the Tibetans did not like the Chinese.   

**Q:**  So was there CIA involvement in '50-51?   

**A:**  In 1951—yes they were [involved].   

**Q:**  I was under the impression that the CIA came later?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  So from 1950?   

**A:**  In 1951, they were there. The reason being that the Committee for Free Asia actually seemed to be a CIA organization. So this is just talk between you and me so. Later, Mr. Nehru did not like this Committee for Free Asia. Because of this, they later changed the name to the Asia Foundation, and it remains this way. They were interested in using Tibet in their Asian politics—to stop the communists. At that time, there was Japan and others, and [they were] wondering what would happen to them. So it seems they were worried about that.   

**Q:**  I was thinking along those lines when you said something about the Committee for Free Asia. You said yesterday that when you went to the Calcutta Consulate, they told you that the CFA would help you. So I thought that they were probably connected with the government.   

**A:**  Yes, they definitely had connections.   

**Q:**  So when the Dalai Lama came to India, did they take a greater interest?   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama came to India—what should I say—they were seeing what actions would be taken and what we were doing and what influence we could have. So they had to look at things like that, right? So they saw all of these in India and thought that these people could do something, and then they decided upon the training. So all the money and things for the operation were decided then. Prior to this, there were no decisions made as to money. I went to India in 1955, and Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Gyalo Thondup and others were saying that they had no money to meet expenses and they were having difficulties. At that time, they were not guaranteeing [anything would be done]. Later, when the Dalai Lama came to India and after they met the various people, and then the finances for the operation were settled.   

**Q:**  In '56 and not before?   

**A:**  In '56. Before that they were not giving any money.   

**Q:**  So in 1956, did they meet other Tibetans and organizations?   

**A:**  Maybe they met secretly, but I don't know.   

**Q:**  In India, they had to contact somebody, right? So who did they contact?   

**A:**  It was Gyalo Thondup. He was the main one.   

**Q:**  They had rented a place in Calcutta. Were they doing it from there?   

**A:**  Yes, from there. [I] don't know how exactly, but at that time, Gyalo Thondup was staying in Darjeeling and they must have been sending letters saying such and such people were going, and so he came from Darjeeling and met them.   

**Q:**  I asked you yesterday about the wireless, whether it was sent in Tibetan. You said that it was sent by code.   

**A:**  Yes, by code. It was not in Tibetan.   

**Q:**  How did it work?   

**A:**  They made it.   

**Q:**  There must have been a book?   

**A:**  They made one specially [for it]—like a Tibetan book which was given to them.   

**Q:**  So if Athar and others wanted to look up something, then there was a book?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In Tibetan.   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Numbers.   

**A:**  Yes, numbers. So it must have been written that for the name, it was such and such. If they needed something, then it was like that [various numbers for various words and sentences]. I wonder if it was in Tibetan. Maybe it was.   

**Q:**  Most probably it was in Tibetan as well as English.   

**A:**  In English, I wonder. [Note: it was in 2 code books with Tibetan syllables and numbers written sequentially beneath. The numbers were sent via the wireless and then on the other side the Tibetan syllables were found by finding the numbers.]  

**Q:**  Because they [Americans] [would] have [had] to look it up.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes.   

**Q:**  And when they sent [it] from Tibet, Athar and others had to send [the message] in Tibetan, right? I wonder how their English was.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, that's correct.   

**Q:**  So [there were] sort of two books, one in Tibetan, right?   

**A:**  There must have been a few; one for them and also [one] for the [people] to look [at] here.   

**Q:**  I did ask you this earlier, about the CIA involvement, [but] it was from 1951 onwards, [right]?   

**A:**  Yes, around 1951.   

**Q:**  In 1956, you came together with one CIA person to India, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. The time period was the same, but we did not come together on the plane. We met in Calcutta.   

**Q:**  So before you came, you must have had some conversations?   

**A:**  Regarding sending people?   

**Q:**  No, you were coming to India, right? So there must have been some talk regarding this.   

**A:**  Whether this or that could be done or not, was discussed with us and Gyalo Thondup.   

**Q:**  When you were in the States, how did you contact Gyalo Thondup?   

**A:**  I didn't have many connections.   

**Q:**  Then they did it?   

**A:**  The CIA people came and they asked me, and I said it was this and that. And then they took that and contacted Gyalo Thondup.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama was going to India, right? So what was the CIA saying? Were they especially hopeful about something?   

**A:**  They said the Dalai Lama was coming, but they were not especially hopeful and things like that. They were showing an attitude [Tib. རྣམ་འགྱུར] that it would be good for the Dalai Lama to stay.   

**Q:**  You went to India because the Dalai Lama was coming, or did they ask you to go?   

**A:**  Because the Dalai Lama was coming.   

**Q:**  They never asked you to go?   

**A:**  No, they did not ask me to go. I said that I was going.   

**Q:**  So the decision to train the six persons was after coming to India and not before, right?   

**A:**  After coming to India and after all the pilgrimages of the Dalai Lama were completed, and after the Dalai Lama returned, in 1957, then the training of the various people was decided.   

**Q:**  So before, while you were staying in the States [questions not finished]   

**A:**  There were talks that it would be good if certain people were trained.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  This was in 1955.   

**Q:**  So this the Americans were saying, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [They were asking,] "Are there younger ones who can come?".   

**Q:**  They must have told Gyalo Thondup and all about this?   

**A:**  Yes, they must have. Definitely.   

**Q:**  So they must have had some connections in Tibet. With Andrutsang.   

**A:**  Ah.... maybe with Andrutsang.   

**Q:**  The reason I'm asking you this is that Andrutsang and others had a meeting in Tibet in 1956.   

**A:**  Is that right? That I don't know anything [about].   

**Q:**  Yes, they had a meeting. The Litangbas and [them] decided that one group should seek support from the outside. So I was wondering if this was all a chance meeting or if there were prior arrangements?   

**A:**  What should I say—in India, a lot of people had come. Some Gyerongwa—someone who is in Canada or some place.   

**Q:**  Gyalthongwa?   

**A:**  Not Gyalthong. He was—someone from Gyarong—some chief.   

**Q:**  Drau Pön?   

**A:**  No. Trochu Pön [Tib. ཁྲོ་ཆུ་དཔོན] and others had come to India. Gungtang Tsültrim [Tib. གུང་ཐང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས] and some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> came from Tibet or something. They had come to India.   

**Q:**  In 1956?   

**A:**  In 1955, when I came to India in 1955. Gyalo Thondup introduced me to these people saying that these people had come like this from there [Tibet].   

**Q:**  So, what I'm saying is that this training business started in India, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  So in 1956, when you met the Dalai Lama in India, you were telling him to stay, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I asked him not to return.   

**Q:**  What was the CIA telling you? What were they telling the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  There is no such thing as telling something to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  No? Nothing was said? You did not even tell the Dalai Lama?   

**Q:**  Do you mean regarding the CIA?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Not one word.   

**Q:**  At this time, Ngabö and others had come, right?   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  So the ones who came from Tibet wanted some guarantee, right? And they were asking, "What guarantee do you have [for us]", right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Therefore, at this time, what were the CIA and others willing to do? What did they say they were going to do? What were they offering?   

**A:**  The CIA did not say they were going to do such and such. Their usual thing was to find out what the Tibetans were going to do and whether the Dalai Lama was going to remain outside or not. If he decided to stay outside, then the Dalai Lama and a certain number of people, they [the CIA] would pay the expenses and all. It was the same thing as before. That if he stayed in India, then that was it. If not, then they would help [them] settle in Thailand, or Sri Lanka (Ceylon). That was all and there was nothing about that they would do such and such thing. They did not say that there was such and such guarantee.   

**Q:**  So, when you met the Dalai Lama, what did you talk about? Did he ask you what the U.S. was like?   

**A:**  Yes, he did ask that.   

**Q:**  At this time, there was a lot of talk about staying and going, and so you must have had some discussions. Those coming from Tibet, like Ngabö, were seeking a guarantee, and there was a lot of talk, right? So you never told the Dalai Lama that he should stay and that the U.S. said that they were going to do such and such?   

**A:**  I never did.   

**Q:**  That the U.S. was willing to train these people?   

**A:**  Oh, never, never.   

**Q:**  Why did you not tell him that?   

**A:**  This was not alright to say because we did not know whether the Dalai Lama was going to stay or return. And if he did return and the Chinese said that such and such things were discussed, then the Dalai Lama's expression would change and there would be trouble. So this was the work that we did from beneath, and there was no need for people above to know. It was better that they did not know. And I never told him.   

**Q:**  So he didn't know?   

**A:**  No, he did not.   

**Q:**  The reason is that such a big decision was being made, but at the same time, when they were asking where the outside guarantee was and the extent of what the outside was willing to do, they did not know, right? The Kalöns also did not know?   

**A:**  No, they did not. Now, Kungö Shakabpa—who were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> there?   

**Q:**  Surkhang, Ragashag.   

**A:**  So if there were any talks, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> and they might have had with them. I never said anything to anybody, nobody.   

**Q:**  Yes, the Kalöns may have known something, otherwise, nobody knew and the Dalai Lama didn't know?   

**A:**  Kungö [Drönyer] Chemmo [Phala] knows because I told him everything.   

**Q:**  The U.S. connection, what were they willing to do, the training?   

**A:**  Yes, all of that.   

**Q:**  So would Kungö Chemmo [have] told the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  I don't know. Maybe they would [have] discussed [this], maybe not. Therefore, it was during this time that Lobsang Samden stayed behind. Lobsang Samden said that when he was in Tibet, the Chinese went to him all the time. That he had to have a lot of contacts with them and that there was a danger that, all of a sudden, the Chinese were going to take the Dalai Lama away. That if the Dalai Lama took the opportunity to stay, this time it was a good idea. [Lobsang Samden] also had his tonsils taken out and he was also sick at this time. So I asked how things would be [if he stayed]. He said that this was very good [things would be very good]. So I asked the Americans if they could arrange for Lobsang Samden's visa if he came to America. They said that there was no problem with giving him [a visa]. And so he decided not to go back to Tibet.   

**Q:**  What I didn't quite understand from yesterday's interview—is the Tibetan side of the CIA connection based in Calcutta? What you said [was] that you were sort of the go-between, an interpreter. Now, if they needed to make a decision [question not finished]   

**A:**  They were in the consulate. There definitely must have been someone who was looking into Tibetan affairs. So whatever was heard in America and in Kalimpong, Tibet, and India, it came to the consulate and they did it from there. This is, I think, what they did. So this just my thought and guess.   

**Q:**  Yes. Yes. Now, if they needed to consult [about] something on Tibet, then they did it with Gyalo Thondup-la.   

**A:**  Yes, with him. And when Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> was there, I think they went to him.   

**Q:**  At Calcutta?   

**A:**  At Kalimpong. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> were also there. So I think they were seeing him, too.   

**Q:**  The CIA people, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> [in] the Trade Mission [Tib. ཚོང་དོན] at that time?   

**A:**  I don't know what he was doing?   

**Q:**  The Trade Mission was taken over, right?   

**A:**  Trade Mission was finished in 1948.   

**Q:**  No, there was one in Kalimpong. Later, I heard it was taken over by the Chinese and I heard <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> was working in this.   

**A:**  Maybe, I don't know.   

**Q:**  I wonder how this worked out.   

**A:**  What?   

**Q:**  Some say that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> was very close to the Chinese at this time.   

**A:**  I really don't know. Anyway, whether he was close to the Chinese or not, he helped me a lot. He did his best.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  In 1951. He helped me a lot.   

**Q:**  At that time, he was not in the Trade Mission. I think he was [there] in 1955.   

**A:**  In 1955, when I went there, I don't think he was—Yes, Yes, he was there.   

**Q:**  Anyway, that's what was said?   

**A:**  But there was no relationship with Gyalo Thondup.   

**Q:**  You mean [with] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, [there was] not much [of a] relationship.   

**Q:**  Last time, when I asked Athar, he said that the Americans were inquiring about what plans the Tibetan government had. Does this seem to be correct to you?   

**A:**    

**Q:**  For example, if a wireless [message] was sent to Athar inquiring about what plans the Tibetan government had. How did they go about doing this? Athar sent a reply which was picked up by the Americans. Now, if they needed to consult [one another], who did they contact?   

**A:**  Whoever was in the CIA might have done that.   

**Q:**  If the Tibetans had to be consulted?   

**A:**  Then they would have [had] to ask people like me or Gyalo Thondup. Otherwise, there was no one. And like Kungö Shakabpa.   

**Q:**  Now, Athar sent a message saying that the Tibetan government had no plans and so there was no use in him staying there. When you were here in the States, did you hear about that?   

**A:**  I did not hear that he did not want to stay.   

**Q:**  If such a message was sent, then the Americans would [have] picked it up, and so they might have [had] to consult someone, right? Some Tibetans?   

**A:**  If they asked in India, they would [have] asked Gyalo Thondup and Kungö Shakabpa. If they asked here, then they would [have] probably asked me. But they never asked me. Geshe Wangye was also in it too.   

**Q:**  You mentioned that when you first came, you were hopeful. Later, you found out that they were sort of just using [the Tibetans]. What made you realize that? For example, was it some promise that they did not keep?   

**A:**  No, that was not it. We said that we wanted to train people, which they agreed to do. In India, they were paying a little bit [of our] expenses. As I saw it—while they were training them [on Saipan], they were not giving [them] the latest weapons. What do you call the radio thing [wireless]—[it] was not a modern one and it was used in the Second World War. Weapons were Japanese and Chinese made. Not the American made ones. So I said these they were not giving. I said that "Our people are sacrificing their lives and we have hope for you, but you are not giving [us] modern weapons and [are] just handing [us those of the] Second World War variety."   

**Q:**  What did they say?   

**A:**  They said that they were going to work in Tibet and that the arms were going to Tibet, and so the Chinese would know [Didn't want to use modern weapons so their help would remain unknown to the Chinese].   

**Q:**  So they wanted to use weapons that were in existence in that area, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But if they didn't drop modern weapons and dropped Second World War arms, then what was the use? That was useless. And so I said thank you and I withdrew. And even in India, they were not able to do anything good. They were sort of not getting along among themselves and Gyalo Thondup could not use any able person. So I thought this was useless and I withdrew.   

**Q:**  You are saying that he was not using able persons.   

**A:**  He was not. Which able persons were there? That you should know if you looked. I did not see any good result [coming out].   

**Q:**  When I spoke with Athar and when the Americans were asking [about] what plans [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>] had, they said that they sent plans. Athar sent a plan and Chushigandru sent one too. This was taken to Darjeeling where Gyalo Thondupla made certain corrections, and then Lhamo Tsering consulted the Americans. Did he come to America then?   

**A:**  Yes, he did.   

**Q:**  Did he come for this reason? With many plans?   

**A:**  Yes, probably. At this time, they must have. —what year was this, in the 1960s?   

**Q:**  No, no. This was even before the first drop. In 1957.   

**A:**  Oh. I was not there. I went to Guam [Saipan] with the trainees.   

**Q:**  I see. Did you not see any plans which said that they needed such and such items?   

**A:**  No, I did not.   

**Q:**  From the Indian government side, from Nehru, they were not supportive of Tibet, wasn't that it?   

**A:**  [There was] nothing. I don't know if there was any [support] later. I had no [connections with them]. They were very suspicious of me, saying that I was a spy for the CIA.   

**Q:**  From the Indian government side?   

**A:**  Yes. Whenever I came to India, the Indian CIA used to come and watch me. Where I went, who came [to see me].   

**Q:**  I see. [They were] always following you.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So during this time, even though the Indian government was not helpful, I wonder what Indian Intelligence was doing.   

**A:**  That I don't know anything [about].   

**Q:**  You had no talks regarding this?   

**A:**  No. I did not.   

**Q:**  With Gyalo Thondup and others?   

**A:**  No, I did not. Gyalo Thondup had connections, but I don't know anything [about this].   

**Q:**  You, Gyalo Thondup and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> must [have] communicated sometimes. Did you send letters?   

**A:**  No, I did not have that many relations.   

**Q:**  Some kind of communication?   

**A:**  No, nothing.   

**Q:**  After the training was accomplished and people were dropped, what did the CIA think? Were they hopeful, saying that the training was going on? Or did they say things like, "Oh, the Tibetan government is not sending any plans." That "They have no plans," et cetera?   

**A:**  No, they never said anything like that to me. I never heard [this]. They were very happy that people were successfully dropped.   

**Q:**  From your side, since you were working in the States, you needed to know what plans the government had, right? The Tibetan government.   

**A:**  That I didn't know.   

**Q:**  No. Now people like Athar were sent, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  To find out what the plans were. What Athar was saying [was] that they had no plans at all. From one perspective, there would have been no plans because there were so many discussions in India and the Dalai Lama had just returned. The Dalai Lama returned in order to work something out, right? It would have been difficult to think about fighting the Chinese with outside help because the Dalai Lama had just returned from India, right? In 1957.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  So from this perspective, and looking at the political situation, it seemed like there were no plans, right? So what Athar was saying [was] that there were no plans. So did the Americans say something like that there were no plans? Were you waiting for some plans?   

**A:**  No, no. I was just waiting for the Dalai Lama to escape. Otherwise, I didn't have anything to wait [for]. I was thinking that he would have to escape and leave, and that this he might not be able to do so because he returned, right? So I was thinking that he probably wouldn't be able to escape. I never thought about planning and doing something to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Let me ask you a general question. If you had a chance to change things, around 1955-56, what could have been done differently? Would it have helped if the CIA gave more support? Would it have helped if our government had requested soldiers to be sent and support to be granted? What would have been different?   

**A:**  Now, this is very difficult. What should I say. The Chinese had already entered [the country]. Before the Chinese came, we could not do anything. Now the Chinese had already come. The soldiers had already entered. So there was nothing that could have been done. In 1956, the Dalai Lama came to the outside and then returned. I thought that that was the end. I thought that, most probably, he would not be able to live [be alive]. Later, thank God he escaped. That was really something, and the Tibetans were indeed very lucky.   

**Q:**  When you were [in the States,] was there something that the U.S./CIA could have done differently that could have helped?   

**A:**  No. Soldiers, they wouldn't send.   

**Q:**  Would they have sent [them] at that time?   

**A:**  Oh, I don't think so. No, never. In 1951-52, if something was done, then perhaps it is uncertain [Tib. ཏན་ཏན་ཡོད་མ་རེད]. What shall I say—the Korean War was going on. If the Tibetans could have done something—but nothing was done. They were so duped by the 17-Point Agreement [to have done anything].   

**Q:**  If at that time we had asked for help, if we said that we would not accept the 17-Point Agreement and asked for outside help and said that "Together, along with Taiwan, we will fight from Tibet," if we said that, do you think the Americans would have helped?   

**A:**  Oh, I wonder. What should I say—when MacArthur said that he was going to bomb Manchuria—it was withdrawn, saying that this could not be done. So I think it would have been very difficult. It seems that in 1948-49, before the Chinese entered [Tibet], that's when we should have made an effort [Tib. ཤུགས་རྒྱག]. Before the Chinese came. At that time, we could not do anything. So this was very harmful, it seems.   

**Q:**  In 1958, since the government had no plans, Athar went with the Chushigandru. Later, when the Dalai Lama was escaping, Athar was at Lhüntse Dzong. What he was saying [was] that the Americans said that they were going to help 100 percent. He was saying that if we had asked for bodyguards, that maybe they would have sent [them].   

**A:**  Oh. It might have been difficult. Yes, they would probably have sent arms. They would have probably sent some later model arms. But they did not send good arms. I told you that already. What kind of arms did he say they sent?   

**Q:**  I don't know if he knew that much. If some arms were sent, they would probably have thought it was pretty good. I doubt if they had seen any good arms. Compared to the arms in Tibet, they would probably have thought that they were very good arms. Later, at Lhüntse Dzong, the Dalai Lama stayed for a while [after] a new government was established. Did the CIA have any hopes for this? Was there any CIA involvement in this? If we held on to Lhüntse Dzong and then held on to some territory, would there have been help from the outside?   

**A:**  No. Nothing.   

**Q:**  No CIA involvement?   

**A:**  Nothing, nothing, nothing.   

**Q:**  So in 1959, if soldiers were requested, would they have sent [them]?   

**A:**  They wouldn't [have] sent soldiers. Forget about sending [in] soldiers. When the drops were made, the American pilots didn't go fly the planes. They brought pilots from the foreign countries like Yugoslavia or something.   

**Q:**  I see. No Americans?   

**A:**  No Americans.   

**Q:**  Planes were taking off from East Pakistan. So those pilots were not Americans?   

**A:**  No, not Americans.   

**Q:**  But there were American soldiers in Pakistan?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. They had their [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  It is said that there were a lot of soldiers at the airstrip.   

**A:**  [There] must have been.   

**Q:**  What were they doing there? What was their work?   

**A:**  That I don't know.   

**Q:**  What were the Americans doing in East Pakistan? At some remote spot.   

**A:**  I don't know. [It] must have [been] something.   

**Q:**  What was the CIA saying about Chushigandru. Did they have a lot of hope or did they say that these guys were just [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, they said that the Khambas didn't have educations and experience.   

**Q:**  So did they have any kind of hope or what?   

**A:**  They had hopes—what should I say—of making it difficult for the Chinese to stay. That the Tibetans were also able to do [things]. Other than that—I don't think they had other hopes.   

**Q:**  Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཐབ་འཛིང] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etc. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">thamdzing</a> continues.   

**A:**  Yes, I stayed like this for six months with the Chinese. They kept asking questions.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Oh, so you are used to it?   

**A:**  Yes . [I] stayed like this for six months at Kumbum.   

**Q:**  Heinrich Harrer was supposed to go in a plane or something. Did the Americans think of sending a plane?   

**A:**  This took place in the Calcutta Consulate.   

**Q:**  He went there?   

**A:**  [He] went there and such talks took place.   

**Q:**  Where was the plane to be sent?   

**A:**  This was to be sent to Trapchi. This request to the Americans was, I think, requested through Shakabpa. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> [requested] two planes. One for the Dalai Lama's retinue and the other for Taktra.   

**Q:**  This was 1950?   

**A:**  It was 1949-50, I think. They spoke with—what was the name—is there an American plane company called Well Lao?   

**Q:**  I don't know.   

**A:**  [Do] you know Cathy Pacific?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  One [plan] that was with them—there seems to have been a pilot, and so they had some talks with them about sending planes it seems. Now I can't tell you definitely.   

**Q:**  Yes, but you have heard this?   

**A:**  He [Harrer] came from Tibet and went to Calcutta and went to the Consulate. They had asked him to go to Tibet once again. Whether a letter was sent or not, that I don't know.   

**Q:**  The Consulate asked him to return to Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes. There seems to have been one person in the Consulate. I don't know who it was. Probably the one that I was to meet later on.   

**Q:**  So this is about what I wanted to ask you regarding yesterday's interview. You said yesterday that some Chinese leader came to meet you at Kumbum. Who was he? What was his name?   

**A:**  Oh. I don't know. The one who came with me?   

**Q:**  No, no. The Chinese leader who came to Tibet and offered you the governorship of Tibet.   

**A:**  The one who said that I must go?   

**Q:**  Yes, yes.   

**A:**  What should I say—At that time, many Chinese came. You know the Commander-in-Chief in Korea? Peng Dehuai? The highest ranking Commander-in-Chief in Korea, he came to Kumbum.   

**Q:**  You met him?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. He came specially for this. He said, "The Chinese and Tibetans are brothers of one big family who were separated. The reason why we were separated is that the imperialists came. The Americans and the English instigated and we were separate. Now we have to bring [Tibet] into the fold and it wouldn't be alright if one killed the other. So without killing each other, Tibet must be peacefully liberated and towards that end, you have to help us. So you please go to Lhasa." In this way, they came many times. It was not one person, but many.   

**Q:**  So since so many people came—were they all from the army?   

**A:**  Yes, the military.   

**Q:**  So if that was the case, then there must have been some policy from the higher-ups?   

**A:**  Oh, yes, there definitely had to have been.   

**Q:**  So what they were saying was for how many months?   

**A:**  Within that six month period.   

**Q:**  What they were saying [was] that within five years, the Dalai Lama had to cooperate. If he did not, then they were saying that they were going to kill him.   

**A:**  Yes, of course! And they were telling me that I was the one who was permitted to kill him. And as a reward, they would give me the governorship of Lhasa. They said that "In the communist custom, one is not allowed not have love towards [one's] parents and relatives. Relatives can kill each other and a son can kill his father." Around this time, in China, a son around 12 years old had killed his father. When he was asked in court why he killed his father, he said, "My father's brain [thinking] was wrong since he supported the Guomindang very much, and that's why I killed him." So he told me that it was the same as this, that the Dalai Lama was nothing in my mind.   

**Q:**  So what you said was that this was very difficult since on the one hand, he was your brother, and on the other hand, what were the Tibetans going to say?   

**A:**  Yes, I was saying that, and they told me that "Your custom is very bad." That going to the temple and burning incense, butter lamps, and the way we wore our dress [clothes], it was so much waste. So I said that this was the Tibetan custom and I could not say these things. At Kumbum, in the assembly hall, a lot of butter lamps were offered. He said that I had to tell them not to burn lamps, that it was not permitted. I said that I could not say this. That "This is the Tibetan custom and if I say that, then the Tibetans will do something to me. So you tell [them]."   

**Q:**  So if you accepted the offer, then, did you say that they were going to send 3,000 soldiers?   

**A:**  They said that they were going to send 3,000 soldiers.   

**Q:**  It was 3,000 right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the agreement later?   

**A:**  Later, it was decided that I would go and no soldiers were to be sent. I said that if some of our tribal chiefs and lamas were sent, then I would go. So when they asked me who I wanted, I gave them the names. From the list, they chose two. Shar Kalden Gyatso and Shaluwa Rimpoche. The said that the rest could not go since they had the wrong [kind of] thinking [Tib. ཀླད་པ་ནོར་འཁྲུལ].   

**Q:**  So both were lamas?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  No <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན] 1. A lord. 2. A local chief.">pön</a> (chiefs) were allowed?   

**A:**  They were not sent. When I was to go, the Amdowas were very hopeful that the Tibetan government would assist them with arms in their revolt against the Chinese. Nothing came out of this.   

**Q:**  When you came up to Lhasa and when you made a petition to the Kashag, it was leaked to the Tsondu, right?   

**A:**  It was not really leaked. They read it in the Tsondu Gyendzom.   

**Q:**  So a general meeting was called regarding this?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Later, when you came to Lhasa, it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. དོམབོར [Tib. གདོང་པོར] and Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར], right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. They were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a>'s [the Dalai Lama's family's] guardians or Tsondzin. They were the main people who took the responsibility for the Yabshi. So when I said all of those things, they said that I should not say those things because it would harm the relationship between the Tibetans and the Chinese. That I should never say such things. "No matter how bad the Chinese are, they cannot do such things. The two statues of the Buddha, Jowo [Tib. ཇོ་བོ] in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, and at Ramoche, the Joshag Nampanyi [Tib. ཇོ་ཤཀྱ་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས], are still here, and so are the three great monasteries, Densa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a>, and the Dalai Lama is also here. So they cannot do such things. What I was telling them was that "If you can stop the Chinese now, then that's it. If not, then the Chinese are not humans but evil ghosts. Once this thing [ghost] enters, then none of you will be able to remain." They whispered to me, "Hozee [Oh my]! Don't say such things."   

**Q:**  So at that time, such talk was not agreeable [Tib. སྣང་བ་འགྲོ་གི་མ་རེད]?   

**A:**  They thought that such things would not happen. That they [Chinese] would not be able to do that. We were so conservative [Tib. ཀླད་པ་ལྗང་གུ], saying that because Joshag Nampanyi was here, that the Chinese would not come. The Chinese would not bring their soldiers to the Joshag Nampanyi, right? Then they said the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> was here. It seems that, at this time, the Chinese power had already existed in the Sendregasum.   

**Q:**  When you say Joshag Nampanyi, you are referring to?   

**A:**  The Jo [Tib. ཇོ་བོ] Rimpoche and the Ramoche Jo. Yes, we have Joshag Nampanyi, and so it's not that easy [for others to do something]. [Note: He is being sarcastic.]   

**Q:**  The American Committee for Free Asia was the first introduction to them through the Consulate.   

**A:**  Yes. They received a telegram from the CFA saying that they were going to support [them] and so [for them to] come to America for six months.   

**Q:**  Who did you know at the Consulate? How did they know about you?   

**A:**  I went there. I applied saying I was so and so and that I wanted to go to America. Then they said to wait for a day or so, and then they said that I could go and that the CFA was going to help me.   

**Q:**  So they made all of these arrangements, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they did.   

**Q:**  You said that at the airport, Bob Ekvall came to receive you. Was he working for the CFA or the CIA?   

**A:**  The CFA hired him since I was coming and he could be an interpreter.   

**Q:**  At that time, he did not have any academic teaching post, right?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Was he working for the government?   

**A:**  He was in the army. He had just finished in the army. After the Second World War, when the Communists and the Guomindang were fighting, wasn't there this Marshal Plan?   

**Q:**  Yes, but I don't remember [this].   

**A:**  He was in this group and went to China. After he returned to the States, after this plan, then I came to America. So the CFA hired him.   

**Q:**  Yesterday, you said that in Calcutta, Kungö Gyalola, Trunyila, and did you say Tashi Tsering? They hired [rented] a house. Then Shelkar Chandzö was there, and then you said that Gyadotsang may have been there.   

**A:**  Yes. The old man, Gyadotsang largen—the teacher—he was there.   

**Q:**  What were they doing there?   

**A:**  They had their organization. What is the name of the organization on behalf of Tibet that they had in Kalimpong?   

**Q:**  In 1954, in Kalimpong, there was the Dedön Tsogpa.   

**A:**  So it must have been the Dedön Tsogpa.   

**Q:**  In this organization, was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> Tashi Tsering a part of it? In 1954?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes.   

**Q:**  I thought that he came only after 1959.   

**A:**  After 1959? No, no.   

**Q:**  Now, this was in 1956 [we are talking about 1956]?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. But it was before that. He came in this way. They had the first disturbance or the second one in Lhasa. He may have come at this time. I think it was the second disturbance.   

**Q:**  The one with Alo Chöndze and the People's Association?   

**A:**  Yes. It was during this or the first one. When I went there, Tashi Tsering was there.   

**Q:**  In Calcutta?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So it was during this time that the talk about training was taking place, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were talking about this.   

**Q:**  At this time, the CIA was in touch with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Gyalola—I wonder if there were others at the meetings, et cetera.   

**A:**  I wonder how they did it. They went to meet during the night. At this time, there was the Gyadotsang, the old man. Then Gyetong. Ask Gyetong, he probably knows.   

**Q:**  Was he there at that time?   

**A:**  I don't know if he was there or not, but when they counted, Gyetong was always there. If one asked, "Who is in your organization?" then [it was] Gyetong, Shelkar Chandzö, [and] old man Gyadotsang.   

**Q:**  But they were the Dedön Tsogpa members.   

**A:**  Is that right? But when they talked—Oh, I wonder. I'm quite sure that old man Gyadotsang was there—perhaps. The CIA man did mention that this old man was there.   

**Q:**  So when they met in Calcutta, you were not there?   

**A:**  No, I was not.   

**Q:**  Why not? You were not a part of that group?   

**A:**  I was not a part of that group. I was never in any group.   

**Q:**  So you were separate?   

**A:**  Yes, yes, not in any group [laughter].   

**Q:**  Yes, I have to ask you this because I don't know.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. I was not in the group. I just introduced them, saying who was who and what they were doing. That's all. I was not in their group nor in the CIA group.   

**Q:**  Oh, I thought you may have been the chief operator.   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  In Okinawa, what did you do? Yesterday, you said that you were translating.   

**A:**  I was interpreting for them, that's all. When they trained in wireless [communication], one had to give the instructions in Tibetan, right? Saying that you have to put your hand here and your feet there, et cetera. That the guns are disassembled and assembled in this fashion, that you have to hold the gun in this position et cetera. That's it.   

**Q:**  So they were trained to throw bombs and all, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Explosives like C3 and C4?   

**A:**  Yes. And how to ambush [people].   

**Q:**  So in Okinawa, you were staying at the base or in the town?   

**A:**  No, at the base. They had made their own place—which was so great and huge [Tib. ཞེད་པོ་དེ་འདྲ་བཟོས་འདུག་ག].   

**Q:**  Were you allowed to go out?   

**A:**  We were not allowed.   

**Q:**  How [why]? What [about] when you had to go to town, et cetera?   

**A:**  When we went to town, we had to be blindfolded in a car and taken where we had to be taken. And in the plane, when I came from Bangkok to Okinawa, I could not see the others. I was in a small room. When the plane landed, I went down the steps and they took me in the car.   

**Q:**  So when you went to town, you were blindfolded?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In the car?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the windows must have been tinted black?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  Then wouldn't others see, saying that some blindfolded person was in the car?   

**A:**  No. no. Well, maybe the windows were black.   

**Q:**  Otherwise, the people on the outside would have seen, saying that some blindfolded guy was going in the car.   

**A:**  One was blindfolded.   

**Q:**  What was the daily routine like? You stayed in quarters? What time did you have to get up? Could you get up anytime you wanted or what? Was there some discipline [schedule]?   

**A:**  Yes, they had to get up at 6 or something and go for a run.   

**Q:**  Athar and those guys went for a run?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. They ran for about an hour, and then [they] washed up and then had breakfast. And then they trained for whatever they had to do that day. But they mainly learned how to send the wireless [messages]. Then in the afternoon, they went shooting.   

**Q:**  So you were always present when they were training? Where did they do the parachute training?   

**A:**  In Okinawa. No. No, in Guam.   

**Q:**  And Okinawa?   

**A:**  When one went to Guam [Saipan], one had to go to Okinawa. They landed in Okinawa in a commercial plane and then they went on a military plane to Guam.   

**Q:**  Athar and others started at Dacca, didn't they?   

**A:**  Yes, Dacca.   

**Q:**  Then where? Thailand?   

**A:**  Thailand.   

**Q:**  Then from Thailand to Bangkok—Taiwan?   

**A:**  To Bangkok.   

**Q:**  Then from there to Taiwan?   

**A:**  I don't think they went to Taiwan. They must have come straight to Okinawa.   

**Q:**  So from Bangkok, they came in a military plane or a commercial [one]?   

**A:**  Commercial.   

**Q:**  Where do you eat? Was there a mess [hall]?   

**A:**  You had to make your own.   

**Q:**  So you stayed in an apartment?   

**A:**  It was like this house.   

**Q:**  Oh, really?   

**A:**  With a dining hall, bedroom, hall, shower room, everything.   

**Q:**  So it was like living in your own house?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes.   

**Q:**  Then you had to do your own cooking?   

**A:**  Oh, yes.   

**Q:**  Then where did you get your supplies?   

**A:**  They brought them. Whatever you wanted.   

**Q:**  Meat and vegetables?   

**A:**  Yes, there was plenty to eat.   

**Q:**  At the base, there must have been shopping facilities?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  Store supplies, drinks?   

**A:**  No, no. They wouldn't allow us [to go].   

**Q:**  Suppose you wanted to buy whisky or something?   

**A:**  They would bring the whisky if you asked. They would bring whatever you wanted. Such things were really something.   

**Q:**  Then, you were not allowed to use your name, right?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  What name did you take Rimpoche?   

**A:**  Livingston.   

**Q:**  Livingston, really?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What Livingston?   

**A:**  George Livingston.   

**Q:**  George Livingston.   

**Q:**  I can't believe you were a spy.   

**Q:**  That's a great name! Very pompous [Tib.. rdzig po].   

**A:**  Yes, very pompous—an English name, Livingston.   

**Q:**  You are joking?   

**A:**  No, [I am] not joking.   

**Q:**  What was Livingston? I see, your name?   

**A:**  Yes. As Livingston, I even stayed one night in Burma.   

**Q:**  So the main training was in Guam [Saipan]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then what happened to this guy who shot his leg? It was accidental?   

**A:**  He went [for] target practice and accidentally shot his foot. I wonder if that was it. Poor guy. He got scared when they said that he was going to be put on a plane and dropped, and so he shot himself. So maybe he purposely shot his foot. Poor guy.   

**Q:**  When you were in Guam, could you go out?   

**A:**  What should I say [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  It's an island, right?   

**A:**  They took [them] to the seashore, [to] swim. But you could not go to where the public was. They were very strict.   

**Q:**  When did the Chinese first come to Kumbum?   

**A:**  July of 1949.   

**Q:**  What was the Chinese policy? Were they very diplomatic [Tib. མཁས་པོ]?   

**A:**  Yes, very "diplomatic". They said that we who were under oppression [Tib. བཙན་དབང] would be liberated and become free.   

**Q:**  Later, in Central Tibet, they said so many things. Did they say the same things?   

**A:**  Yes, the same [things].   

**Q:**  That they had come to help et cetera.   

**A:**  Yes, that they had come to help and all [of] that.   

**Q:**  When did the revolt take place there?   

**A:**  Three months after the Chinese came.   

**Q:**  They revolted? Around Kumbum?   

**A:**  Yes, they revolted at Kumbum.   

**Q:**  Within three months?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And there was war?   

**A:**  Of course, there was total war. Near Kumbum, there was a village. All the Chinese were expelled. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>s, Hui Hui, the Amdo Muslims, [they] kicked the Chinese out. This was happening all the time.   

**Q:**  Were the Guomindang soldiers involved in this?   

**A:**  The Guomindang [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Had the Guomindang already lost?   

**A:**  Oh, they had already lost and they were all gone. It was just the local people [Tib. ཡུལ་མི]. They didn't like the Chinese, right? So they revolted in collaboration with the Hui Hui.   

**Q:**  Around this time, were they saying that they were going to make democratic reforms, or had they already done that?   

**A:**  No, they had not. Nothing was done.   

**Q:**  So what was the general public thinking?   

**A:**  That the Communists were no good. That they were destroying the way we have lived. That the Chinese were no good and Communism was no good. Everybody knew that the Communists were going to make reforms and equalize everything.   

**Q:**  They knew that?   

**A:**  Yes, they knew [that]. Then they were holding the struggle sessions. They got a hold of the wealthy people and held struggle sessions against them.   

**Q:**  They were doing that, there?   

**A:**  Yes! The traditional chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] were caught. The better off people too, and [they] held struggle sessions. This they did not like and so they revolted.   

**Q:**  I was under the impression that the revolt started around 1955.   

**A:**  No, no, no.   

**Q:**  Much earlier?   

**A:**  He [the Chinese] came in July and in November, the revolt had already started. There was shooting everywhere. After dark, there was a lot of shooting.   

**Q:**  So the fight was quite severe, right?   

**A:**  Oh, yes.   

**Q:**  Did a lot of people join?   

**A:**  Yes, a lot. The whole area, from everywhere, the uprising took place.   

**Q:**  They must had really suppressed very strongly then?   

**A:**  Yes, the Chinese had a lot of soldiers and guns. So they suppressed them. Otherwise, the revolt—all the Amdos revolted.   

**Q:**  Therefore, at that time, when you were coming up, the Amdos were asking you to petition the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  Oh, yes, of course.   

**Q:**  What were they requesting? Soldiers or arms?   

**A:**  Arms. They said that if arms were sent, then they could manage. So nothing came out of this. I am looking through some pages. So—that's how things went. So, now what else do you have?   

**Q:**  I just have a few [more questions]. I took some things from your book. After the 17-Point Agreement, the representatives like Lhautara and others were in Calcutta. You mentioned in your book that at that time, Depön was insisting that you return, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And what did Zhang Jingwu tell you? Where did you meet him?   

**A:**  At the Chinese Consulate.   

**Q:**  Was it for dinner or just for a while, or was it in the morning?   

**A:**  It was in the evening.   

**Q:**  For dinner?   

**A:**  No, not dinner. It was around 4:30 in the evening. His interpreter was there.   

**Q:**  Was it Phünwangla?   

**A:**  Not Phünwang, but someone called Phüntso Tashi [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. He [Zhang Jingwu] was asking me for what reason I had come to Calcutta. He said, "We won't meddle into what you did in the past. What occurred earlier is already done." That "If you behave well from this day on, then there will be no punishment for your past actions. So you have to go to Tibet. What are doing around here? Do not stay here, the climate is not suitable for your lungs and that the air is better in Tibet, and so it's better to return. How is the doctor here? We have a doctor here." At this time, there was the Chinese ambassador called Yuan, kind of a flat-looking guy. He told the ambassador that when I was around, to help me with seeing doctors or if I needed a car. After that, he [ambassador] got up and since I was sitting in the chair, he patted my shoulder and said, "Friend. We have a lot to accomplish." That "You must return to Tibet." That "Places like Kalimpong, Darjeeling, Sikkim, Ladakh—these are all our [Chinese] territories, and so we must take these areas back. So go to Tibet, and we have a lot of work [to do]." So that's what he said.   

**Q:**  What you mentioned in the book was that you told Depön that you were leaving. That Depön was kind of shocked that you were leaving [for] abroad, but that he did not say anything. That he kept it to himself.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. I see.   

**Q:**  So during this time, in 1951, Kungö Depön—and later you mentioned that when you arrived in Calcutta, Tsering Drolmala [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལགས] [Rimpoche's sister] was there.   

**A:**  That was in 1955.   

**Q:**  Yes, 1955. So from 1951 to 1955, those who were in Tibet, were they very hopeful? For example, your sister was insisting very much that you return, wasn't she?   

**A:**  Yes, very much so.   

**Q:**  So at that time, did they perceive things as pretty good? They must have, right? Otherwise, they wouldn't have insisted so much, wasn't that it?   

**A:**  Yes, they saw it as very good. That what happened was that the Dalai Lama had gone to China and they went to China. At that time, I was in Japan. It was 1952 or '53. At that time, my sister and others kind of guaranteed [promised] and told the Chinese that they would get me to return. In 1955, when I was in India, they said that they were going to ask me to return. They came and insisted so much. [My sister] cried, saying that I had to return. Otherwise, it would not do.   

**Q:**  So it seems that they sort of "guaranteed" [Tib. ཁས་ལེན].   

**A:**  Yes, I said that I was not going to go. Then, even in 1956, my sister and they were saying that they were going to take me to Tibet. That if I didn't return, it would be very harmful to the Dalai Lama. That there was a danger to the Dalai Lama's [life].   

**Q:**  In 1956, what did Kungö Depön say?   

**A:**  As usual, he was not the type of person that said much. He didn't say much one way or the other. At that time, I think in Lhasa, they were very friendly with the Chinese. They said [she, they] played a lot of mahjong [with them] .   

**Q:**  In 1952, you said that you and Gyeltsen went to the World Buddhist Conference in Tokyo. At that time, your Indian papers expired, and so you learned some Japanese and taught some Tibetan for a while. Then you said that it took some time to get the permit to go to the States and India. Were they not giving you the permit to return to the States?   

**A:**  I didn't have a passport since I was a refugee.   

**Q:**  Since you had connections in the States, could they not give you a permit to go to the States again?   

**A:**  I don't think it was easy for them to do it right away. Through the Church World Services, I applied for immigration, which I got.   

**Q:**  Then you mentioned Gyalo Thondup in Calcutta. You met him there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then you said that the Chinese were offering Gyalola some diplomatic post to the USSR.   

**A:**  No, no. This was when we met Zhou Enlai. We met Zhou Enlai in 1956 [in India]. He told him not to go to the States but to go to Tibet. "If you don't want to stay in Tibet, then you can stay in China. If not, then you can go to the Soviet Union. You can also stay in India and work in our Consulate on East European Affairs, but don't go to America." This was said in India.   

**Q:**  In Tokyo, at the World Buddhist Conference—what was it? You got an invitation?   

**A:**  Yes, I got an invitation, and so I went from the States.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama went all over India and—let me read my summary—"When the reception was all over, the Dalai Lama invited [his] family to visit for a few days at a hotel in Calcutta. [The] family got together again. His mother made tea and they reminisced about the good old days in their homeland, in Amdo. Late [that] evening, you told the Dalai Lama and Mother that days were numbered, but that you understood why the Dalai Lama had to return—to help prevent the worst [from happening]. You and Gyalo Thondup could not reconcile yourselves to the fact that the Dalai Lama was leaving. But in order to not spoil the last hours before leaving, you all decided not to say anything." So at this time, did you talk a lot with the Dalai Lama? Did you insist that he stay?   

**A:**  No [to both questions]. Because his leaving was decided. It seems that Mr. Nehru told him a lot that he should go. So all was set for the return. [We] did not say anything.   

**Q:**  That's about it, Rimpoche. I thank you very much.   

**A:**  Thank you very much.   

