# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0020.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 60  
**Date of Birth:** 1933  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས] was a shengo in the Gyantse Regiment [Tib. ང་དང་དམག་སྒར] who was in Chamdo in 1950-51 and the Lhasa uprising in 1959. In this interview, he discusses putting up posters and delivering messages while working for the earlier People's Association. He talks about how the Tibetan soldiers did not accept amalgamation into the People's Liberation Army and how they submitted a petition to the Dalai Lama about this. And he discusses how he secretly took approximately 30 soldiers with their uniforms and weapons in 1959 to help train militia and joined Chushigandru in Lhoka. Additionally, he discusses the uprising in March 1959. He also discusses how he and Lobsang Yeshe returned to Lhasa when the Dalai Lama fled from Lhasa in 1959.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0020_02/H_0020_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Some representatives of the army went there, and you went as an assistant of Shengo Wangden Lhakpa Gökye and did some copying work, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Because of my young age, I could not compose communications, but I could copy letters well. Mainly what I did was to take messages hither and thither, and also paste posters in the Barkor Street. We were young and had no difficulty doing such tasks.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the meetings once or did you go a few times?   

**A:**  I went there for more than a month.   

**Q:**  A month! Did you go every day, or once a week or so?   

**A:**  Probably, it was almost every day. Sometimes, it happened that we were meeting only briefly in the evenings.   

**Q:**  So you were meeting for almost a month?   

**A:**  Yes, more than a month.   

**Q:**  Was this in Shide (monastery)?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  During this time, if one needed pens and paper, tea, etc.?   

**A:**  This was all prepared. As I told you last time, there were many people who wanted to be sponsors. Regarding stationery, that was easy, as much as one needed was available.   

**Q:**  Regarding the pasting of posters, did you organize into groups of like 10 people or 5 people?   

**A:**  We said that we were making a joint petition to the Tibetan and the Chinese authorities for such reasons, and regarding this all the people in the country must support us. Together with this, all the reasons were given. For example, since the Chinese came, the situation had deteriorated and they gave us no help at all, so all the Chinese must withdraw. Slogans like this were written in the posters.   

**Q:**  A petition had been made and there were 6 articles in it right? When I asked around, it was said that probably Namseling had seen the draft. Were there commanders, monk officials, etc., giving advice on the draft?   

**A:**  The main leaders did not say that there were people that they were seeking advice from and who they had to go see. I did not see any indications of this. However, as I mentioned, when they met at the Potala, our leaders returned very happy about the situation since they said that Lukhangwa and others were very supportive of their intended petition and they got very good advice. So here, internally, it seemed that they definitely advised them.   

**Q:**  Since the army representatives went to the meeting, the depön probably must have known everything.   

**A:**  Yes, they did. Regarding this, it was like a sickness that everyone was suffering together like the proverb, "The disease caused by the same devil [Tib. གདོན་གཅིག་ཟིན་གྱི་ན་ཚ]." Since the situation was such that if people had to rise up, then it was definitely a situation where all people, regardless of whether military or civil, would want to rise up. However, there was also the situation where there was a danger to Chinese and Tibetan relations and the possibility that a disturbance might harm the unity between the Tibetans and the Chinese. So it was definitely inconvenient for the depön to come out and do things openly.   

**Q:**  I saw in some books, now I can't recall where, that it was said that the Shigatse Depön was recalled to Lhasa [by the government].   

**A:**  It's possible that the depön was recalled for some government reasons, but most probably not for People's Association related matters.   

**Q:**  From the military side, was there any secret type of organization in the Barkor?   

**A:**  From the military side, there was no specific secret organization on the side. The most important work regarding the military was that in the 17-Point Agreement, article 8, it said that all of the military would be converted into the People's Liberation Army, and a group would protect the borders. Regarding this, the various regiments made a lot of objections. The Chinese put forward some points like the first, the second and the third. As for the first point, it said it had been decided that the [Tibetan] army would be amalgamated with the Chinese one, and that they would wear Chinese uniforms and their salary would be paid by the Chinese. At that time, in the building called Phodrang Sarpa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསར་པ], the Legjö Legung was begun. Supposedly, the order came from the Legjö Legung, which had both Chinese and Tibetan authorities. When the order was given, the regiments said this was not at all acceptable. They said that "Since time immemorial, we have been called Tibetan soldiers (Tib. bö magmi [Tib. བོད་དམག་མི]) and were never called Chinese Soldiers (Tib. གྱམི་མགམི [Tib. རྒྱ་མིའི་དམག་མི]). So we cannot accept becoming 'Chinese soldiers,' even if it was mentioned in the 17-Point Agreement." Later, except for the Bodyguard Regiment, all the various regiments were to be abolished. The order had already been given, so the rupön, the gyagpön and others discussed this and went to ask the Tsangrel oracle [Tib. གཙང་རལ] to go into a trance and consult the deity. I was there. My father was among those sort of leading this and he took me there. The Tsangrel deity gave the prophecy saying, "It is not possible for the army to be sent home. However, the Owner of All [Tib. དོན་གྱི་བདག་པོ] [Dalai Lama] does not have such a wish [for army to be disbanded] so you should not be worried about this." So what the army said to the government was, "Please don't think about sending us away because we will also not go home. If the government is having trouble paying us the military salary, then it does not matter because we will feed ourselves and remain here." So we even had to say that. However, they [officials] said that there was no point in making such a request because it had been jointly decided by both the Tibetan and the Chinese authorities to disband the troops. Finally, the army had to make a petition to the Dalai Lama. This was a dongshu, that is, a petition submitted directly to the Dalai Lama without going through anyone. The appropriate occasion for doing this could not be found at Norbulinga so during the time when the Dalai Lama was visiting Tölung Tsurphu [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་མཚུར་ཕུ] monastery, we kind of took the opportunity to submit the petition there. We sent a Shengo called Pema Gyalpo [Tib. པད་མ་རྒྱལ་པོ] and one soldier. Likewise, there were two soldiers from the Trapchi Regiment. So we secretly sent around 4 people to Tsurphu as it seemed that it was difficult to submit the petition in his residence [in Norbulinga]. One day when the Dalai Lama was going for a circumambulation around the monastery they waited there and submitted the petition, and briefly stated the reason. The Dalai Lama said,"Yes, yes, don't worry, don't worry." And the drönyerchemmo told them that they would get a reply when the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa. Later, from the gaa, the order was given through the Military Headquarters. The drunyichemmo were said to have made the investigation. Finally, it seemed that they did not find any desperate situation for the army to be disbanded and so they decided that it was better to keep the army than to disband it. So the order was given to the Military Headquarters saying that the order for the disbandment of the soldiers had been rescinded. In addition to that, the regiments that had not fulfill their full quota [of troops] were told to fulfill them. For example, if the number was 500, at times there were 10 to 15 or 100 less. The order also said to have better training and make the regiments well organized. At that time, the magji was Jangjenlokho [Tib. ལྕང་ཆེན་བློ་ཁོག]. Unlike many others, he was very patriotic, brave and educated. So everybody liked him and he was quite famous. Probably all of this took place around 1956-57 [note: actually 1955].   

**Q:**  I see. So that's much later. Had the Dalai Lama gone to India yet? Had the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region already started?   

**A:**  Probably it had started and I think the Dalai Lama had already returned from India. [This was actually done after he returned from China in 1955].  

**Q:**  Regarding the military uniforms, the Bodyguard Regiment wore Chinese uniforms and in the other regiments, only the officers wore Chinese uniforms while the soldiers wore Tibetan dress. How was this?   

**A:**  Yes, that's it exactly. Finally, the Chinese insisted so much. I have yet to finish what I was saying earlier. The situation was such that all this was mentioned in the 17-Point Agreement, so it was hard for the Tibetan government to refuse and the Chinese were insisting too. So the Bodyguard Regiment uniforms were changed to those worn by the Chinese. The other regiments refused to wear the Chinese uniform and they were left alone. However, those soldiers from the rank of shengo and above wore Chinese uniforms during Chinese ceremonies such as the October 1st National Day [Ch. shi yi] and the August 1st Army's Day [Ch. ba yi], etc. And at times during meetings and during Chinese shows, they were ordered to wear the uniforms. So from the shengo and above, the uniforms which included the insignias, caps, leather belt with knife attachments and boots were given [by the Chinese]. But they were not worn daily. The Tibetan chupa was the basic uniform worn during the Shotön Festival at Norbulinga, and at the Butter Sculpture Festival on the 15th of 1st Tibetan month [Tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ] when dignitaries arrived, and when the Dalai Lama moved up and down from Norbulinga Palace to the Potala Palace. Besides this, the Chinese insisted very strongly that they wanted to hoist the Chinese flag, but the regiments absolutely refused saying that we had our own flag and so we could not hoist two flags. Finally, the Chinese said that during the October 1st and the August 1st holidays, the Chinese flag must be hoisted along with the Tibetan flag. When they said that, our government said that for the sake of [good] relations, we had to agree to that. So it was a situation where we had to do it. However, the pole of our flag was long and straight, right? And next to that the Chinese flag was hoisted on a bent pole of inferior quality, just to avoid the Chinese saying we didn't hoist it. On one occasion, we hoisted the flag on a crooked stick with the flag upside down (laughter). This was at the entrance of Gyantse Regiment. The Chinese noticed this and were furious saying,"This was too much. This Gyantse Regiment putting our flag upside down is belittling our country." So our rupön and gyagpön were called to the Legjö Legung where they were given a difficult time. They implied that if this was ever done again they would never leave the matter alone .   

**Q:**  What about during ceremonies when one had to carry the flag.   

**A:**  When we were in processions, we didn't have to carry any flags.   

**Q:**  Regarding the mimang, I saw in a Chinese account that some time in March-April [1952] there were a lot of disturbances at Lhasa, and shops were closed and many people demonstrated at Zhang Jingwu's residence, the People's Bank and the Foreign Office. During this time did the mimang go to Zhang Jingwu's residence?   

**A:**  Regarding the closing of shops and the bank, and the demonstrating at Zhang Jingwu's house, perhaps it happened this way. At the time of the Shide People's Association, as I mentioned last time, from various regions and from the three great monasteries, there was the feeling that war would break out if the mimang's demands were not fulfilled, and so a lot of people created a commotion. Each had their knives and guns, and the monks wore laymen clothes. So at that time, there were many groups of people gathered here and there. It was even said that we must go to Zhang Jingwu's place. After that, now I can't remember the exact moment, but the Chinese were so alarmed that they made bunkers. This happened about three times up to 1959. One other occasion was when Alo Chöndze and Shigatse Lhabju's organization was there, and the Chinese were very suspicious. Other than that I don't quite remember.   

**Q:**  Now regarding the people's thoughts, the Kashag and the government had signed the 17-Point Agreement and there were many articles in it that they had to implement. What were the people thinking? Did they feel that the government was agreeing with the Chinese too much?   

**A:**  Yes. To tell you the true situation, as I ponder about what the people were thinking and what the government was doing, I don't know about one or two individuals, but others were thinking that with the 17-Point Agreement in mind, Tibetan Buddhism and politics should not get harmed. And whatever was coming from the Chinese side, they gradually thought about doing their best and hoping for the best, and in this way they continued to extend good relations with the Chinese. They thought that if they did not do that, the Chinese were very powerful and if all of a sudden militant action would take place, then the life of the Dalai Lama, the palaces [sacred places] and from all aspects it would go wrong, and there would be nothing left to look at. So definitely this seems to have been the thinking. Then there were a few people who were very close to the Chinese from that time onwards [early 1950's]. For example, many prominent people joined the Women's Association and the Youth League. Not only did the better off people join it, but they used to bring others with them to the meetings. From the perspective of the mimang, they were thinking that the Chinese were their enemy. The people had great misgivings that the Chinese would destroy the Buddhist faith and that from whichever angle one looks, the power of the Dalai Lama would be wrecked and the Chinese would forcefully control Tibet. The people had this kind of sad foreboding in their mind, and because of this, the people in general never looked to the Chinese nor did they ever like the Chinese at all. From this perspective, the people were criticising the government officials and saying that "If you don't work properly, then the Chinese, like a drop of oil on paper, will absorb Tibet [Tib. ཤོག་བུ་སྣུམ་ཐིག]." They also asked what kind of work the government was up to, and said that "When the Chinese first came up, the government did not take proper steps and now we have landed in such a situation. But even now the government is listening to what the Chinese are saying and it is not right for this to continue," and so on. This kind of talk is something that sort of always existed everywhere.   

**Q:**  After the People's Association's work, were you in Lhasa all the time?   

**A:**  I was sort of in Lhasa all the time since 1950.   

**Q:**  I see. Now the Chinese policy at first, up to say 1954, was very diplomatic. Then things got worse and worse. What were the reasons for this?   

**A:**  Yes, it was like that. It happened in the following manner. When the Chinese first came, they were very decent in character. Not only were they well trained, but they were very well disciplined. So from the perspective of politics or whatever - whatever was needed to be said or the way they acted, it was a situation where they were showing their attitude and saying things in a unified way like one person. There was no such thing as one Chinese saying something and the next saying a different thing. And then they were so sweet, It was amazing. They said that "We are all relatives and are the same Chinese nationality, and so we have come to help you. After much help and when you have also become good [developed], then we will go home." They said that they were not sort of going to stay permanently. And when they traveled about, we usually helped with some water or firewood, and at those times they wouldn't hesitate to pay 5-10 dayan. Generally, when they bought things they were being very truthful. When they first came, they very much took Tibetans into consideration. Then after 1-3 years, all of these things were not there. Then they took the power and did not hesitate to stay in places where they wanted to stay. They did not think in terms of rent or the wishes of the landlord. If there was some trouble with us Tibetans, the question of arresting and killing had already started by then, from 1954-55. In this way if one had some trouble with the Chinese in the Barkor, it was not like the earlier days. They would immediately arrest and take them to the army camp. Even if there was some trouble at a show [play, film] they would immediately arrest them. We had our courts and police, but they were not considered at all. They would just do it on their own, even if the person was to be imprisoned for 10-15 days. In this way they got more forceful and their numbers were increasing too. What they did earlier, later, was not there at all. It really got worse. Finally, in 1956-57, there were disturbances in the Kham and Amdo areas. In the Ütsang area the disturbances had not started. The situation on the Kham side was that they were going to start the democratic reforms. So everyone had heard and knew that the democratic reforms were done forcefully and this involved robbing and making [class] divisions. For this reason, no one liked it. Specifically, when the forceful behavior of the Chinese began and the democratic reforms took place on that side of the Drichu [Tib. འབྲི་ཆུ] River (the Yangtze), many people ran away and came up around Lhasa. Many people like refugees were arriving. Most stayed around Lhasa and Ütsang. Since there were so many coming, the Chinese thought that this represented a danger and they said that these people could not stay and must return to their homeland. Then they checked on them to see the kinds of people who were arriving. Most lived in tents around Ramoche and so the Chinese noted things down. Even if one took the example of traders, previously, in the years 1953-54-55, the Chinese used to provide bank drafts for dayan which could be changed [into rupees] at Calcutta. Then one could buy whatever one wished and they never said that one had to buy this or that only. In 1956-57 one could only buy whatever they [Chinese] said and they were not allowed to buy what one wished. So they were making difficulties for the traders.   

**Q:**  They were saying that they only wanted items that they needed, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They said that the Khambas and the Amdos that arrived in 1956-58 must return to their homeland, and were not permitted to stay in Ütsang, especially in Lhasa. [And they said] That if they stayed here, they would arrest them, put them in trucks and send them back. That it was better to leave when told. Otherwise, later there would be a lot of difficulties and problems. It had come to the point where they were about to be sent home. In addition to that, in the beginning of 1958, the Chinese said that one could not keep guns privately. Before the Chinese came, the government was sort of giving some sort of pass and allowing people to keep guns. There was no control over whoever wanted to keep guns. After 1958, the issue of gun control was also there. In this way, there were more and more problems, and unlike the previous period, they got much more power and everyone in the country was saying that they were not doing things in accordance with the Dalai Lama, the Kashag, or anyone. People were screaming out of anguish. When this happened, Chushigandru rose up. It was said that Kungö Chemmo [Drönyerchemmo Phala] and others advised and showed the way, so Andru Jinda [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་སྦྱིན་བདག] [Gombo Tashi], Amdo Jimpa Gyatso [Tib. སྒྱིན་པ་རྒྱ་མཚོ], Traya Atru Lama [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ་ཨ་གྲུ་བླ་མ] and many gathered, including people like Jangtsa [Tib. འཇང་ཚ] Chöndze, Litang Jamatsang [Tib. ལིཏང་བྱ་མ་ཚང]. They were the main ones. From the military, Trapchi Gyagpön Keldram la [Tib. སྐལ་དགྲམ་ལགས] and others were also there. So they decided to leave [for Lhoka]. At Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. ཤངས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར], the munitions of the former Chadang Artillery Regiment which had been disbanded, was stored there. It is said that the internal [informal] permission [to take these] was given by Drönyerchemmo [Phala]. . At the end of 1958, our depön was the son of Ragashag, Ragashag Seykusho [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག་སྲས་སྐུ་ཞབས][Paljor's note: he was my mother's brother]. Then there was Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས] of Damba Simkhang [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང], who was an ex-monk official who earlier had gone to study in Beijing, so he knew Chinese politics and policies well. Then there was our Magji Jangjenlokho Lokela [Tib. བློ་སྐལ་ལགས]. There were also other government officials. They had a secret organization. From their side they were thinking that it would not be okay if we didn't recruit a strong militia from the various regions. They wanted each region to establish their own organization. When these organizations were well established, they were to secretly make relations with the (Tibetan) Military Headquarters and would be given arms secretly. So there were such plans. When they said that officials, military personnel and aristocrats were needed [for an organization], it was said that Lobsang Yeshe was well educated and Lobsang Yeshe was in this secret organization. He decided to leave [Lhasa to join Chushigandru].   

**Q:**  Who is Lobsang Yeshe la?   

**A:**  He used to be the monk official of Damba Simkhang. Later he became a kind of lay official [wearing Mongolian dress] and stayed in China for a long time for studies.   

**Q:**  Is he Ngawang Senge la [Tib. ངག་དབང་སེང་གེ་ལགས]?   

**A:**  Yes. He was also known as Ngawang Senge.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  So Lobsang Yeshela and I had a talk. I spoke with our depön [Ragashag] and told him that Lobsang Yeshe la was saying such things [about the need for militias]. At that time, the depön used to like us a lot. He said, "This is very secret talk and so you must make sure no one knows about it. If you can go, then it is very good, but you must make sure there are no problems." I was the one who got to go. I was sort of a platoon leader, a shengo, and there was another shengo I took along. I took about 30 soldiers, fully armed with 2 bren-guns, along with Lobsang Yeshe and some Amdos. I also had some Khambas from Tsarong [Tib. ཚ་བ་རོང] and Jüba [Tib. འཇུས་པ]. So we secretly left Lhasa. We were to go and make connections with Andru Jinda in Lhoka and then we were to go to Tsang [Tib. གཙང]. Now since Chushigandru was already present in Lhoka, we were going to recruit [and train] militias in Tsang [where they were not present]. When we crossed Ramagang ferry site and passed the Benza ferry site and got to Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར], there were some Chushigandru, like Jangri Lhagye [Tib. བྱང་རི་ལྷ་རྒྱལ], Litang Kunga Samden [Tib. ལི་ཐང་ཀུན་དགའ་བསམ་གཏན] and others. They said that Andru Jinda was down in Po [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] and Kongpo, and it was said that he would be arriving soon, so please stay here in the meantime. Since we were to make connections with him, we decided to stay. Then Lobsang Yeshe la, sent a letter with two people [to Gombo Tashi] saying that we had arrived and that, "This is our plan and work, and we wish to discuss this with you. It would be good if you could come soon to the southern area." The reply said that he was going to come soon, so we stayed for 2-3 months. While we were staying there, from the nearby areas of Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར], Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང] and Tsang, we were sent letters and people. So from Tsang, about 100 volunteer militia arrived, like Gabshi Kenorla [Tib. ཀ་བཞི་སྐལ་ནོར་ལགས], the son of Netöla [Tib. སྣེ་སྟོད་ལགས], the son of Tara [Tib. རྟ་ར་སྲས], Gyantse Dewalang [Tib. སྡེ་བ་གླང] and others arrived one by one. So since we were waiting for Jinda, we couldn't leave for Tsang. In the meantime, at Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང], at Gangbu, a lot of Chinese had dug themselves in and would not get out. So there was fighting taking place daily. Since some of our soldiers had training and were experienced, they asked for, and I sent, about 10-15 soldiers. They were there until 1959 fighting [with the Chinese]. There were some with me and some of the rural militias were with me along with Lobsang Yeshe. Later, there were about 50-60 Amdos who wanted Lobsang Yeshela to be their leader. We were all there together. Then, the uprising took place at Lhasa on the March 10th. During this time, some of our soldiers were at the Jagsam Drukha [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ་གྲུ་ཁ] ferry site as guards. I was around Pobra [Tib. ?] as a "guard" [Tib. ས་སྲུང]. I heard about the news in Lhasa and I immediately came to Gongkar and asked Lobsang Yeshe la about this. We made the bugle call for a gathering [Tib. ལྷན་དུང]. When this call was made, all the leaders would gather, right? The reason being that when we were at Gongkar we taught a lot of drills to the Chushigandru and we also taught quite a lot of the bugle calls. So we all gathered and said that this is what had happened at Lhasa and so now what should we do? Some said that we should go to Nyetang, but some disagreed and there was no consensus. We did a senriy lottery in front of the goddess Lhamo and it was said that it was a good idea to go to Nyetang. So we went there and immediately we contacted Norbulinga. We sent two of our soldiers saying that "We and Lobsang Yeshe la discussed this, and we have arrived here, and so please give us whatever orders you may have." We sent a petition through Kungö Ragashag. We immediately received a reply through persons disguised as villagers and said that tomorrow they were going to send a representative. The next day Gyagpön Kedram la and Major Chölung Nanga [Tib. ཆོས་ལུང་ནང་པ] came. They did not have anything specific to say. Lobsang Yeshe and Kunga Samden were asked to come to Norbulinga. It had now been 2-3 days and there were serious orders that we should stay as guards on the north and south banks of the river. So we kept guards there and did everything. Later, when Kungö Ta Lama [Tib. ཏ་བླ་མ] and Taktra Labrang Kungö Dzasa came with a letter from Kungö Chemmo that said something very important. It said that "It is possible that something very important will arrive your way through the north or south of the river, and for this reason, you have to place guards in a well-organized manner." When we wondered what important thing would be coming this way, we suspected that maybe it was the Dalai Lama. But we did not at all think that he was coming. In this way we were busy day and night guarding the area. Finally, on the night that the Dalai Lama was arriving, our soldiers were stationed on the north and south side of the river, but we, the leaders, went to the Ramadruka ferry site. I think it was just before sunset. Lobsang Yeshe la and Kunga Samden had also arrived there. Then after some time Kungö Kündeling and some officials arrived, like Phala Rimshi, and we were told that the Dalai Lama was coming and that we must be on alert. Then after some time, 200-300 Trapchi soldiers were sent to cover the northern and southern water route in places like Trip [Tib. གྲིབ], and along the route. Before the Dalai Lama arrived, the Dalai Lama's family members like the mother of the Dalai Lama arrived at around 8-9 p.m. Then the Kashag members arrived by ferry. Then the Dalai Lama's coracle was on the other side of the river. It was situated down there below the regular ferry site. Then the Dalai Lama came in a coracle and we were getting ready. Lobsang Yeshe, Kunga Samden, Tempa Dargye [Tib. བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས], Choto Bhu [Tib. uch rdo bu ?], myself and my assistant Namgyal Tsewang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཚེ་དབང], who is in Darjeeling now, were there. When the coracle approached the shore, the rope was thrown from the coracle, and I and Namgyal Tsewang were holding on to the rope. When the Dalai Lama got out from the coracle, Lobsang Yeshe and those people were standing in a line. Then the Dalai Lama asked, "Who and who is here?" Tempa Dargye and Choto Bhu were right there, and they told the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama said, "Oh, very good, very good, those are auspicious names." He (the Dalai Lama) quickly left. The horses were prepared by Kündeling, and he [the Dalai Lama] rode the horse and we travelled together right away. Except for a break at Namgyalgang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་སྒང], the party made a continuous journey. The next day, just after dawn, Kungö Chemmo asked all the volunteer leaders to gather. He said, "It is reported that since the Dalai Lama left, all the people guarding the land [Tib. ས་སྲུང] are also coming along. This will not do at all and they must stay in their positions. So one military officer has to return to tell them that. And then one officer has to go to the Banzadruka [Tib. བན་རྩ་གྲུ] ferry site to make preparations ahead." Tempa Dargye and I spoke, and I was to return to report to the soldiers to keep their positions and he was to go to Banzadruka. I backtracked to the Ramadruka ferry site. When the Dalai Lama proceeded, Lobsang Yeshe la immediately returned to Norbulinga since arms were yet to be procured. There was important work to do at Norbulinga and so he returned. When I returned, he must have heard that I was around. Amdo Chunden [Tib. ཆོས་ལྡན], poor fellow, he died now, but he was sent to contact me. I went to Norbulinga, and reported to the regiments and the Military Headquarters on the situation in the south and everything. However, one had to be very secretive regarding the fact that the Dalai Lama had left. Nobody in Lhasa or Norbulinga knew about that. So Lobsang Yeshe la and myself were stuck there for 2 days waiting for the arms and preparing animals for their transportation. Then after some time, the real war began and Lobsang Yeshe la and I could not leave. I was at Shöl, since our regiment was there, and Lobsang Yeshe la was at Norbulinga. The next day after the war began, I was with the soldiers fighting during the whole day. Later, I heard that Lobsang Yeshe la had to flee towards the Ramadruka ferry site and succumbed to cannon fire. I was at the west side of the Potala facing towards the stupa called Bago Karling [Tib. བྲག་སྒོ་ཀར་ནེ], trying my best to fight back against the Chinese. However, by the evening we could not stand it any longer and we fled to the Potala. There we separated into those who would stay and those who would leave. Our group said that there was no use in staying and via Nyarenang [Tib. ཉང་རལ་ནང], Phembo, Tölung Tsurphu, Chushul and Sey [Tib. ཟས]. Our regiments were at Sey and Jagsam and we met there. I arrived there with about 60-70 soldiers and stayed there for about 10 days or so. The Chinese arrived there and we fought for about 5 days at Jagsam. Then one day we could not hold on as we had lost the positions both above and below, so we withdrew and went to Lake Yamdro [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག]. The Chinese chased us and there we ambushed the Chinese and a big battle ensued. We had quite a lot of casualties, but many Chinese were killed and it was even said that the Chinese were killed in the lake. When we ambushed them, they could not bear it and just entered [Tib. འཛུལ] [jumped] into the lake. Then when their reinforcements arrived, we could not hold on, and then it was a total withdrawal. We arrived in Nye [Tib. གཉལ] where some of our government officials and Chushigandru were. [Andru] Jinda had also arrived. They made plans to organize and try to hold the land again. We also went to our positions, but to no avail. Everyone was thinking about leaving and not fighting. We were left towards the end. From Nye we went to Katang and crossed the Magola Mountain Pass and came to India.   

