# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0020.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 25 September 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 60  
**Date of Birth:** 1933  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས] was a shengo in the Gyantse Regiment [Tib. ང་དང་དམག་སྒར] who was in Chamdo in 1950-51 and the Lhasa uprising in 1959. In this interview, he discusses the military situation in Kham in 1950, and the fighting in Denkhog and Lhodzong between the Shigatse Regiment and the People's Liberation Army. He also discusses Ngabö's journey from the battle to his eventual surrender, how the Chushigandru was set up and armed, and also the uprising and his role in it. He talks about the fighting in Lhasa, how the Sera monks came to the Potala to take arms for themselves from the government armory, how he fled from Lhasa through Phembo to Tshurpu and Jagsam in order to join Chushigandru, and then how he fought the Chinese in the Jagsam area and in Yamdro. He then discusses how he fled to India and about internal arguments while crossing a mountain pass just before the Indian border. Finally, he describes the differences between the long barrel and the short barrel 303 English Carbines, and between sten-guns and bren-guns, etc., and he comments on a few members of a secret underground group, like Lobsang Yeshe and Magji Lokela.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0020_03/H_0020_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1949, you and the Gyantse Regiment were in Dome in the area of the 39 tribes [Tib. ཚོ་པ་སུམ་ཅུ་སོ་དགུ], right? During this time, Sawang Lhalu was the Doji. At that time, what was in the mind of Sawang Lhalu. Was he making preparations and was he definitely going to fight?   

**A:**  This was known to all because Lhalu was solely thinking in a militant way. If the Chinese were to invade, it is said that he had definite ideas to oppose them. Not only were there such ideas, but during Lhalu's time, whether it was assigning border guards, giving arms to the various regiments and even to many rural militias such as Shotalhosum, the 39 tribes and the four northern areas, (Tib. Changrig Deshi [བྱང་རིགས་སྡེ་བཞི]) [sentence not finished]. Beside that, part of our regiment was in the 39 tribe's area and the main regiment was in Khyungpo Serta. Our depön was Kungö Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ]. One regimental troop [Tib. མདའ་ཤོག] of the Shigatse regiment was in the Derge Jomda [Tib. སེ་དགེ་འཇོ་མདའ] and Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར] areas. One regimental troop was in the Khyungpo Karnasesum [Tib. དཀར་ནག་སེར་གསུམ] area. The [regiment's] main base was in Tengchen [Tib. སྟེང་ཆེན]. When they were there, there was great danger in the Denkhog [Tib. ལྡན་ཁོག] area from the Chinese. So Lhalu ordered them to go to Denkhog. This was probably in the 6th Tibetan month [1950]. From the Den Chöngor [Tib. ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] area, via the Yangtze River, the Chinese came, and Shigatse Rupön Bügangla [Tib. sbud kgang ba] and Depön Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] tried to stop them and put up a stiff fight. After many days Rupön Bügangla was killed. After that, the famous hero Dingpön Dumrala [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར་ལགས] also lost his life. At that time, Depön Muja seems to have been on the mountain tops of the Chöngor Monastery area. There were accounts that the Shigatse regiment put up a good fight. The Chinese came from Derge through Denkhog and not over the water of the Yangtze River. This was at the time of Lhalu. The Shigatse regiment fought. There was a period of a few months in which the Chinese did not advance and the Tibetans did not loose too much ground. During this period there were Chinese reconnaissance troops, and we heard that some of these were captured and some killed. Later, around the 9-10th Tibetan month, Lhalu and Ngabö replaced each other. Once Ngabö had taken over, and just after Lhalu had left, the question of holding positions and bunkers was relaxed since Ngabö said, "It would just be a hardship to stay in the bunkers and hold the mountain tops [Tib. རྩེ་རི]." There was this talk and also it was common knowledge in the Kham area that Ngabö was not interested in confrontation. Regarding the policy of Ngabö and Lhalu on the question of stopping the Chinese, regarding the actual policy, we know what was generally said. However, we were young and we went by what others said and so we cannot comment absolutely on the internal discussions. When the Chinese actually advanced and, as mentioned, we had a number of regiments, right? And where Lhalu was making war, that was where the big advance came through and the Shigatse regiment really fought. I have forgotten the name of the pass, but it is probably mentioned in my book. There was supposedly a fierce battle and a lot of Chinese were killed. However, there were many Chinese and since they advanced one after another, it was impossible to stop them. And so the regimental unit [Tib. མགའ་ཤོག] of the Shigatse army that was in the Derge Jangra and Jomda areas faced a strong advance and Depön Karchung [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང] lost his life. Gradually, ground was lost there too. In the lower Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས] area, the one facing the strong Chinese advancement across the Yangtze River was Derge Sey and the Tadang Regiment which was guarding the area. The talk was that the Tadang Regiment did not put up a stiff resistance because Derge Sey, what should one say, immediately became "two faced" and surrendered to the Chinese. So when the advance came from 4-5 directions it was not possible to hold on. When they approached Chamdo, Ngabö was unable to bear the situation [Tib. འགེན་བློས་མ་བཟོད་བ] so he had the government armory at Sidhothang [Tib. sri zlog thang ?] set on fire and he left immediately to the west. When they approached the Riwoche area, the Chinese had come to Drugugön [Tib. གྲུ་གུ་དགོན] via Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ] and Nangchen, via Doshö Tramoling [Tib.?] straight to Drugugön. When Ngabö had just arrived at Drugugön the Chinese had already arrived ahead [west] of Drugugön and they sort of blocked the road going west, so Ngabö could not flee to Tibet. From Chamdo, the Chinese were sort of pursuing him and Ngabö was caught, and nothing could be done (laughter). The advance from Nangchen, since it went to Drugugön, did not come up [west toward Lhasa] to where we were located. We were not the only ones there, as there were also other newly recruited regiments and rural militia from Khyungpo Karnasesum and many others. So we sort of remained as before [status quo]. I also mentioned this the last time - that we were staying at Khyungpo Tengchen. In this vicinity, Gadang regiment's Rupön Bügangla was there. However, on Lhalu's order they were recalled to Denkhog in Derge. So at Tengchen, there were just a few soldiers from the Gadang Regiment. While we were staying there [Khyungpo Tengchen], Lhalu came to Lhodzong and then to Shotalhosum at Shopando. Lhalu knew that the Gyantse regiment was in that area, so he ordered this regiment, the remainder of the Shigatse regiment and rural militias to protect the main route and move to Shotalhosum. So we crossed the pass at Nyoshö [Tib. ?] in Targyegön [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན] and crossed the Gyama Ngülchu [Tib. རྒྱ་མོ་རྔུལ་ཆུ] [river] and came to Shopando. Lhalu was not there. It was said that he had left a day or two before and was now staying at Tar Dzong [in Pembar], which is two satsig away. We were to stay and guard Shopando and people were sent to consult with Lhalu. The monastery at Shopando, its miser and the village tsodrag said that we should not make Shopando the main battle site because the monastery and its people would suffer. They suggested the place called Barinang. It had a pass, was forested and was well-protected, so it would be best to establish the defences there and fight the Chinese there. The miser said that whatever assistance they were asked for, they would be willing to help. The regiment agreed and Barinang became our main defensive position. We had sent many scouts to Lhozong and down, but it was 3-4 days later when the Chinese came. For one day, from pre-dawn to late dusk, a battle took place. We tried to prevent them from advancing. We had some casualties and it was said that there were many Chinese dead in the forests. So we didn't go down [east] and the Chinese did not advance. We stayed like this for about two months. During this period the 17-Point Agreement was implemented. It was then said that the Chinese were going to help Tibet and do such wonderful things and that the relations between the Tibetans and Chinese are on friendly terms and one should not antagonize the other. So we got such orders from the government. Later we were withdrawn and since Lhalu was in Kongpo Giamda, we were ordered to go there and be Lhalu's Bodyguard soldiers. We came up and did that. One section was called up to Lhasa, while another remained with him [Lhalu] for about 5-6 months. Later, Lhalu came to Lhasa and a bit later we all came up. Anyway, generally, the situation with Ngabö and Lhalu was that the latter strongly prepared for war while Ngabö, who only had a short stint [as Doji], spent that time trying to dismantle the defensive positions. If the Chinese came, he was not thinking about stopping them militantly. This for sure was the general situation.   

**Q:**  Before the 17-Point Agreement was signed, Ngabö had gone down [from Lhasa to Chamdo]. When he arrived, did you soldiers have any discussions when Ngabö said that it was no use fighting or that we couldn't challenge them?   

**A:**  Ngabö fled from Chamdo to Drugugön where he was caught and taken back to Chamdo. The captured soldiers, those still in the hills, and the rural militia, to them it was said that the Chinese made Ngabö order that they must surrender. Definitely, this order was given and some also surrendered and gave up their guns. However, as we examine the situation, I doubt Ngabö himself was well informed about the strength of the Chinese. The Chinese made a sudden advance from various directions when it was least expected and a lot of ground was lost, and since he was unable to bear the situation, he fled. So I don't think it was a situation where Ngabö clearly gauged the strength of the Chinese and said that if we fought we would not be able to challenge the Chinese. All of a sudden, so much land was lost and one fled when such a situation arose. Then, when the Chinese blocked the route [back to Lhasa] near Drugugön, there was no fleeing. Then they were taken to Chamdo and it was said that most of the officials who were arrested with Ngabö had broken spirits. Among them, Depön Muja was said to be the most determined. Then it was said that a formal surrender ceremony took place. The Tibetan soldiers' guns were lined up on both sides, their names read out and they were each given about 25 dayan coins. At that time, the English wireless man [Ford] was taken from Drugugön to Chamdo like a dog. His neck was tied with a rope and he was paraded up and down. The Chinese said,"This man is an English imperialist. Look! His hair is yellow and his eyes are blue. English imperialists are like that. We are all relatives. Just look at our faces. It is stupid to have hopes in such people." There were quite a few lectures aimed at degrading the English.   

**Q:**  After the fall of Chamdo, a month or so later, he [the Dalai Lama] took over the reigns of the country. It is said that he sent a letter to the Chinese government stating that he wished to establish relations. Some say that after this the peaceful process sort of began. Therefore, during this period, when you were in the army, was there anything new, or any changes in policy?   

**A:**  When we heard that after the fall of Chamdo the Dalai Lama had taken over the reigns of the government after the ceremony by the regent, everyone was happy and hopeful that the situation would improve. It was just hope and really nothing [in reality]. It was war and nothing of that sort [to improve the situation] happened.   

**Q:**  Now I know that you were not in the Chushigandru early on, but after they formed an organization and set up a base at Drigutang, then where did they go and what battles took place?   

**A:**  Regarding their situation, I can't tell you in detail. However, based on what I heard and what I know, they gathered at Drigutang and formed a military headquarters and organized the leadership based on various [area] groups. Then they left Drigutang and went to Nyemo. At Nyemo, they arrived at the monastery where the arms of one regiment were stored. They took the arms. I was at Lhasa when we heard that they went to get the arms. The Chinese could not take this and were thinking that it would be problematic if arms got into their hands and they immediately sent the army. So in Nyemo, there was a fierce battle with a lot of casualties. The details I can't tell you.   

**Q:**  When they gathered at Drigutang, what was the estimated number of people?   

**A:**  Perhaps around 1,000.   

**Q:**  Most went to Shang?   

**A:**  Since Drigutang was the main headquarters [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང], perhaps one hundred or two remained. Most went to Nyemo.   

**Q:**  Did the battle take place before or after the arms were taken?   

**A:**  After [Note: there were battles before and after]. Then there was a motorable road from Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང] and the Tsang side and 2-4 trucks were ambushed. One or two Tibetan vehicles were caught in the shooting.   

**Q:**  When you say Langkor [Tib. རླངས་འཁོར], you are talking about road constructors?   

**A:**  No, this means trucks. 3-4 Chinese trucks were destroyed and 2-3 Tibetan trucks were caught in the crossfire. Then they went via the north and via the upper area of Drigung and went to Mashung. The Chinese must have sent reconnaissance and in Mashung the Chinese laid an ambush. They [Chushigandru] got caught in the ambush and they had a lot of difficulties There were quite a lot of casualties and they got into quite a difficult situation. The troops in Mashung were split up into two to three groups. At first they came to Mashung and then went to Kongpo and Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] and organized and recruited in those areas, and planned for guerilla warfare. Andru Jinda planned to connect the Kham areas. However, it was sort of unlucky and they got caught in the ambush at Mashung. At Mashung they seem to have broken off into 2-3 groups with the majority going down with Jinda. Some also did come to Lhoka. Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] and others came via the northern area and quietly came to Lhasa, and from there once again to Lhoka. Later, the Ganden lama, I think he is Serkong [Tib. སེར་ཀོང] Trülku, Ngawang and others destroyed 2-3 trucks at Lhoka Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར] [Note: This occurred on 18 December 1958]. Then there was fighting at Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] and then the Chinese went to Tsetang Gangbu, a well-fortified area [in Tsetang].   

**Q:**  At that time you were at Lhoka?   

**A:**  When they were fighting at Gangbu I had arrived at Gongkar. I arrived at Gongkar 15-20 days after they had destroyed the Chinese vehicles. Lobsang Yeshela [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས] and I arrived after the fight at Gongkar [ed. note: the ambush started on 18 December]. The fighting in the South was something like this.   

**Q:**  Now at Tsetang what happened? Was it a Chinese office or what?   

**A:**  At first they were in the village of Tsetang. Then they could not continue that situation, so they [the Chinese] all went to Gangbu. There the Chinese had a military base of sorts and much of it was underground it is said. This could not be taken and the fight dragged on for a long time.   

**Q:**  What did they do, use bombs? They only had grenades, didn't they?   

**A:**  Yes. From our side they tried many times to dig and plant explosives. The Chinese shot at us when some one bobbed up and weaved and we did the same. At times they had volunteers to advance, but they were too well fortified and so they were never able to get the Chinese out of Gangbu. Other than that, in the Lhoka area, the Chinese were not there in any force. The reason being that when the base started at Drigutang there were just small groups of Chinese in the villagers, some doing some investigations [Tib. ཉམས་ཞིབ]. They all seem to have gotten together at Tsetang.   

**Q:**  The organization was called the Volunteer Army to Defend the Religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླངས་དམག་སྒར]. How did they organize? Did those from, say, Targye Gomba form one group, etc.?   

**A:**  Yes, exactly. They had names for each group according to the region [Tib. ལུང་ཤོག]. For example, the group from Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ], the Chamdo group, Markham, Baba, Jüba [Tib. འཇུས་པ], etc. There were some groups that had a hundred or two [hundred] people, others 10-15. There were various sizes.   

**Q:**  It is said that some Ganden Monastery monks joined Chushigandru. Did others from the Lhasa and Chushul areas join too?   

**A:**  Yes, before the Lhasa uprising, there were quite a few from Ganden. The greatest number from Ganden took place after the uprising.   

**Q:**  Had the Dalai Lama arrived in India already?   

**A:**  Perhaps he may have been around Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང]. It was said that there were some elder Ganden monks [left], otherwise they all went to Lhoka. But even before the uprising there were more Ganden monks joining Chushigandru than monks from Sera and Drepung.   

**Q:**  Some say that when Andru Jinda was there the organization was good, but when he left there was in-fighting. When he was not there what did they do about leadership?   

**A:**  Each group had their own leaders. Besides that, there were said to be some more prominent leaders like Litang Jamatsang, and probably Jangtsa Chöndze and others. I have no evidence to say that the organization suffered, but generally it is said that the group with Andru Jinda had better discipline. Those who were not with Jinda, even though they had leaders, it is said that the organization was worse. That talk is definitely there.   

**Q:**  Now what did they do about food commodities?   

**A:**  Regarding that, they made the miser take out things [for them] [Tib. འདོན]. If at the time they could afford to pay money, they did. If not, they were given a receipt with the hope that they would be compensated after victory. Whenever the volunteer regiment was there, they made the people who had the means bring out the things [they needed] [Tib. ཡོད་འདོན་རྒྱག]. Leave aside the question of supplies for people, but even fodder for horses was given by the miser. Everyone was working towards re-establishing the Buddhist faith [Tib. བཏན་པ་སླར་གསོ].   

**Q:**  I see. Now the Dalai Lama had left from Norbulinga, Tempa Dargye la [Tib. བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས་ལགས] had gone to the Benzadruka ferry site and you were sent by Kungö Chemmo [Drönyerchemmo] to tell the soldiers to remain in their positions, right? After that what happened? Tell me in some detail.   

**A:**  Yes. the Dalai Lama had left Norbulinga and went via the Rama ferry site, and we all went to sort of receive him and went to Namgyegang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་སྒང]. The Dalai Lama rested there for a while and then went down [toward India]. Anyway, he travelled that whole evening. The next day at sunrise, Kungö Chemmo had stopped his horse and was there on the road. He ordered that the Volunteer Army leaders should all gather immediately. Along with us was Kunga Samden [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་བསམ་གཏན] and Kungö Lobsang Yeshe, but they had to return to Norbulinga from Ramagang. Down this side, Tempa Dargye and I, a few of us, were there. So when we went to meet Kungö Chemmo, it was as you have said. He said one of us leaders would have to go to the Benzadruka ferry site. Benzadruka refers to the boat crossing on the Yarlungtsangpo river. One person was needed to bring the boats to this side and have them ready. Another person was to go to tell the soldiers stationed between Ramadruka and this place who were leaving their posts, not to do so. The two of us discussed this and Tempa Dargye said that he wanted to go to Benzadruka. I said okay, and I went to instruct the soldiers. I went all the way to Ramadruka. I arrived at Ramadruka around sunset. Then, after some time, Amdo Chünden [Tib. ཆོས་ལྡན], who was the servant of Kungö Lobsang Yeshe la, said that I should come quickly to Norbulinga. He must have heard that I was around Ramadruka. So along with 2-3 soldiers I went. I didn't go to Norbulinga right away, but went to our regiment where the rupön and the gyagpön were. They had been given the responsibility to guard the Gyatso area towards the east of Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  At that time who were the gyagpön and rupön?   

**A:**  Rupön Phüntso Wangye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ], was the first rupön. Our father was gyagpön and then the 3rd gyagpön was there. The 2nd gyagpön and some of them, along with the soldiers, were located towards the Potala near Bago Karling [Tib. བྲག་སྒོ་ཀར་ནེ] where they were acting as guards. So I went to Norbulinga. The rüpon and the gyagpön did not at all know that the Dalai Lama had left. Let alone knowing about the Dalai Lama's departure, on the way I met our Depön Ragashag and the Gusung Rüpon Sötrela [Tib. བསོད་བཀྲས་ལགས]. They were going along with one or two people and about 10 (1 lag) horses and mules. Kungö said that he was going as assistance [for the Dalai Lama's party]. He asked me where I was going and I said Kungö Chemmo sent me there to do some task. I didn't get to speak with him at length and he told me to be careful. The rupön and the gyagpön did not even know about this. I told them about the situation in Lhoka but since the Dalai Lama's leaving was secret there was no way I could tell them. Then I immediately went to Norbulinga where I met Lobsang Yeshe la. Sambo Kungö Depön was with him. I asked Lobsang Yeshe la why he wanted me to come. He said "I don't have anything else to say except that in a day or two there would be a large cache of arms and these need to be sent there [to the southern area] and so I need assistance." When I asked him what kind of assistance he needed, he said he needed a lot of animals for transportation. So I sent the soldiers who were with me to Ramadruka and told them to get the animals ready and the arms will come at night. So we got ready.   

**Q:**  Where were the arms to go?   

**A:**  From Ramadruka to Lhoka. Around Nyetang there were hundreds of people without any arms.   

**Q:**  At that time in the Lhoka and Tsang areas a lot of militia had been recruited, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. When we were staying at Gongkar we had a lot of connections and we were to go to Tsang to organize a militia. Also militia were to be formed in the Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང] area. People like Nyetang Damsing la [Tib. དན་གཟིམ་ལགས], Barmey Künsang [Tib. སྦར་སྨད་ཀུན་བཟང], Kyishong Ane la- [Tib. སྐྱིད་གཤོངས་ཨ་ནན་ལགས] these were all famous people who were extremely pro-government, courageous and ready to fight. We made connections with them and they also brought a lot of militia. From Tsang, there was Kabshi Tenor la [Tib. ཀ་བཞི་བསྟན་ནོར་ལགས], Tara Sey [Tib. རྟ་ར་སྲས], Netö [Tib. སྣེ་སྟོད], and Tregang. Even in the Tsang area we had about 100 or so [recruits]. But there were not sufficient arms and so the question of arms was very important. For this reason, Lobsang Yeshe la and others were staying at Norbulinga. Since this was the case, we were making preparations and could not leave immediately. Just then, the real battle started and we could not go. We were at Shöl since the main regiment was there. Earlier the Döbel [Tib. འདོད་དཔལ] houses were all given to us, the Gyantse Regiment.   

**A:**  When the real battle started, that night I was at Shöl Döbel. Now, it was difficult to even get to Norbulinga, right? Our soldiers joined those who were at the Potala, at the Bago Karling. We stayed until dawn returning the fire and doing things that needed to be done. Then before dawn, the shelling of Norbulinga started, including the Jogpori [Tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] and the Potala. When we looked out from the Potala, we could tell where they were shooting from and whether it was a mortar or cannon that was fired from the side, trenyog we could definitely tell. But there were hardly any Chinese to be seen in the various military camps and areas because they were well prepared in advance and remained underground. At times, one could see one or two moving to and from. Therefore, when we shot, there wasn't much to be done. However, from our side, the use of mortars and howitzers belonging to the Trapchi regiment firing at the Chinese positions in Trip [Tib. གྲིབ] side and their military headquarters was excellent. The Chinese had most of their "transportation offices" [Tib. འགྲིམ་འགྲུལ་སྐྱེལ་འདྲེན་ཁང] in Kyangthang Naga [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་ན་ག] and they fired the mortars a lot. But they [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  You mean the Trapchi regiment? And who was the one who was mainly firing the guns?   

**A:**  Yes. Mainly there was the gunnery unit of the Trapchi Regiment. There was an instructor who was very accurate in shooting. But he was unlucky and died right there.   

**Q:**  What was his name?   

**A:**  I don't recall. In this way, a lot of soldiers were killed. Then after some time, one just couldn't bear it any longer. The Chinese just fired automatically [non-stop].   

**Q:**  So it was one after another?   

**A:**  Yes, one after another. It was just all at once firing nine shots automatically [Tib. དགུ་ཤོག]. And it was not just all at once and then a break. It was all at once and then continuous firing. Except for a few isolated cases, all had to retreat into the Potala. Then from the various windows of the palace, machine guns and others were fired, but just as in the other places, they fired at the palace. Every time the red palace was hit, there were clouds of red dust. On would think it was on fire. It was not on fire, but the red ochre which had been painted on it since the earliest times was scattered and made everything all red. Then some said that we should not fire from the palace since the palace was going to be destroyed. When this was said, it was also something that had to be somehow considered. That night, from the Tibetan military headquarters, Magji Khenjung Lokela [Tib. བློ་སྐལ་ལགས] and others said that we had to retake the Jogpori once more and he asked for volunteers. Many of us volunteered, but it was very difficult to go there since the Chinese had fully captured it.   

**Q:**  At first we were holding it, right?   

**A:**  At first the Trapchi were holding it - along with some volunteers and some monks. They put up a good fight, but the Chinese used their cannons non stop and amidst that storm from the other side they sent in the soldiers. When the air cleared, the Chinese were right there at close quarters. So many fled down. Our Shengo and many Trapchi soldiers were killed there. So it was very difficult to volunteer [to take Jogpori], and the telephone to Norbulinga was cut. Kungö Magji tried a lot but there was nothing to be done. That day from Sera, more than 1,000 monks came to get arms from Potala. We showed them where the arms were stored and how to handle the guns. The soldiers taught them and what ammunitions the soldiers had was shared with and divided [between] the monks. The problem was that the ammunition was stored at Sharchenjog and since the Chinese were firing their cannons continuously, there was no way to go there - one would have to go via the Deyangshar [Tib. སྡེ་ཡངས་ཤར] courtyard. [They, we] went to get the ammunitions but with the cannons shooting, right there about 7-8-10-15 or so were killed. It was only possible to take out about 30-40 caches of ammunitions. So we shared our ammunitions with the monks. The idea was that the monks were going to pounce on the Chinese, but they went straight to the monastery. It seems that they were going to assemble and attack the Chinese. But I doubt really much happened because it seems the Chinese knew about the monks taking arms. So at Sera they fired a lot of cannons. That night we said that it was better to leave since one could not see any Chinese and when one fired from the palace, the palace was shelled. This is what some of us said. Others said, "We have to die in the palace. If we have to fight, then we must fight in here in the palace itself and if we must die, then we must die in here also and there is no use going to the outskirts". We soldiers, government officials, monks, volunteers soldiers, Namgye Tratsang monks - so many were there. It was decided that those who want to stay would stay and those who want to leave, would do so. So we left. It was at night. We descended from the back of Potala, through Lukhang, then Jera [bye rag], and then into the upper reaches of Nyare [Tib. མྱང་རལ].   

**Q:**  First- before you left, in Lhasa, wasn't there some meeting of the mimang.   

**A:**  Yes, there were meetings.   

**Q:**  About what? Leaving the city or staying and fighting in Lhasa? Maybe there were such talks?   

**A:**  There was no way of having connections with Lhasa from where [we were] since all the telephone lines were cut or down. There was no way that people could go back and forth. There was such a severe battle on and there was no way of going amidst it.   

**Q:**  So most people were in their houses?   

**A:**  Yes. Before that, when the uprising began, immediately the Command Center was formed. It had moved a bit later to the Shöl Parkhang. There the government officials and representatives of the three monasteries and the people's Association- the prominent people- were all there. However, the Chinese fire-power was so great that there was nobody to listen to orders or to give orders. What should one say, the whole set-up had fallen apart? Like I just mentioned, even at the Potala it was a situation where one chose whether to stay or go. So there was nobody giving orders to stay or go.   

**Q:**  So the Command Center and all had fallen apart?   

**A:**  Yes, fallen apart completely. Before that it was there. For example, the morning the Chinese started the war we were at the Potala, and one could see Lhasa and Shöl like the palm of one's hands. That evening there were many people burning incense for the gods [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ]. At dawn, just before sunrise, there were so many burning incense that the whole of Lhasa was just smoke. Then there were so many people, from every quarter, shouting "Victory to the gods," "Ki-ki-so-so." In one's mind one really had the feeling that if today we fought the war then we were sure to be victorious and one found pride in this. Nobody knew that the Chinese had so much fire-power. It was only the fire-power of the cannons that alarmed and dismayed everyone. The Chinese were also continuously firing their guns and automatics but nobody was bothered much about them. Even at Norbulinga there was the whole Command Center and everything. They had relations with the Command Center at Shöl. But even there the Chinese had so much fire-power that one could not see from the dust and everyone was scattered. Those that stayed in Norbulinga, Lhasa and the Potala were all caught by the Chinese and taken [prisoner]. People like us, went into Nyare and the following day Chinese planes came. No bombs were dropped from the planes.   

**Q:**  What kind of planes? Jets?   

**A:**  No, not jets. The next day we went to Phembo and arrived at Tölung. Then [we went] to Tsurphu [Tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] and landed at Sey. This was about 5 days after the uprising and then we arrived at the Jagsam [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ] ferry port. When we got there, the soldiers I had taken earlier were at Jagsamdruka as guards. As I mentioned we had volunteer people from other areas. So along with the others that came from Lhasa, we stayed there.   

**Q:**  What was your reason for staying there?   

**A:**  To hold on to territory in the Lhoka area. We were responsible for the Jagsam area. Then there were others at Kyinag [Tib. སྐྱིད་ནག], Jedeshöl [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ] and the Tsetang area. All along the Yarlungtsangpo various groups were responsible for defending the areas. At that time, many people came from Lhasa. Monks, soldiers and people, and they all stopped at Lhoka. Everyone was to stay on the river banks and protect the area. The southern area was to be protected and the idea was to fight from there and take over Lhasa later. Like a rebirth we stayed like that [in a defensive position]. Now the Chinese shelled Lhasa so much and it was easy. They (pre) positioned whatever they had and fired all at once. Now if they had to do this in the outlying areas, the Chinese did not have that much cannon power, and since the battle would be face-to-face, it was said that it was not going to be like it had been at Lhasa. We were staying like this and we were at the Jagsam area, and the Chinese would have to come from the Chushul side and the Sey area. Only then they would come to the ferry crossing at Jagsam. So the Chinese came to Sey while we were at Jagsam and we could see them. If we fired from our side, it was within range. So we fired our rifles as well as the bren-guns. The Chinese were dug-in in the misers' houses and they did not dare to come out. Then when they did come, for a while we fired and they did the same. We stayed like that for 5-6 days. Then one night, many reinforcements were sent. It seems like they were sent from Lhasa via Trip, then from Samye via Trip, via Jela towards Benzadruka. Most of them came in coracles sailing along the river. The Tibetan coracles were used as well as their rubber rafts. They sent so many that it was endless. Places like Kyinag, Gongkar, and Kyishong were easily over-run. They came in the boats, as well as those who had come earlier prepared. They prepared for this encounter and came. Now we were at the Jagsam ferry site and there the boats would not come right? We faced just the ones who came from Sey since the river flows down before Jagsam. The Jagsam water is the Tsangpo river. The river from Lhasa joins the Tsangpo at Lumpa and flows down right? That was east of us. At night even the ones at Sey got reinforcements. There were just so many of them. Before dawn it was said that Kyinag, Gongkar, and Jedeshöl were all lost and so now run away. Now if those positions were over-run and if we didn't flee, then we would get blocked like strangled. We were at Jagsam and if they came from Gongkar then we would get surrounded and there would be no escape. Anyway, we did not retreat until dawn saying that at dawn we will know the situation. So we told the soldiers to remain in their positions. We gave the instructions to our government troops via the trumpet. At sunrise we took a look at the river crossing where the boats were docked. The fields further off were just covered with Chinese. Then they fired their cannons at us and the place was filled with dust. Then when the withdrawal signal was given and the soldiers withdrew. We were the last to escape via the upper reaches of the Changthang [Tib. བྱང་ཐང]. If one crosses the pass then one reaches Yamdro [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག] Lake. That whole day we travelled and the next day we got to Drongdragtsa [Tib. འབྲོག་བྲག་རྩ]. When we were there, we got word that the Chinese were chasing us at close quarters. When we discussed what we should do, most were not interested in fighting the Chinese. So we said that those who want to flee should do so but we were going to try and stop the Chinese at the lower area of Drongdragtsa, a secure place where the land meets the lake. That night we stayed and early next day we backtracked to that place. Before dawn we took our positions. Along with us there was a group of Amdos and another group from Derge. Kungö Juchen Thubden [Tib. འཇུ་ཆེན་ཐུབ་བསྟན] was also there. When dawn broke, we saw the Chinese advancing. We agreed that we would not fire until the time came. Then we opened fire. From around sunrise to just past afternoon the fighting continued. Then the Chinese brought their artillery and many were going behind us. If they did that and came from behind, that would be a problem right? So just after mid-day we withdrew. When we did, night was approaching and when night came, all of our people were scattered. For example, our Gyantse Regiment [was scattered] and the same was true of the others, too. Some of our soldiers ended up on the road to Bhutan and others on the one towards Tsöna. Some went via Drigutang to Nyen [Tib. གཉན]. I went to Drigutang and came to this side. This I only learned later. At that particular period there was no knowing where they went. So we went to Drigutang and Nyen and when we got to Nyen Dragogön [Tib. brag sgo ? dgon] Monastery, Andru Jinda, Namseling, Trebela [Depön Tashi Bera] and many of them were there. They were forming groups to hold territory. We happened to be the group that would stay at Nyen Gubdü [Tib. ?]. We stayed there for a day and a night. Then it was said that we better not hang around since the people at Nyen Dragogön had withdrawn. We said that couldn't possibly be correct. The leaders of the Chushigandru were there and many government officials were there. And so were the heads of the regiments. So this could not be correct. They said. "It's true, really!" So we said it was better to find out and we sent people to check this out. When they returned they said that it was true and they had withdrawn. So we withdrew and went that way, and there was not a soul in sight. They had all withdrawn. When we got to Lhüntse Dzong some of the Trapchi soldiers were there. Kedram la was there. At the time I was a Shengo and they said the Gyantse Shengo la had come. They said, "Now what shall we do." So I said, "Now shouldn't we leave." They said, "That's right." We were just sitting here sort of about to leave. So we were going to leave and we all went together via Khatag [Tib. ?]. We were towards the tail end. We went via Nyen and Jora [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར]. When we got to Jora it was night. Now those who withdrew from Dragogön - Chushigandru, the government officials, and other prominent ones - they had planned to go straight to Tsöna. However, the Chinese had already arrived at Tsöna and so they backtracked. When they did that we met them on the way. In that area at night it was just absolutely packed with people, horses and animals. The place stunk with the smell of horses "hooves." So there was no way to go to Tsöna. One could not backtrack [north]. If we went via Jayü [Tib. བྱ་ཡུལ] there was no way that horses and mules could get through [the path too narrow]. So there was nothing to do except ascend the hills at Jora where there was no road at all. Everybody went that way. Then they stopped at Khatag where they rested for a while or something like that and went straight to the Mango [Tib. ?] pass. We went from Nyen down to Jora and stayed the night at the Jora monastery. The next day we crossed the pass at Khatag. People said that the others had left last night. We stayed at Khatag for a while and then continued. They could not get over the snow pass. My God, the snow mountains were just too much. Each peak was worse than the next. So some went ahead and made the path. On both sides of the ridge many items had fallen off, and so had many animals. My God, it was just too much. When we passed Khatag, just before the Indian border, there were quite a lot of our people there. What they were saying was that now we should return to fight. It was said that one should return to fight and that it would not do to go to India. Some said that people do not have to return, but all the arms must be left behind. Now, this was at the last moment right? If one wanted to fight, then it should have been done much earlier, right? So here we almost ended up in a fight. We said, "What's this? If you wanted to fight to stop the Chinese, to sacrifice one's life, then this should have been done right in the beginning. Now, here at the Indian border what's all this talk about fighting and leaving arms. There is no way of leaving it." And so there was almost a fight.   

**Q:**  Now who were the ones who were saying that?   

**A:**  They were the leaders of various groups.   

**Q:**  Chushigandru or from the military?   

**A:**  They were not from the military, but from the various groups [the Khamba, Chushigandru groups]. Yes, it was like that. So in this way we came to Mango. As I mentioned to you, we had to cross snow mountains. There were two or three of them [passes]. After the second pass or so, then one reaches the Indian border. The Indian guards were not allowing us to go at all. But our people bullied some of the border patrols and just went. If one considers the rank of the border guard - he may have been a Sibdhar [Subidhar] I think. He could not control us and he was in tears saying that "I have sent a telegram saying that you all have arrived. but I have not received any reply. But the people are going and so what kind of punishment am I going to get?" He was so sad saying that he's had it now [in trouble]. However, later it seems the reply came saying to let us through .   

**Q:**  Yes, he must have been so happy.   

**A:**  Yes . And it was like that.   

**Q:**  Yes, now I have a couple of short questions for you.   

**A:**  Yes, please ask. Whatever you have.   

**Q:**  There was a Shengo from Wangden named Lhakpa Gögye [Tib. ཁག་པ་རྒོད་སྐྱེས]. Did he come to India?   

**A:**  He was not able to come. He was arrested during the fight?   

**Q:**  In 1958?   

**A:**  In 1959, during the Lhasa battle.   

**Q:**  Later in 1957, there was talk about the Legjö Legung and it had been decided that the regiments would be no more [join People's Liberation Army], except the Küsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, except for the Gusung Regiment, all were to be dissolved.   

**Q:**  You mentioned something about- probably the oracle Tsangrel [Tib. གཙང་རལ], right.   

**A:**  Yes, it's oracle Tsangrel Gyechen [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  It was not Lamo Tsangpa [Tib. ལ་མོ་ཚངས་པ] was it?   

**A:**  No. It was called Tsangrel. It was a lha of Tsangrel. And so they went to consult and find out what to do.   

**Q:**  Now the military rupön and gyagpön went to consult and at that time who were they?   

**A:**  From the Trapchi, there was Gyagpön Pema something. They had to go as the representative of the regiment right?   

**Q:**  Wasn't it Pema Gyalpo [Tib. པད་མ་རྒྱལ་པོ].   

**A:**  No. Pema Gyalpo was the one who came to Lhoka with me. Oh, yes. It was Pema Künsang [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང] from Trapchi. Our father is called Gyagpön Kharwa Sambo [Tib. ?] [from the Gyantse Regiment]. From the Chadang Regiment, there was Gyagpön Tsering Lhagye la [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ལྷ་རྒྱལ]. From each regiment there was a letter writer. The Trapchi letter writer was Dewa la [Tib. སྡེ་པ་ལགས]. He came to India. From our [Gyantse] side, since our father had gone, he took me along.   

**Q:**  Is Dewa la still here in India.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. These days he is somewhere. I think around Darjeeling or so. I don't know who came from the Chadang Regiment. The Gusung Regiment was not there. So we went to consult Tsangrel.   

**Q:**  When you went to ask, what did the oracle say? That it will not be possible to return to the regiment?   

**A:**  Yes. We said that we had such orders regarding the dissolution of the military and no matter how much we petitioned our cause [they] would not listen to us. Therefore we were getting ready to make a direct (face-to-face) petition [Tib. གདོང་ཞུ] and so we wished to know how our case would fare. The oracle said that "You all should not worry at all. It will be decided by the wishes of Lobpön Thubwang Thönden [Tib. སློབ་དཔོན་ཐུབ་དབང་དོན་ལྡན] [the Dalai Lama] and there is no cause for you to be so concerned about this." The Tsangrel gave us a clear prophesy. So everyone was happy. Later we went to present the petition and there were two representatives from Trapchi and Gyantse at Tölung Tsurphu.   

**Q:**  When you say Tölung Tsurphu, you mean Tsurphu Karmapa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So, from Gyantse there was Shengo Pema Gyalpo and one soldier, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the soldier.   

**A:**  That I don't remember. There were two from Trapchi and I don't know their names.   

**Q:**  I see. You said that before the Chinese came there was a kind of permit for guns from the government. Was there really such a thing? When one says a permit, you are talking about one for private people, right?   

**A:**  The guns made by the British called long barrel [Tib. ཁ་རིང] and short barrel [Tib. ཁ་ཐུང], 303 Carbines and sten-guns, etc. All of these were not permitted to be kept by civilians whether they were monasteries, private people or traders. These were the arms for the government soldiers. Now the various other guns, the Russian made ones, European, Japanese and American- whatever the size they all had to have permits. This rule is country-wide.   

**Q:**  Now this was when the Chinese came.   

**A:**  No, this was before they came. A few years before. Before they came, there were also the 33 Military Codes [Tib. དམག་ཁྲིམས་དོན་ཚན] nationwide. It was during the time of Magji Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད], the one who came to India and died. Now, unlike the old days, these Codes are really something [good].   

**Q:**  We were just talking about guns. Generally the weapon that was used was mainly the 303s?   

**A:**  Yes, for the military. Then there was the 303 bren-gun.   

**Q:**  What's that?   

**A:**  An automatic.   

**Q:**  When one says 303, is that some [size] for bullets?   

**A:**  It is the width [bore size].   

**Q:**  Then there's a longer and a shorter.   

**A:**  The size of the barrel is the same. But the name for the early model is called long barrel. The later model was called short barrel.   

**Q:**  So what's the difference?   

**A:**  Not really much.   

**Q:**  Same bullets?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The weight, bolt action?   

**A:**  It is all the same. The body is a little different. Then there was the sten-gun, machine gun, Lewis-gun, these are automatics, right?   

**Q:**  What's the differences between the sten-gun and the bren-gun.   

**A:**  Now for the 303, for every shot you have to pull the bolt, right? The others are all automatic with magazines.   

**Q:**  How many bullets?   

**A:**  The machine-gun, the bullets are fed from the side.   

**Q:**  For that you need two people, right?   

**A:**  About three people. For the bren-gun and the sten-gun you need two people.   

**Q:**  How many bullets in the sten-gun?   

**A:**  It is a small one. It's a 9mm.   

**Q:**  Is the magazine loaded from below or on top.   

**A:**  Its loaded from the side and will shoot 30 bullets.   

**Q:**  Now, at that time Magji Jangjenloko [Tib. lcang can blo khog ?], Lobsang Yeshela and some officials had a secret organization, right?   

**A:**  Yes, a secret organization.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that there was Phala Drönyerchemmo, Depön Tashi Bera la, then a Magji, I don't know who, maybe Künsangtse.   

**A:**  He was the only one, Magji Jangjenloko.   

**Q:**  Yes, so he must be the one. Then there was Tseja Gyentsen la and so do you mean this [was an] organization?   

**A:**  It probably was. The reason I said it probably was - is because I was just a Shengo in the military and nothing more. Anyway, I took some soldiers and arms, and they needed someone to go secretly without the involvement of the military headquarters, the government and the regiments. So I sort of volunteered, and along with one dingpön and about 30-50 soldiers, went to Drigutang. All of them had the qualities of being potential instructors because if we were able to raise militia in the southern areas, then they had to be taught. So we took all good men. However, where this [whole idea] led to- the secret organization, I don't know exactly. However, Kungö Lobsang Yeshe la, our Kungö Depön [Ragashag], and Magji Lokela [Tib. བློ་སྐལ་ལགས] (Jangjenloko) were in it and this much I knew. They told me secretly that it was best to just go. So when I went I said that "I did not ask anybody. That today I myself went just on my own and nobody else is to be blamed for this." That if I was asked, then this work of ours would be in danger, and so I left on my own decision. Before I took off I left a letter stating this. This letter was left in the hands of Wangyal la [Tib. དབང་རྒྱལ་ལགས], a soldier from Trogawa who was to give it to the regiment and military headquarters.   

**Q:**  So today's, that's about it.   

