# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0020.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 60  
**Date of Birth:** 1933  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Namgyel Wangdu [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་འདུས] was a shengo in the Gyantse Regiment [Tib. ང་དང་དམག་སྒར] who was in Chamdo in 1950-51 and in Lhasa uprising in 1959. In this interview, he describes his time with the army in eastern Tibet in 1950-51 and the People's Party in Lhasa in 1952.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0020_01/H_0020_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You can start in 1949 or 1950, during this period where were you?   

**A:**  In 1949, we, the Gyantse Regiment, were in the area of the 39 nomadic tribes [Tib. ཚོ་པ་གསུམ་བཅུ་སོ་དགུ] in the north, in the Hor Bachen [Tib. ཧོར་སྦྲ་ཆེན] area called Khyungpo Serta [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་གསེར་རྟ]. This is on the border with Nangchen and so we were in charge of protecting this border between the 39 tribes and Nangchen which was in Qinghai province.   

**Q:**  I see, so you were in the Gyantse Regiment.   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, my father was a gyagpön [in the regiment] and I think I was about 16-17 years old, but I had already joined the army at a young age. Before Chamdo was lost, at Riwoche [Tib. རི་བོ་ཆེ], the Jadang commander Phulungwa [Tib. ཇ་དང་མདའ་དཔོན་ཕུ་ལུང་བ] was there, right? It was Lhalu's order that we join up with Phulungwa as their reinforcements. So when we went there, there were things to be handed over to the Drongdrag Regiment. After we left Khyungpo and before we reached Riwoche, we reached the place called Shalag [Tib.?]. We heard that Chamdo was lost and that Ngabö and all of them were already arrested in Drugugön [Tib. གྲུ་གུ་དགོན]. So we were not able to go down and we stayed in the Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན] area for almost a month. At that time, Lhalu had come from down there [Chamdo] and was at the Shotalhosum [Tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] area. This area included Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ], Pembar [Tib. 'pal 'bar] and Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང]. He sent an order through a rider saying that we should withdraw our troops to protect the main route at Shotalhosum. In the Khyungpo Tengchen area there were the Jadang [Tib. ཇ་དང] troops who had fled from down there [Chamdo] along with the rural militia of Karnagsasum [Tib.?]. So we were to hand over responsibility to them and we were ordered to come to Shotalhosum. So like this we were withdrawn to the south and were told to travel day and night. We stayed there for about 10-15 days. Once again, the Chinese came from Chamdo via Lhodzong, and then they came to Shopando and to Bari. From morning until sunset, we had to engage in quite a severe battle. We lost some of our soldiers and it was said that the Chinese suffered very heavy casualties. So such an incident took place. From there, the Chinese withdrew down to Lhodzong and then to Shopando, and we stayed in Lhatse around Pembar for about 2-3 months. When the 17-Point Agreement was signed and all was done, our regiment was ordered by the government to evacuate via Kongpo Giamda. Since Lhalu was to stay there (at Giamda), some of us were to stay there as his bodyguards and the rest were to return to Lhasa. So about half stayed as bodyguards for 4-5 months and the other half went to Lhasa. When we got to Lhasa, I think it was around the beginning of 1951, and then the Chinese arrived at Lhasa.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama was at Yadong and had come up, and also Zhang Jingwu had come. Had you already come up by then?   

**A:**  They arrived just after we had. When Zhang Jingwu came, I remember we were told that we, the regiments, had to line up. And so we went to Gyetseluding [Tib. skted tshal klu lding] [to greet him].   

**Q:**  At that time, how old were you?   

**A:**  Probably, I was 18 years old. Now I am 59. Then the year 1951 passed in that way. There was the Gusung Regiment [Tib. སྐུ་སྲུང], the Trapchi regiment and there was the Gyantse Regiment. There was the former Police Regiment recruited from the Lhangam Phünsum [Tib. ལྷ་ངམ་ཕུན་གསུམ], that is to say, from Lhatse [Tib. ལྷ་རྩེ], Ngamring [Tib. ངམ་རིང] and Phüntsoling [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང]. Later, this regiment returned [to Tsang] and the Chadang Simchung Magar [Tib. ཆ་དང་གཟིམ་ཆུང་དམག་སྒར] was told to take the responsibility of the police. During the interim period before the Lhangam Phünsum's time was finished and they handed over police duties to the Chadang Regiment, we, the Gyantse Regiment were told to be the police for about a year. In the meanwhile, a large number of Chinese soldiers came up. I heard that in the side document (codicil) of the 17-Point Agreement, it was written that the Chinese would not be allowed to send more than 1 army [Ch. jun] of soldiers. But later they sent a large number of soldiers which in total was more that 1 army. There were also many Chinese soldiers in the Tsang area. At that time, the Tibetan Government had to kind of lend a large amount of grain to the Chinese from its granaries. It was said that the (Tibetan) government was selling all the grain to the Chinese. Therefore, not only did the price of grain increase, but the prices of all things went up rapidly and enormously. Just before the Chinese arrival, it was about 10-15 sang for one khe of barley. After the Chinese arrival, in 1952, it had gone up to 125-30 sang for a khe of barley. Consequently, if a large number of Chinese would come to Tibet, the Chinese would take over the political power and then it would be very bad and not right. So the people could not live peacefully like that and started opposing the Chinese everywhere, not only in Lhasa. Then in Lhasa, the Water-Dragon Shide People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་བཞི་སྡེའི་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ] was started. The Association meetings were held in Shide Monastery. This People's Association was saying that the Chinese said that they had come to Tibet to help the Tibetans and to develop Tibet, but in the 1-2 years since the Chinese arrival, leave alone developing Tibet, they had caused tremendous sufferings for the people. Because of the large number of Chinese sent to Tibet, the prices of commodities had gone up, which made the livelihood of the people very bad. So the People's Association demanded that the Chinese troops should be withdrawn. This was their main demand. In that tshogpa, there were monks from Sera and Drepung, and especially from the army regiments. However, if they [the soldiers] joined it openly, it might harm the unity between Tibetans and Chinese. But there was talk that the regiments were also secretly involved in that [Association], and that they had become a fully united front. I don't remember which of the rupön and depön came from the Gusung and Trapchi Regiments, but from our regiment, the representative was the shengo [Tib. ཞལ་ངོ] called Lhakpa Gökye [Tib. ལྷག་པ་རྒོད་སྐྱེས] who was from Wangden [Tib. དབང་ལྡན]. I couldn't compose the documents because I was young, but I could copy them and stick up the posters around the Barkor Street. So I was sent as the partner of Lhakpa Gökye and I joined the People's Association in Shide, and went there to copy and stick up the documents. There were some soldiers from Trapchi like Major Jabo Tashi Wangdü [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་དབང་འདུས] and some Shengo. Among the main people, there was the Drepung Loling [Loseling][Tib. བློ་གླིང] Guge Jamyang Dawa [Tib. གུགེ་འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ], the Sera Mey chandzö Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], the Gomang monk Drubtola [Tib. གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ལགས], the Sera Mey Chagdrung Lodrö Phüntso [Tib. ཕྱག་དྲུང་བློ་གྲོས་ཕུན་ཚོགས] and the Karkhang chöndze Phüntso Tashi [Tib. བཀར་ཁང་ཆོས་མཛད་ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. These 5 were the main people. Among the members, there was Shöl Gomdzö Jola [Tib. ཞོལ་གོ་མཛོད་ཇོ་ལགས] and Tongsum Jola [Tib. སྟོང་གསུམ་ཇོ་ལགས]. From among the women, there was Tsarong Künsang la [Tib. ཚ་རོང་ཀུན་བཟང་ལགས]. She was living in Tsarong, but later she came to Gurteng [Tib. གུར་སྟེང] as a bride. So she was called Gurteng Künsang la.   

**Q:**  At times she was also known as Kündeling Künsang la, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then there was Sera Mey's Ngawang Tempa [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ] and the representatives from the regiments in Lhasa, but I don't remember their names except for those I have already mentioned. The meeting took place before the 2nd month in the Water-Dragon Year, just before the Tsongjö Procession [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད་སེར་སྦྲང]. The petition was to be given on the 5th of the 2nd month and they did submit the petition. Before this, they wanted to consult internally [with the government] so on the day of the meeting of the Prime Minister and the kalön [Tib. སྲིད་བཀའ་ལྷན་ཚོགས] at Tse [Potala], the 5 people [leaders] went to the Potala, and told them how and why the organization was formed, and what it's aims were. Then they spoke about the petition and requested their internal advice. When they went to the Potala it seemed that the Prime Ministers said that it was very good. Specifically, Lukhangwa gave advice saying how good it is that you are doing these things and that you must pursue the matter to completion. Besides this, when they went to the Potala there were others who said that this was very good and that Namgyal Tratsang fed them rice mixed with butter and sweet potatoes [Tib. གྲོ་མ་འབྲས་སིལ]. So when they returned they were very pleased and said that the higher ups were also of the same mind. The next day, or the day after, they went to submit the petition to the Tibetan and Chinese authorities. The petition was given and accepted by the Kashag, and Zhang Jingwu or Zhang Guohua. So just the petition was handed in, that's all. A day or two later they were summoned to the Kashag where they were told that the People's Association was not at all correct and it was destroying the unity between China and Tibet, and the hands of foreign imperialists may be involved. Consequently, the People's Association could not be formed in the future and it could not meet then. Not only was such an order given, but the 5 leaders were detained at the Police Regiment for the time being. They confessed and guaranteed that they wouldn't hold that kind of meeting any more so they were later released. Because of this incident, as well as others, like the converting of the Tibetan army into the People's Liberation Army, the hoisting of Chinese flags on the regiments instead of the Tibetan flags and other things, which Lukhangwa and the important personnel vehemently opposed and gave whole-hearted advice without any fear of the Chinese, it was said that this People's Association was instigated by the two Silön [actually they were sitsab] and that they were influenced [Tib. གཡོ་འགུལ] by the foreign imperialists and that they were destroying the unity between China and Tibet and all bad things. And so they [Chinese] insisted that they [the sitsab] should resign and after 2-3 months, they had to resign. From this time on, the Dalai Lama now was directly heading affairs. This was the Water-Dragon Year People's Association. When this People's Association was organized, mainly from the three great monasteries (Tib. སེནདྲེགསུམ [Tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ]) to everywhere, there was a great surge [Tib. འུར་ལངས] (of enthusiasm). The monks wore laymen's clothes, and with guns and swords they trickled into Lhasa one after another. Since so many were arriving, the Chinese were very frightened and suspicious and alarmed and wherever they [the Chinese] were staying, they made bunkers on their houses as if war might break out tomorrow or the day after. When this happened, the various regiments could not just stay still and so they also had to build bunkers. For a few days in Lhasa it was as if there were no shopkeepers and since so many people came, the situation was such that any day there was the feeling that war might break out. Anyway, things cooled down. However, our organization created such difficulties and received a very severe order, and we were banned from continuing our activities.   

**Q:**  After the Kashag examined the issue, they ordered the banning of the organisation. After this, it seemed like it was difficult to organize in Tibet and the thought of going to India in Kalimpong arose. It was said that at Shigatse, Karkhang Chöndze made a slip of the tongue, and this led to his and his servants arrest, including 5 members in Lhasa.   

**A:**  The 5 that were arrested were the main leaders of the Water-Dragon Year People's Association. Later, after the examination and order banning the organization, they were compelled to accept the judgement. Later, most probably there wasn't any members from this organization that went to India and formed an organisation. In 1956 or so, just after the Tibet Autonomous Region began [answer was not finished].   

**Q:**  You are referring to the 2nd People's Association, right?   

**A:**  At this time, there was Alo Chöndze, Bumtang Trunyi and Shigatse Lhabju. They had an organization. They were released on the guarantee of the three great monasteries, but Lhabju died in prison. [After their release] Alo Chöndze and the others definitely went to Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  As you are mentioning, the people first met in Shide.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Mainly, the 5 of them were there, right? So regarding the petition and all, they must have all discussed it there, right?   

**A:**  Regarding that, they met almost a month before the petition was handed in.   

**Q:**  Yes, and you mentioned that the Kashag was meeting at the Potala, right?   

**A:**  The Kashag normally met in the south side of the Jokhang. But at times they met at the Potala. Sometimes they also had to attend the Drungja in the Potala. At times the Kashag and the Silön together also had to discuss things. So when it was said that it was a time when the Kashag and the Silöns were going to meet, we all heard about this and we took this opportunity to meet them at the Potala. That's how the 5 leaders went there.   

**Q:**  So regarding the petition, did they give any advice?   

**A:**  We said that this was our aim and our plan was to submit a petition and we would like to jointly petition the Chinese and the Tibetans. When this was said, the Kashag and the Silön said that this was a good idea. As I mentioned earlier, Lukhangwa specially advised them, so later the Chinese must have heard about this and it was from this angle that the Chinese were especially harsh on the two Silön. In addition to their other grievances against the Silön, the People's Organization also was used to blame the Silön saying that they were behind it.   

**Q:**  Later, did the People's leaders have any connection with lay and monk officials?   

**A:**  It is possible that they had relations secretly, but openly it was a little bit difficult. It was a situation where our government had to be extremely careful. Likewise, the Dalai Lama was very careful, doing his best to work within the terms of 17-Point Agreement. He was hoping that the Chinese would undertake development in Tibet. The Chinese made the 17-Point Agreement as a tool to fool us. In reality, when they first came, they showed themselves to be humble, well-disciplined and good. Then they gradually got worse and worse, and more and more powerful, and finally things were unworkable [Tib. བྱེད་ཉན་འདི་ཉན་མེད་པ]. When such a situation approached, if our government would be very forceful, and say bad things and break the friendly relations, then since the Chinese had already arrived with a lot of soldiers our government thought if there would be a big disturbance, that it would have very bad consequences. Therefore, they tried their best to be very diplomatic. So we were in this situation. Anyway, this was the opinion of the government, but the people did not agree with that. The people wanted to see the Chinese practice what they were preaching, like saying that they have come to help and improve Tibet. And, as mentioned in the 17-Point Agreement, it was said that if the people did not agree, then they would stop doing things. So the people thought that the Chinese would implement what they said, and felt that the Chinese must do what they preached and it would be not be okay if they didn't implement that. So that is what the people were thinking all the time. Although the government and the people had no disagreements on the principle issues, there was quite an imbalance in their approaches. The government wanted to make [good] relations all the time, but the people felt that something had to be done and that we could't just sit around. So in this way time ticked by and the Chinese got stronger and stronger. For example, in Lhasa, at first when the Chinese came, they had to stay in many vacant residences [Tib. སྡོད་སྒར་ཐོལ་འཁྲོལ] used by the previous Chinese troops who were sent back to China. The government loaned these areas to the Chinese. Later, besides this, the various aristocratic households began to sell their houses. There were also many who loaned their houses. Then the best parks were also loaned or sold to them and the Chinese occupied them. So in this way, many Chinese came and their numbers grew, and the motor road from Qinghai to Tibet [Tib. མཚོ་བོད་རླངས་འཁོར] and the one from Kham to Tibet [Tib. ཁམས་བོད་རླངས་འཁོར] were made in great urgency. The Tibetan government was part of this as they sent personnel to make the roads and the airport, etc. The planes were arriving at Dam [Tib. འདམ] airport and vehicles were coming from the north and from Kham, and then the Chinese got very powerful and one almost could not move. So that was the situation.   

**Q:**  Now the People's Association started and so from your side, how did you first hear about the people organizing and then join it?   

**A:**  It was not a case where I specifically heard that the people were organizing. However, our regiment's leaders and our people's leaders seem to have been secretly in touch. Since the organization was meeting in Shide, a sort of representative of the regiment needed to be sent. Since it would be too conspicuous to send the rupön and the gyagpön, as I mentioned earlier, the Shengo Wangden Lhakpa Gögeyla was sent and I was sent as a kind of clerk to copy the posters. That's how I got there.   

**Q:**  Was this the first meeting? They must have met earlier, right?   

**A:**  They met a month before the petition was handed in.   

**Q:**  When the meeting took place, how many people were there?   

**A:**  The were the 5 main leaders and generally there were always about 20-30 people at the meetings. So it was said at the meeting that so and so labrang and so and so aristocrats agreed to make contributions to provide carpets and cushions. And so and so aristocratic households supplied the foods for the meetings. There were many like that and now I can't remember (laughter) which labrang and which aristocrats made contributions. At the meeting place, even thankas were provided and besides that whatever was needed there were so many who came forward to be the sponsors and so it was said, now it will be very good, and they all appreciated this very much. It was in good shape as everybody was supporting it. Later, after the notice was given and the problems arose, they didn't let the People's Association meet again. Otherwise, if one looks from the way things developed, there were various labrang, various tratsang from the three great monasteries, aristocratic households, traders - they all voluntarily came forward and it looked like it was going to be just excellent and everyone was happy.   

**Q:**  So it was becoming very widespread, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Today that's all I have to ask you.   

