# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0012.01  
##  : with Tsering, Sonam Wangmo, and Penam [Tib. ཚེ་རིང, བསོད་ནམས་དབང་མོ, སྤེན་རྣམ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Sogang, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** August 2000  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gyatso  
**Name:** Tsering [Tib. ཚེ་རིང]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1922  
**Name:**   
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
**Name:** Penam [Tib. སྤེན་རྣམ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 64  
**Date of Birth:** 1936  
**Name:**  na  
**Gender:**   
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Interviewee [A1] was born in Shangtö Milung in Tsang to a treba family. When she was about sixteen years old, she began working as a maid-servant for the Sogang aristocratic family [the lord of Sogang]. At nineteen, the interviewee [A1] was sent to Lhasa to work as a maid-servant to the family of a lord. After giving birth to her daughter, she returned home. In this interview, she describes some of the events of the 1959 revolt in Lhasa, and then how she received land during the democratic reforms, and how the Mutual Aid Teams were started. Interviewee [A2] was born in Samar Jang and was a servant of a feudal lord during the old society. Serving her lord, she lived for a time in Lhasa, Chamdo and Dram. In this interview, she compares pre-reform and post-reform conditions. Interviewee [A3] was born in Sogang during the old society and worked as a servant for a relative of his in Chukhang until the age of twenty-four. During the period of democratic reforms, he worked on road construction. In this interview, he describes setting up the Mutual Aid Team and the People’s Commune. During the Cultural Revolution, he became a Red Guard and talks about the destruction of religious objects.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0012_01/OR_0012_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  [A1]..., could you tell me your life story from the beginning in detail, about the Reforms and the Cultural Revolution and so on?   

**A1:**  I have a very bad memory, but I will never forget the bad things. I was born in Shangtö [Tib. ཤངས་སྟོད] Milung. In the old society we didn't have much land, but we had to work doing corvée labor. When I was small, we didn't have enough food to eat and we had to take loans. After I grew up, I worked as a trenyog.   

**Q:**  How long did you live in Milung? Up to what age?   

**A1:**  Up to the age of fifteen to sixteen probably I stayed in Milung. After that, I worked as a servant for other people.   

**Q:**  Up to the age fifteen to sixteen, what did you do at home?   

**A1:**  I would collect some fuel and sell it because we didn't have enough food to eat. I was doing something to help my family.   

**Q:**  You had some land in Milung, right?   

**A1:**  Yes. We had some land, but the area was not big and we had to work as a [corvée] tax.   

**Q:**  Were you a miser of Sogang?   

**A1:**  Yes. Everyday one person had to work as a corvée laborer for the Sogang family. And we had to pay the taxes according to the land. At the age of seventeen to eighteen, the ngadag called me to become their maid-servant. They were giving food to eat, but they were not giving any wages or clothing.   

**Q:**  When you were a maid-servant, what did you mainly have to do?   

**A1:**  I had to fetch water and fuel, and I had to serve the kungö tea and chang.   

**Q:**  Before that, you had been living with your parents and relatives and then all of a sudden you became a maid-servant, so at that point what was your thinking?   

**A1:**  When I was at home, we didn't have enough food to eat. At the time of the harvest, the loan collectors would come and take away the barley. But when I was a maid-servant, I could get a salary. Although it was not enough to be full, but I didn't need to worry about not getting food to eat.   

**Q:**  When you were a maid-servant, what did you have to do beginning from the morning?   

**A1:**  After getting up, I had to fetch water for the offering bowls and then make the water offering in the room where the lord lived. Then I would take care of the some of the animals. They made me spin wool during my spare time.   

**Q:**  Did you have to do any heavy labor?   

**A1:**  At that time, there was not that much heavy labor.   

**Q:**  How was the food?   

**A1:**  The food was not as good as nowadays.   

**Q:**  Was the food different from the food that the lord was eating?   

**A1:**  The tsamba we ate was lentil tsamba which was considered poorer in quality than barley, and the tea was a mustard oil tea. They would put oil in the tea instead of butter. We would eat bag with it. That's all.   

**Q:**  Did you have food enough to be full?   

**A1:**  It was barely enough for me.   

**Q:**  Did the lord give you clothing?   

**A1:**  We had to make our own clothes.   

**Q:**  Did you get a salary?   

**A1:**  Yes, it was one daso of tsamba per day.   

**Q:**  Could you give that salary to your home?   

**A1:**  I had to eat it. They would give me some mustard oil tea in the morning and in the evening some porridge. We didn't have anything to eat.   

**Q:**  What would you eat for lunch?   

**A1:**  There was no lunch for us. In the mid-morning they would give one ladle of roasted barley for the maids. And they would give one clay jug of chang to the male servants. We didn't have tsamba to eat for lunch. Until the evening, we didn't have food to eat.   

**Q:**  Till then what would you do?   

**A1:**  We had to do wool work during that time.   

**Q:**  Did the kungö and his family members insult and abuse you?   

**A1:**  They did not do that.   

**Q:**  How long did you serve as a maid-servant?   

**A1:**  I served as a maid in this place just for a year or so. After that I was called to Lhasa to serve the kungö and his wife.   

**Q:**  How old were you when you went to Lhasa?   

**A1:** I was probably nineteen years old.   

**Q:**  What was the relation between the lord in this place and the kungö in Lhasa?   

**A1:**  The son of the kungö was in Lhasa and his wife was also from Lhasa. They were officials in the dewashung. I had to cook food although my cooking skills were not good and I had to wash their clothes. Also, when the master [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] would go out I had to follow them.   

**Q:**  Did the kungö in Lhasa treat you well? Were you alone when you were sent to Lhasa?   

**A1:**  I was the new maid-servant. Before that there were some servants. Altogether there were three to four servants there.   

**Q:**  When all of a sudden you were told to go to Lhasa, didn't you say that you did not want to go to Lhasa?   

**A1:**  I was not willing to go, but since he was my lord [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] I didn't have any choice but to go.   

**Q:**  Did your family say that they were not going to send you?   

**A1:**  It was impossible for them to say that. Then I went to Lhasa. I didn't have clothes like nowadays. I was just wearing an inferior chupa and went to Lhasa. At that point, we didn't have shirts to wear. We just wore a sleeveless chupa without the shirt. In Lhasa, we had shirts to wear and the food was also a little bit better than here. At that point, we were just going through the motions of saying that we were glad, but actually there was nothing to be glad about because we were maid-servants.   

**Q:**  Did you have to take your clothes?   

**A1:**  In Lhasa they would give us some used shirts and trousers.   

**Q:**  Did you have to take your food from home?   

**A1:**  The tsamba and the barley were brought from the shiga. In Lhasa they would buy the food that should be bought from the market.   

**Q:**  What did you mainly have to do in Lhasa?   

**A1:**  I was cooking food for the kungö and making tea for them, and I was washing clothes. In Lhasa we didn't have other things to do because it was in the city.   

**Q:**  When you were cooking, did they criticize you for not cooking well?   

**A1:**  They would scold me a little bit.   

**Q:**  Did they beat you?   

**A1:**  They didn't beat me.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the kungö in Lhasa?   

**A1:**  He was called Phüntso la. The mother of that household was the mother of Jigme la [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས]. She was from the big kudrak family called Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག]. All of the family members of Yuthok have fled abroad.   

**Q:**  You were working like that all the time right?   

**A1:**  Then the revolt took place in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How long did you serve as a maid-servant? Until the revolt?   

**A1:**  After five to six years of serving them, I gave birth to my daughter. Therefore, they told me to go back [to the shiga].   

**Q:**  What was your daughter's father doing at that point?   

**A1:**  He was also a servant.   

**Q:**  Where was he from?   

**A1:**  He was from Nar [Tib. སྣར] in Shigatse.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for sending you back?   

**A1:**  Because I had the baby they thought I would not be useful for them. Therefore, they sent me back.   

**Q:**  When you had the baby, did they scold and beat you?   

**A1:**  They didn't beat me. They were scolding me saying that now I would be useless and they sent me back.   

**Q:**  Did they send both of you back?   

**A1:**  No. They sent me and the baby. They didn't send the father of the baby back.   

**Q:**  The father was also their servant right?   

**A1:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was he doing at that point?   

**A1:**  He was the servant of the kungö. He had to follow wherever the kungö went and he had to clean the rooms.   

**Q:**  When you were sent back, did they take you back?   

**A1:**  I was sent back with the muleteers. They said that when my daughter was grown up, I had to come back to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  After five years, when you came back home, were there any changes?   

**A1:**  There were no changes. It was the same old society.   

**Q:**  Did you go back home?   

**A1:**  No, I didn't. I went to live with my paternal aunt who was a nun in a nunnery.   

**Q:**  Why didn't you go back home?   

**A1:**  At that point, my parents had passed away and the relatives were not so good. Therefore, I didn't want to go to my home. There were people in Lhasa telling me to stay with them but my paternal aunt treated me very well when I was small and at that point there was no one helping her. So I went to live with her. After that the revolt took place. When I was living with my aunt, I went to work for other people during the spring and the autumn seasons. Otherwise, I wouldn't have food to eat. After my daughter reached five years of age, I was called back to Lhasa with the muleteers.   

**Q:**  After you came back to Lhasa, did you do the same work in the family?   

**A1:**  My daughter and I were given to the sister of Jigme la's mother to serve her as a maid-servant. The work was almost the same. After four years, the revolt took place in Lhasa   

**Q:**  That was the revolt in Lhasa right?   

**A1:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A1:**  I was probably forty-nine to fifty years old. I don't remember my age at that time.   

**Q:**  During those four years before the revolt, what work did you do?   

**A1:**  The work was the same, cooking, washing and cleaning. When the kungö would go to attend ceremonies in Norbulinga and the Potala Palace, I had to keep watch in the house.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in that family?   

**A1:**  There was the couple of the kungö and his wife, two servants and me. Then the revolt took place and the movement called the "Oppose Three and Exempt Two [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ་གསུམ་དང་ཆག་ཡངས་གཉིས]" was held and they said that we didn't need to serve the kudrak. All of the servants were called to the meeting. After studying all about those policies, I came back home in the eleventh month.   

**Q:**  What happened in Lhasa when the revolt broke out?   

**A1:**  The revolt took place all of a sudden.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, how did it start?   

**A1:**  In the beginning, it was said that they fired artillery at Sera Monastery from Trip [Tib. གྲིབ]. We heard the sound of the artillery at night. It was said that Ngabö Ngawang Jigme [Tib. ང་ཕོད་ངག་དབང་འཇིགས་མེད] was in China. Our kungö went to Ngabö's house in Lhasa. Before that, they were saying there were bad people doing something. Before they [the kungö and his wife] left, they told us that we should keep watch on the house. There would not be any disturbances and they said in case some kind of disturbance occurred, we should remain in the house. At the front of our house was the Government's Bank and at the backside there was the [?] Regiment. After that, they were shooting a lot of guns. When they were shooting artilleries, the windows and the brass ladles hanging on the water containers were shaking and making sounds. We could no longer stay in the house so we dug a deep pit in the orchard and we covered it with a big canvas and hid in that pit. That was better.   

**Q:**  Did you lock the door?   

**A1:**  No, the pit was just near to the house. We had barricaded the door so no one could come in. As you know, the revolt was put down in two to three days. Then it was said that the war was over. They were blowing a trumpet.   

**Q:**  When you were working as a maid-servant, would they let you go out sometimes to the market or just for wandering around and visiting people?   

**A1:**  We had to go to the market to buy meat and vegetables.   

**Q:**  Would they give you the money?   

**A1:**  Yes, they would tell us to prepare this and that food and do the shopping.   

**Q:**  Were there many things to buy in the market?   

**A1:**  Yes, there were many things in the market.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were called a shendama, right?   

**A1:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What does that mean?   

**A1:**  That means the personal maid of a kudrak's wife.   

**Q:**  What did you have to do when you were serving the kungö's wife?   

**A1:**  I had to help her when she was dressing. And I had to follow her when she would go out.   

**Q:**  Was that equal to the simpön, the personal servant of the kungö?   

**A1:**  Yes, the maid of the wife was called shendama.   

**Q:**  Did the kungö's wife treat you well?   

**A1:**  She treated me well. She would just scold me a little bit when something went wrong. But she never beat me or scolded me seriously.   

**Q:**  You had to help her when she was dressing, right? What else did you have to do?   

**A1:**  I had to make suggestions whether she was dressed well or not. After coming back, I had to fold her clothes.   

**Q:**  Did she wear a patrug headdress ornament?   

**A1:**  No. She didn't have a patrug.   

**Q:**  After the revolt, how long did you still work in Lhasa?   

**A1:**  I worked for a long time. Then I came back home in the eleventh month.   

**Q:**  Did you came back just after the revolt?   

**A1:**  No. I attended the study session concerning the "Oppose Three and Exempt Two" [campaign] in Lhasa. After that I went back. When I came home, they were beginning to study that policy in the countryside. After I came to the nunnery, the nuns were pulled down and they gave me this house. All of the servants were given houses. My aunt died in this place. She was eighty-eight or eighty-nine years old when she died.   

**Q:**  After you came back, did they give you land?   

**A1:**  Yes, they gave me land, a house and animals. I was plowing the land with other people like in a cooperative. And they gave me some money to buy farming tools. But I couldn't buy the tools and the money was spent like that.   

**Q:**  Your daughter also got the land right?   

**A1:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Now, where is she?   

**A1:**  She is in Khangmar [Tib. ཁང་དམར] doing wool work.   

**Q:**  There are only two of you in the family?   

**A1:**  I also have a granddaughter. She is sixteen years old. She went to tend cows.   

**Q:**  When you came back, had they already divided the lands?   

**A1:**  No, they hadn't. They hadn't done the "Oppose Three and Exempt Two." After that, they divided the lands. If I had stayed in Lhasa, I would not have gotten the land. So I came back home.   

**Q:**  At the time of the Mutual Aid Team, were you here?   

**A1:**  Yes, five to six households merged together and set up the Mutual Aid Team. In the team, the households who had plowing animals plowed the fields and the households who didn't have plowing did the manual farm work. And we also did the harvesting, helping each other. After that it was said that we had to set up the rukhag or the People's Commune. It seemed kind of good for the people who didn't have farming tools. The households who didn't have many laborers could only get the ration grain. They couldn't get the work point grain [Tib. སྐར་འབྲུ]. It seemed that the rukhag was good for some people and it was not good for some people. After the rukhag, the system of gentsang was implemented. At the time of the reforms, we got good fields but at the time of gentsang, they were doing reckless things when dividing the fields, [gave her the fields that were easy to be damaged by flooding] so our biggest field was damaged by flooding. So we had only one big field and two small fields for three people. Actually, three people only had the field of two people. Therefore, I was facing hardships because of not having enough fields.   

**Q:**  Do you have any relatives in your original home?   

**A1:**  I have only one nephew who is a cadre in Panam County. There is only one relative in my original home who was also not related very closely. Otherwise, all of them have come to that family from outside.   

**Q:**  When you were living in Lhasa, did you come home to see your relatives?   

**A1:**  They would not let me go home, even when my parents were sick. And my parents didn't dare to call me because the lord was powerful.   

**Q:**  After you came back, you lived alone with your daughter right?   

**A1:**  Yes. My daughter was also living alone with me. My daughter was born in the Year of the Dog. She is forty-three years old. At the time of the rukhag, even elderly people had to go to work carrying walking sticks because of the work points [the need to earn work points]. At that point, I would get seven work points. The better workers were getting eight work points and the younger people got ten work points. If the rukhag were still in existence, I would have to go to work carrying a walking stick, but now I don't need to go to work.   

**Q:**  Your name is A1, right?   

**A1:**  Yes, A1.   

**Q:**  You were born in the Year of the Dog, right?   

**A1:**  I was born in the Year of the Pig. My daughter was born in the dog year.   

**Q:**  Now you are seventy-eight years old, right?   

**A1:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you get this house?   

**A1:**  In the past, there used to be a prison here. Later this house was built. All of the servants were given houses from the house of the ngadag. After that, the new names of those households were given according to the previous names that they used to call the rooms in the past. For example, the household that is living in the Protective Deity Temple Gönkhang is called Gönkhang. The household that is living in the room where they made chang, is called the Changgong. My household is called A1 because I lived in a room with two pillars that they used to call A1.   

**Q:**  When you got the house, you were probably glad because in the old society you didn't have any land or a house?   

**A1:**  Yes. As I mentioned above, all the households who have names didn't have any fields, and some of them just had very small rooms for three people. But afterwards, they got an equal share of land and houses.   

**Q:**  Your name is A2 right?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A2:**  I am eighty years old.   

**Q:**  In what animal year were you born?   

**A2:**  I was born in the Year of the Bird.   

**Q:**  Are you a native of this place?   

**A2:**  Yes. I was born in Samarchang [Tib. ས་དམར་བྱང]. I was a trenyog of the ngadag. I got something during the reforms.   

**Q:**  In 1959, how old were you?   

**A2:**  In that year, I was forty years old.   

**Q:**  Before that you had been working as a trenyog, right?   

**A2:**  Before that, when I was a child, I was living with my parents. Because my parents were poor, at the age of twenty I had to go to work as a servant for other people.   

**Q:**  When you were working as a servant what did you mainly have to do?   

**A2:**  I had to do farming.   

**Q:**  Did they pay you wages?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did they pay for the wages?   

**A2:**  They would pay barley. They would not pay money.   

**Q:**  How much did they pay for working a whole day?   

**A2:**  It was not really a daily wage. I had to work for them from the harvest to the threshing. And they would pay the wages for that.   

**Q:**  How many years did you work as a servant?   

**A2:**  From the age of thirteen or fourteen up to the age of twenty I was working as a servant. I used to work as a servant during the spring and the autumn. In the winter season, there was not much work to do so I would stay at home.   

**Q:**  Did you have lands?   

**A2:**  No, we didn't have lands.   

**Q:**  How did you manage your livelihood?   

**A2:**  I was just working as a servant and making a living.   

**Q:**  How many family members did you have?   

**A2:**  There were about five to six people.   

**Q:**  All of you didn't have any land, right?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What would the other family members at home [do?]  

**A2:**  One person had to work as a trenyog.   

**Q:**  When you were working as a trenyog, would they pay you wages?   

**A2:**  They would just give us food. Otherwise, they didn't pay anything.   

**Q:**  How many children do you have now?   

**A2:**  I didn't have any children so I adopted a girl from one of my relatives and took the doctor as the magba.   

**Q:**  You have been living alone all the time, right?   

**A2:**  I was working as a trenyog of the kungö and my parents were working as trenyog. At the time of the reforms, we got the land and a house, so I adopted this girl when she was small.   

**Q:**  Where was she born?   

**A2:**  She was born in Chung.   

**Q:**  Is this the house that you got at the time of the reforms?   

**A2:**  Yes. My brother and sister and my husband were all trenyog. So we got the share of land like other people. And the house was given from the ngadag's house. It was about two pillars [in size].   

**Q:**  Was your husband a muleteer?   

**A2:**  Yes, he was a muleteer.   

**Q:**  Was he a chief muleteer?   

**A2:**  Yes, he was the muleteer for the ngadag.   

**Q:**  Where did he go to transport loads?   

**A2:**  He was transporting loads between Phari [Tib. ཕག་རི] and Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did he go to India?   

**A2:**  No, he didn't. When the ngadag would travel, he had to serve them.   

**Q:**  How many years did he work as a muleteer?   

**A2:**  He probably worked for ten some years.   

**Q:**  How many times did he have to go to transport loads?   

**A2:**  I don't know how many times. He just had to go after the mules and he had to hand over the transportation fees to the master. They would just give him food.   

**Q:**  Did they give him quite good food?   

**A2:**  The food was not like nowadays after the revolution took place. He was given enough tsamba and tea to be full.   

**Q:**  How many mules did he have?   

**A2:**  He had seven to eight mules. He probably used to go to Phari two to three times a year.   

**Q:**  It would take a long time on the way, right?   

**A2:**  During the summer time, the mules would be sent to the pasture areas to graze .   

**Q:**  Did he have any other assistant muleteers?   

**A2:**  Yes, he had one assistant.   

**Q:**  In this area, there were not many people who had been muleteers, right?   

**A2:**  There were some people, but they are all dead.   

**Q:**  At the time of the Mutual Aid Team, that was not like the rukhag, right?   

**A2:**  The farming was done together but the people could get the yield of one's own lands. When the people were working on one's fields, the owner of the field would supply the food. The households who didn't have animals were made to work together with the middle class households that had animals. They would calculate the number of days worked for the people and the animals. The people who didn't have animals had to work for the middle class households who had large fields.   

**Q:**  What was the difference in terms of the way of farming between the period before the reform and the after the reforms?   

**A2:**  Before the reforms, even when were working, we were working for other people, because we didn't have any land. We could just get a little amount of wages. We were trenyog. We would just get food and some clothes that they gave us and worked for them. We didn't get any wages per se.   

**Q:**  Some people say that the relations between people and neighbors were good in the old society. If someone was sick, people would help each other. Nowadays, the relations have become worse. People are just anxious about their own work and they are not helping each other, is that correct?   

**A2:**  I don't think so.   

**Q:**  Some people were saying that the livelihood was poor but the people were kind-hearted in the old society, but nowadays neighbors do not help each other very much. People are only pursuing their own livelihood, is that correct?   

**A2:**  Most people probably are something like that. Nowadays, people are holding hatred [Tib. ཞེ་སྡང] towards each other. In the past, friends and relatives helped each other. In those early days there was less hatred. Nowadays, people are concerned about their own matters. People in the past were like idiots, but they had less hatred in their minds.   

**Q:**  Did you ever go out of this place?   

**A2:**  I had been to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  When did you go there?   

**A2:**  I went as the maid-servant for the ngadag in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  For what reason did you go there? Please tell me in detail?   

**A2:**  I just went to work as their maid-servant.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A2:**  I was probably twenty-five or twenty-six years old. I don't remember clearly.   

**Q:**  Did you go to work to serve other people or to serve your own kungö?   

**A2:**  I went there to serve my own kungö.   

**Q:**  When you went to Chamdo, did you walk all the way?   

**A2:**  We were riding horses and mules. There were no highways.   

**Q:**  How many days did it take from Lhasa to Chamdo?   

**A2:**  It took probably about a month. On the way they would take rest for one day.   

**Q:**  Did you go through the northern route, or through Kongpo?   

**A2:**  I went through Kongpo.   

**Q:**  Did you encounter bandits on the way?   

**A2:**  At that time my kungö went to Chamdo to serve the Kalön [the Governor of Kham]. So there were a lot of people going together. There were no bandits.   

**Q:**  Were there about twenty to thirty people with you?   

**A2:**  Oh! There were much more than that. There were a lot of people.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Chamdo?   

**A2:**  I probably stayed about two years.   

**Q:**  What did you have to do at that time?   

**A2:**  I was serving as a maid-servant. Otherwise, I didn't have any other work.   

**Q:**  What would you do from the morning after getting up?   

**A2:**  I would make the fire, cook the food and serve the meal to them. And I had to clean the rooms.   

**Q:**  Did they pay you any wages?   

**A2:**  No there were no wages because we were trenyog.   

**Q:**  Did you have to take care of the animals?   

**A2:**  No, they didn't have animals.   

**Q:**  Did your kungö have any kind of branch unit [Tib. ཡན་ལག] in Chamdo?   

**A2:**  They themselves were serving the kalön like servants. They were the servants of the higher kudrak.   

**Q:**  So you left for Kham from Lhasa right?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you come back through the same route?   

**A2:**  Yes, we came back through Kongpo.   

**Q:**  Did you ever live in Lhasa?   

**A2:**  I lived in Lhasa for about three to four years before I went to Kham. I was about eighteen, nineteen or twenty years old.   

**Q:**  Where did you live in Lhasa?   

**A2:**  The trenyog owner himself had to rent houses in Lhasa. We lived in Ramoche and Tromsigang, and we also lived near the Mentsigang.   

**Q:**  When you were serving your kungö, did they scold you when something went wrong?   

**A2:**  Being a maid-servant, they would scold me a little bit, but they never beat me.   

**Q:**  Did they give you clothes?   

**A2:**  They would give us some clothing, but we had to wear our clothes also.   

**Q:**  Did they usually let you go outside to look at the market?   

**A2:**  I had to go to the market to do shopping.   

**Q:**  Did they give you the money?   

**A2:**  Yes, they gave me the money and told me to buy meat and vegetables.   

**Q:**  In those days what kind of vegetables did they have?   

**A2:**  There were all different kinds of vegetables. There were cabbages, asparagus, lettuce [Ch. osun], spinach, celery and all other vegetables.   

**Q:**  They were planting those vegetables, right?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Those vegetables were planted by the Tibetans, right? There were no Chinese, right?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was the market quite big?   

**A2:**  The market was not as big as nowadays. But it was quite big. At that time, there were vegetables the same as nowadays. I also went to Dram [Tib. འགྲམ] near Nyalam [Tib. གཉའ་ནང] to serve my kungö.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Dram?   

**A2:**  I stayed about three years in Nyalam. At that time, my kungö was the Dzongpön of Nyalam. In those days they didn't call it a dzongpön. It was called Shopa, which means Customs Officer. There was no highway, so people could not pass the mountains in winter because of the snow.   

**Q:**  At Nyalam when you were serving them, did you have to get up early in the morning?   

**A2:**  Yes. I had to get up early in the morning and clean the rooms and cook their food.   

**Q:**  Were there other servants?   

**A2:**  Yes, there were other servants.   

**Q:**  Did the other servants offer the water offering?   

**A2:**  The kungö themselves would offer the water offerings.   

**Q:**  What is your name?   

**A3:**  My name is A3.   

**Q:**  How old are you?   

**A3:**  I am sixty-four years old. I was born in the Year of Ox.   

**Q:**  Would you please tell me about your experiences before the reforms, after the reforms and during the Mutual Aid Team and the Cultural Revolution.   

**A3:**  From the time of my parents, I didn't have any fields. At the age of eleven to twelve, I was working as a servant for other people. My father belonged to the kudrak Sogang. My father was a trenyog and he was tending sheep and goats. At that time, my father would get twelve khe of barley per year as a salary. He had to raise the children with that barley. We had a relative in Wangden Chukhang [Tib. དབང་ལྡན་ཆུ་ཁང] who kept me as their servant. I stayed in Chukhang until the age of twenty-four.   

**Q:**  What work did you have to do then?   

**A3:**  Until the age of twenty I was tending sheep and goats.   

**Q:**  How did that household treat you?   

**A3:**  They didn't treat me bad because I was related to them. They raised me. At the age of twenty or twenty one, I was sent to another household called Jangwogpa [Tib. ལྕང་འོག་པ] to herd their animals. After that, the Democratic Reforms took place [answer not finished].   

**Q:**  How old were you at that time?   

**A3:**  I was twenty-five years old.   

**Q:**  What was the situation when the revolt took place?   

**A3:**  The People's Liberation Army were in Tibet and I heard about the loss of Lhasa and other things. Later, the road building was set up and I joined the road building project. There was a Headquarters of Road Building [Tib. ལམ་བཟོའི་བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང]. The road was built through the Gampala Mountain Pass. When I was living in Jangwogpa, I was going after animals and working in the fields during spring and harvesting during the autumn. I was not smart and my hands were clean. In the beginning, I didn't understand that and I was wondering why they were saying that my hands were clean [Tib. ལག་པ་གཙང་མ]. Later, I came to know that they meant that I was not stealing things. I never stole things.   

**Q:**  Where did you go to build roads and for how long did you build roads?   

**A3:**  It probably took about eight months to build the road.   

**Q:**  Did they pay you wages?   

**A3:**  Yes, they paid wages.   

**Q:**  How much?   

**A3:**  The wages were paid according to the amount of work that was done and the government gave me forty-five jin of tsamba per month. At that time, my parents didn't have food to give me to take with me because they couldn't manage their livelihood. The household where I was working also didn't have much food to give me. After the revolt, in 1960 the reforms took place and people got a share of the land, so the livelihood became better. When we were building the road, we were divided into teams and the work that each team should do was measured in meters. The wages were paid according to the work that was done. I would get quite good wages and I got along with the people quite well. The wage was about seven to eight maotse per day. I would get twenty-four or twenty-five or twenty-eight yuan per month. In those days, things were also cheap. One packet of Tiger Brand Cigarettes would cost only three maotse and five fen. A packet of Front Gate Brand [Ch. da qian men] cigarettes would cost four maotse. Afterwards, I was among the people blasting rocks. Then I got the highest wage that was nine maotse per day. The middle standard wages were eight maotse, and the lowest was seven maotse. At the time of the Mutual Aid Team, I had a happy time. I got three khe of land and my wife got more than two khe of land. We used to depend on those fields for our livelihood, and the yields were not so bad. In the Mutual Aid Team we were working in a team. At that time a work point was worth about one yuan. But money was valuable. When the People's Commune, or the rukhag, was established, the first year was not so bad, but from the third year, I faced quite severe hardships because I had many children and there were only two people working for work points. I had eight children and had a very hard time. I had to go to deliver letters for the leaders of the rukhag at night to get work points. If I refused to go, I was afraid that it would have an impact on my regular work.   

**Q:**  After that, the Cultural Revolution started, right?   

**A3:**  That was just after the rukhag was set up.   

**Q:**  What did they do in this area?   

**A3:**  It was said that people were not allowed to keep and worship statues and the scriptures. Nowadays, people are worshipping the deities but the deities were destroyed.   

**Q:**  Did you become a Red Guard?   

**A3:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you an activist?   

**A3:**  I was not among the ordinary activists.   

**Q:**  The Red Guards were not selected from individuals but were sent from the Youth League, is that correct?   

**A3:**  Yes, they were from the Youth League and there were groups of activists who became the Red Guards. I became a Red Guard when they increased the number of Red Guards. They were burning the "monsters and the demons [Tib. ལྷ་འདྲེ་གདོན་བགེགས]," and the scriptures. I went to destroy the local deities' temples and the Nagmug in people's households for about three days.   

**Q:**  Did you have any kind of regret when you were burning those things?   

**A3:**  No, I didn't feel any regret. It was decided by the circumstance of that time. People were not so stingy. Nowadays, people have become more stingy. People were not so greedy for getting wages. When they were called for work, they would not talk about the wages. When people were called to carry stones for the dam, I would carry very big stones. After that, the leaders would praise me at the meeting saying that so and so carried big stones. When I heard that, I would feel glad. When the leader would scold some people at the meeting, they would feel uncomfortable. But, nowadays, people are greedy for getting paid.   

**Q:**  How long were you a Red Guard?   

**A3:**  I was a Red Guard for about one year. We didn't need to go everyday, just sometimes. When we were told that we had to go somewhere, we would feel very glad to go. We would take our own food, and we would never think about the wages.   

**A4:**  In those early days, people had to depend on the thirteen khe of barley and we didn't have any chance to do something and make a living because we didn't have the capital for doing that. But nowadays we are allowed to do whatever kind of business we want. That is really good. But the main problem is the flood damage. Many fields and houses were damaged by the floods. There are many erosion gulleys [Tib. གྲོག་རོང]. We are afraid that in the future, during the time of our children, that that will cause a disaster. I was just thinking that because the number of livestock has increased the land and the amount of animals are unbalanced, that that might cause a increase in the gulleys. And another thing is that the best lands are used for construction.   

