# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0041.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 23 April 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 72  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kedram [Tib. སྐལ་དགྲམ] was a famous gyagpön in the Trapchi Regiment in the Tibetan Army. In this interview, he tells, in detail, about how the uniforms of the Tibetan soldiers were changed and how they carried the Chinese flags along with the Tibetan flag. He also talks about going to Ngarigar when the road was built in 1955 and how he received his Chinese uniform there and wore the uniform in Lhasa. Finally, he discusses where the Tibetan and Chinese regiments were located in Lhasa.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0041_05/H_0041_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  From 1951 onwards, I am not clear on the how the military uniforms were changed and how the flags were carried. What I heard was that you Trapchi wore Tibetan uniforms while the Gusung wore Chinese ones. Can you tell me about this?   

**A:**  I'm not sure about the year the uniforms changed, but it was before the Chinese came. The Tibetan government made a 35 [point] code for military discipline. I can't get this book, it's very rare. The conclusion said, "Do not attack the enemies first. This is the tradition of the dharma king, and do not let the enemy evade punishment when they attack us. This is the tradition of the political king [Tib. dgra la phar rgol mi byed pa chos kyi rgyal po'i bzhed srsol/ tshur rgol yan por ma gtong ba srid kyi rgyal po'i bzhed srol]." That's all I remember. Around this time, the military uniforms were changed to the Tibetan style [Tib. བོད་ལུགས]. When this was done, the Gusung retained the British uniform. After the Chinese came, they said that the Tibetan Army had to change into [become a part of] the Chinese army and carry the Chinese flag. That the uniforms must also be changed. When they said this, the ones who wore the Tibetan uniform said that "Until now, we have worn Tibetan uniforms and have not worn outside ones. In the 17-Point Agreement, it is said that one can retain the customs of one's country, and so there is no way that we can change." When we said that, the Gusung had foreign uniforms, and so they all wore Chinese uniforms. The rest of the regiments—it was said that those above the rank of shengo [shengo, gyagpön, rupön, depön and magji] must wear Chinese uniforms and the soldiers were [to be] left as they were. When we carried the flags, when we came out of the barracks, we folded the flag and came. When we got to Lhasa, when we got near the Chinese, we unfurled the flag. We carried our flag first and the Chinese flag behind. We carried our flag a bit higher than the Chinese flag. Then they said that "This is not acceptable, carrying our flag lower and behind. Our flag must be carried in front and higher." When they said that, the military headquarters, Magjigang, said that we had to do as they said. Then we carried our flags equally [in height] and the Chinese flag in front. When we got to Lhasa City, we carried the flags. Otherwise, we put them away. On the return trip, we put the flag away and then we didn't carry it.   

**Q:**  I didn't get that?   

**A:**  In front of the Chinese, we took their flag a bit higher, but the moment we passed the Chinese, we put the flag away and [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Then you carried the Tibetan Army flag.   

**A:**  Yes. We took both flags.   

**Q:**  However, the Tibetan one was in front?   

**A:**  Yes. Earlier, we took the Tibetan one in front and a bit higher. Later, after the order was given, the Chinese one was in front and just a bit higher.   

**Q:**  When was this? Before the Dalai Lama left for China?   

**A:**  Yes, before. Before '55.   

**Q:**  The uniforms and [answer not finished]   

**A:**  The uniforms were changed in 1955. I was sent as the Kashag representative to go from Nagchuka to Ngarigar [Tib. མངའ་རིས་སྒར] when the Chinese vehicles first went there. At that time, there was a big meeting of the Tibet Autonomous Region. At that time, they put them on . When I was at Tö Garsa [Tib. སྟོད་སྒར་ས] and arrived at Gyamu, I received my uniforms. Together with me was the Chinese director, Chen Chuzhang, who said that "You have done great and all the uniforms have been changed in Tibet. Now your turn has come and you have to wear [the Chinese uniform]." The whole set was there. Then I said, "What you said must be true for Tibet and one must wear [the uniform]. Until I get to Lhasa, I will not wear [it]. When I get to Lhasa, I will wear [it] and [will do] that [all] too happily. Now there is just no use wearing in the [uniform in the] remote northern plains," and so I did not wear [it]. He was a bit angry but said okay. He was diplomatic. Neither did I accept the uniform nor wear it. When I got to Lhasa, there was the full set of uniforms waiting for me at home. Then, during some parade, we had to wear [it].   

**Q:**  Regarding the Chinese military headquarters, the Junqu is located [where]?   

**A:**  South of Lhasa near the river. Towards Trip.   

**Q:**  Yes—and you were below Sera?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And the Gusung?   

**A:**  They were in Norbulinga?   

**Q:**  Chadang?   

**A:**  In the middle of Lhasa. At Tromsikang.   

**Q:**  And the Ngadang?   

**A:**  They were at Yamon, at Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག]. They were next to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Besides the Junqu, there was one at Nortölinga.   

**A:**  Yes. Then at Gyangdra Linga, below Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Below means?   

**A:**  Westward. Then there was one on the Trip side. Then to the east, as I mentioned last time, there was Peding, below Tse Gungtang.   

**Q:**  Yamon and Peding, what's the distance [to them]?   

**A:**  If you ride, it's one rest stop away.   

**Q:**  That's quite a lot [a far distance[.   

**A:**  You have to cross the Kyichu and go up. Then Trapchi was where our government mint was. Then there was Drawothang below the hill Michungri [Tib. མི་ཆུང་རི]. West was Trapchi, our regiment. To the east was the mint. The Chinese were staying at the mint. On the other side of that, eastwards, towards the hills, that hill is called Michungri. There is a nunnery there. At that place is a regiment. It is called the Sangyib [Tib. གསང་ཡིབས] Regiment. These days, many Tibetan prisoners are in Sangyib. That's it.   

**A:**  Yes, now I get it. Thank you, that's all I have to ask. It's very clear.   

