# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0041.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 25 April 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 72  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kedram [Tib. སྐལ་དགྲམ] was a famous gyagpön in the Trapchi Regiment. In this interview, he In this interview, he talks about the letters written to Sera telling them to be on alert because the Chinese invited the Dalai Lama to a show and he talks about the people’s (Tib. མིམང) reactions to this invitation. He also talks about how Phala wanted to offer a golden throne to the Dalai Lama, how Andru Jinda told the members of the Tibetan Army that it would be good to make connections with Chushigandru, and about a meeting with Chushigandru and how they all made a pledge about the Chinese. He then describes the defection of the Chinese officer Lobsang Tashi, and how he went to Lhoka and fought with Chushigandru. He also discussed the battles in Dokarsumdo, Gonggar, and Mashung. Finally, he describes, in great detail, the plan for the Dalai Lama’s escape to India.   

---  
### Tape 4  

---

**Q:**  In your last interview, you mentioned that Barshi [Tib. བར་གཞིས] Tsendrön came to Trapchi just before the uprising, and told you that it was dangerous for the Dalai Lama to go to the show. Did you have relations with Barshi Tsendrön before that and did he send [unclear] to you, or did he do it out of his determination? And did he say this or was a letter shown [to you] saying that there should be a demonstration tomorrow? So if you could speak on these [things] in detail.   

**A:**  Barshi Tsendrön did not come to Trapchi, but to the Potala. We were staying as guards at the Potala. He came late at night, sent by Phala Drönyerchemmo.   

**Q:**  Did he say that?   

**A:**  Yes. Phala sent him to us. What he said was that "The Dalai Lama is going to go to the Chinese military barracks tomorrow and so it is very dangerous. And from the numerous actions of the Chinese, the situation is such that it is not possible to bear the danger [if he goes]. Therefore, we must be most careful, whether it is the military or Sera Monastery." He told me this verbally and did not have a letter. Since he mentioned this at the Potala, Depön Tashi Bera from our regiment, and two rupön and three to four gyagpön were there. We all discussed what he said and, led by Tashi Bera, we said that if this was the case, then we have to send messages to the military and Sera Monastery.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for sending messages to Sera?   

**A:**  To tell them that they had to stay carefully. That if they didn't stay properly, then there was danger . So I was told that I must go give the message, and so I did.   

**Q:**  To Sera?   

**A:**  No. From the Potala to the Trapchi barracks. At the regiment, the gyagpön and rupön were called and told fully about what was to transpire the next day, and we said that there were such problems so that we had to be careful. By then it was very late, around 11 p.m., and then I went to Sera. There was Ngawang Drakpa [Tib. ངག་དབང་གྲགས་པ], the abbot of Sera Mey College [Tib. སྨད], whom we knew. I met him and told him that such was the situation. That we at the military also got such a message, and I was also told to give the message to Sera. That's why I have come. So you must be on alert.   

**Q:**  So he had to call the Sera Jey [Tib. བྱེས], Mey, and Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] colleges together and discuss this. When they were doing that, I was returning around midnight. They said that there was nothing they could do except to request that the Dalai Lama not go to the show. So I got to the regiment and told them that I had gone to Sera and given [them] the message. The next day, I was not to go to the Potala, but to Norbulinga. That night, I didn't stay at the barracks, but at home. I did not take my horse, but [I] rode on a bicycle and went down to Norbulinga early [the] next morning. When I got there, I was early and people had not yet come to Norbulinga. When I was returning to the Potala, at Barkokaling [Tib. བྲག་སྒོ་ཀར་གླིང], the people from Shöl were coming in rows. I asked where they were going. They said that, "It is said that the Dalai Lama is being invited by the Chinese [to see a show], and so we are going to go and prostrate and asked him not to go at all." So I thought it was alright now. They knew, and so I returned following them. Then from all over, the people were going, and quite a few Sera monks had also come. They were sent to prostrate. But mostly, it was the people. They all gathered at Norbulinga and they begged the Dalai Lama not to go to the Chinese military barracks. They prostrated and cried and Be . Since that was the case and since it was full of people, the Dalai Lama could not go, right?   

**A:**  At that time, Sawang Surkhang was coming. He had left his car early on and was on foot. The people were telling him not to trade our Dalai Lama for dayan [silver coins]. That it was not at all acceptable to take the Dalai Lama . Sawang Surkhang came inside . Then Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] came and they said the same thing. Then Samdru Phodrang [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] was coming. He, like Ngabö, had the rank of both a Tibetan and Chinese commander. He was coming in a car and his bodyguard was a Chinese. So people said, "Chinese are coming, Chinese are coming." A crowd surged and the car was stoned. The moment Samdru Phodrang got out of the car, he was hit on the head and blood poured [out]. A few of the lay and monk officials protected him and told the people not to throw stones. He was given some water. It seems that at times, we did not think properly. He could have been taken into the Norbulinga. Instead, he was taken to Dekyilinga [Tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] where there was an Indian doctor. From there, the Chinese took him. Then, Khenjung Chamdo Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] came. Earlier, when he came to the Drungja, he was in his robes. Later, he came on a bicycle wearing a white [mouth] mask. Generally, people had suspicions of him and people said, "Chinese are coming, Chinese are coming," and then he was stoned. When [this happened,] some people said, "Don't do this, don't do this," and tried to cover him. However, he tried to get ready to go in the door, but could not because of all the people. He had a pistol, which he fired into the air. Then the people stoned him. They knifed him, but some did not penetrate him because of his protective amulet [talisman]. Then some women spat and dusted their aprons on his head, and then his protection [from the talisman] was gone [Tib. མཚོན་ཕྱིན་བཞག]. He was killed. I was not there at the end. I went to the Potala to tell some of our soldiers to stay there, but [for] most to come down to Norbulinga. When I was returning, the people were coming towards Lhasa in rows. They were dragging the dead body of Phagpalha Khenjung and shouting, "Tibetans are the owners of Tibet and the Chinese must go home." When we got down there, it was said that some of us had to go down to the Indian Consulate. The reason was to tell them that not only were the Chinese invading us [Tib. བཙན་འཛུལ], but also [that they were] taking the Dalai Lama and had plans to insult us using all brutal methods. "Since this is the case, we, all the Tibetan people, are rising up and saying that Tibet is independent. And it is the case that Tibet is really an independent country, and for this, the Indian government should be the witness [Tib. བར་དཔང]." Another group went to the Nepalese legation and said the same thing. Another group went to the Bhutanese representative [Tib. ལོ་ཕྱག]. Anyway, they were demonstrating in the town and then they came down. In the town, they said the same thing. That "Tibetans are the owners of Tibet and the Chinese must go home." It was a peaceful demonstration. A militant one was not possible and neither was it done.   

**Q:**  Prior to this, you, Radrü Ngawang [Tib. དབྲ་ཕྲུག་ངག་དབང] and Phala, did you have connections? After some time, Radrü Ngawang came from Phembo to Lhasa, and so how did these things transpire?   

**A:**  It came about in this way. Since the situation with the Chinese was such, and previously, there were many members of the People's Association, like Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], Tsha Trunyi [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག], Gomang Drubtola [Tib. སྒོ་མང་གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ལགས], [and] Jayan Dawa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ], many rose up and opposed the Chinese. They made many preparations so the Chinese told the Kashag, and the Kashag gave an order saying that they could not protest, and so their organization was destroyed. Later, people like Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག], Shigatse Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག], [and] Alo Chöndze Tsedor [Tib. ཚེ་རྡོར], headed and started an organization. Then the Chinese instigated the Kashag and the Kashag said that they were not permitted to meet. When this happened and when there was a need to challenge the Chinese, it was said that we needed to offer a golden throne to the Dalai Lama, and then have people group together and start talking. All [of] this, like an idea, was done by Drönyerchemmo Phala.   

**Q:**  How would one know that it was Phala's idea?   

**A:**  Phala said that it would be good if they met in this way. Then they all met and they were happy with what Phala said, and they agreed with him 100 percent. Then they met and agreed to offer a golden throne to the Dalai Lama. They organized the workers, made the throne and then they prepared to start the Chushigandru. Andru Jinda was the head and it was said that it would be good if the Tibetan military made connections.   

**Q:**  Who said [that]?   

**A:**  Andru Gombo Tashi said it was good to make connections. When he said that, it seems that Drönyerchemmo said something through our Depön Tashi Berala [that] we discussed it. Since our depön said that, we said that this was very good and that we agreed 100 percent.   

**Q:**  This is not clear. Tashi Berala was the depön, and so you rupön and gyagpön got together?   

**A:**  A few of us got together.   

**Q:**  A few means like whom?   

**A:**  We had Rupön Wangden and Gyagpön Wangden Tashi [Tib. དབང་ལྡན་བཀྲ་ཤིས] Then we all met.   

**Q:**  What he asked was, "What do you think if our military made relations with the Chushigandru?".   

**A:**  Yes, that it's good if we made relations with Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  Then Tashi Bera got a few of you guys together and at that time, Chemmo said that this was good. Did he actually say it?   

**A:**  Not actually, but we suspected that he did. So the three of us spoke with the many rupön and gyagpön. Then we spoke with the Gusung, Gyantse and Chadang regiments. At that time, we had only four regiments [in Lhasa].   

**Q:**  Gusung Kadang, Khadang Trapchi?   

**A:**  Yes, [and] Ngadang Gyantse and the Chadang Police. That's all we had. The rest were returned [decommissioned].   

**Q:**  At this time, how many soldiers were there?  

**A:**  We Trapchi were 1,000. The Gusung from Tsang and Ü [Tib. དབུས] together were 1,000 [500 each]. Gyantse 500. Police 500. So there were about 4,000. . Since we agreed and said that this was good, and since a person was needed to make relations with Andru Jinda, that person was me, and [also] Gyagpön Wangden. So we went to Andru Jinda and said that "You have started the Chushigandru and are doing well for the sake of religion and politics, and we, the military, cannot immediately join together because the situation is not right. However, we have full support and whatever connections need to be made with the military, we are the representatives, and so do them with us."   

**Q:**  Did Gombo Tashi have the idea that the military was going to come out with them?   

**A:**  He did not have this idea. He would [have] liked the support of the military, right? But he did not think that we would come. But we began from there. When we started this connection, we told people like Traya Lama Atru [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ་བླ་མ་ཨ་ཕྲུག], Gaba Wangchen [Tib. སྒ་པ་དབང་ཆེན], Tsarongpa Damba Lodrö [Tib. ཚ་བ་རོང་པ་དམ་པ་བློ་གྲོས] and some others that we were the military representatives and that we had connections with them, and an introduction was done. Then...   

**Q:**  This was before the Chushigandru went to Lhoka?   

**A:**  Yes, around 1957. Then, on another occasion, it was said that it would be good if there were more than us two leaders from the military. This was discussed in our barracks and it was said that if a situation occurred where more than the two representatives were needed, then we would call Gyantse Rupön Phüntso Wangye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ] and Chadang Gyagpön Tsering Lhagye. This was told to them. Then the two of us told them that Andru Jinda was saying this and so it would be good if the two of them came with us. So they came.   

**Q:**  How were the names chosen?   

**A:**  It was already decided earlier that if the two of us were undecided, then the two of them would be the ones. So we all went to Andru Jinda and had some of the people like [come with us]. So it was said that "The two have been introduced and today, these two new ones have come. If you have any opinions to give, then give them, and if we have any opinions, then say them." We had already said that earlier, right? Phüntso Yügye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གཡུལ་རྒྱལ] and Tsering Lhagye [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ལྗ་རྒྱལ] said that it was decided earlier that the two of them were our representatives from the military. "Since it was said that one or two others were needed, today, we have come. The time has not come to openly come and join you. However, please rest assured that all of our military supports you. Whatever connections you need to make, please make with the two of them, and if it is needed, then the two of us will also come." That's all that was said. Then they said that this was very good and that "We are happy that the military supports us and we have found pride."   

**Q:**  Where did the meeting take place?   

**A:**  In Andru Jinda's house. There were the four of us and Andru Jinda, and six to seven others.   

**Q:**  I was thinking about this a long time ago. I always hear about Depön Tashi Berala from Trapchi, but there were two depön, right?   

**A:**  The other was Samdru Phodrang, the one who died in Rajpur.   

**Q:**  Now, all of you discussed this, right? Now, was Samdru Phodrang in this or not?   

**A:**  He was not there completely. He did know about it. Earlier, we had suspicions about him, saying that he was close to the Chinese. However, he went to China. People like him and Ragashag [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] who went to China, said that they were Party men. So sort of trusting them, told them and showed them many things. Then they thought, "Oh, now it's not good. If we fight with them, then we cannot manage. However, they are not going to do anything good at all." So they had a change of heart and then they could be trusted. Since that was the case, we gradually talked with them. They were not kept completely out of it.   

**Q:**  What about the Chadang and Gyantse regiments, did their depön know?   

**A:**  Yes, they both knew. The Chadang Depön was Jünba [Tib. འཇུན་པ], and the Ngadang [one] was Ragashag. Ragashag was excellent. Jünba too was good. They all knew.   

**Q:**  What about the Gusung Regiment?   

**A:**  Depön Taklha knew.   

**Q:**  He knew you all went to Andrutsang? Did he support that or did he stay nicely [quietly aside]?   

**A:**  For the time being, they were not doing things like us, but they were staying in a nice way. It was not that they did not support us, we were all of the same mind. Then—one day in Andru's Kangyur Lhagang room, about 30 odd Chushigandru got together and made a pledge of unity. That "Regarding the Chinese, we are all united and [we] will fight together."   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  About late 1957.   

**Q:**  During this time, there were you people from the military, and, aside from this, were the others all Khambas? Something like that?   

**A:**  There were about 33-34 of the Khamba leaders.   

**Q:**  Was Ütsang Bisula there?   

**A:**  He was involved later. The military was there and the people from Sera and Drepung. They were not coming out openly, but people like the abbot of Sera Mey and his chandzö, Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས], and the Ganden and Drepung representatives were there. Like the military, they came, but not openly. The time was not ripe for that. When they made the pledge, it was only those who were going into the Chushigandru [i.e. the Khambas].   

**Q:**  Tell me again about the pledge. What was the real content?   

**A:**  I don't remember much since it has been many years. However, the main point was that the Chinese not only uprooted the country, but there was danger to the religion and politics, and the life of the Dalai Lama. [It said that] "What is clear is that when the Chinese first came to the lower regions [Tib. ཌོམེ] of Tibet, the Chinese said that they had come to serve the Tibetan people and to help the Tibetan people. Now, in the eastern areas of Amdo and Kham, see what they have done. So just like this, the same is going to happen to Lhasa and to the whole of Tibet. And so now is the time to think, and we must oppose the Chinese. And to this end, we must all be whole heartily united." In the pledge wording, there was a Tibetan proverb which I will relate, I wonder if you can understand it: "In good times, we will eat grass on the top of the mountain pass together. In bad times, we will even share the bluish water. We will hit one's father's head if we are told to do so, and even go to hell if we are told to go [Tib. སྐྱིད་ལ་ཁའི་རྩྭ་ལ་མཉམ་ཟ། སྡུག་སྔོ་མོའི་ཆུ་ལ་མཉམ་འཐུང། རྒྱོབ་ཕ་མགོ། རྒྱུ་དམྱལ་བ]." Then there were many others.   

**Q:**  At the time you made the pledge, did you think about fighting?   

**A:**  Some did and others did not. Everyone was fully in support of opposing the Chinese, but whether to fight or not was unknown. However, [repeats the proverb of hitting one's father].   

**Q:**  Who was the one who spoke about the pledge?   

**A:**  Andru was the one. It was written down.   

**Q:**  So did he say something like, "Today many people have come and our work is to pledge to fight the Chinese."? Something like that?   

**A:**  Yes. Like that. There was a meeting and in Tibetan custom, tea was given, and also droma dresi. Then the talk began and then the pledge was made. At the time of the pledge, when it was all decided to make the pledge, it was said that the two military representatives need not stay as they had something to discuss. Before we left, we said, "Though the time has not come [for open support], rest assured that the military is all behind you. And it is very important for you to do what needs to be done since the pledge has already been made." The pledge was made and everyone placed their heads on the Kangyur at Andru's house.   

**Q:**  Was the pledge in writing?   

**A:**  Yes, in writing and with signatures . So we left and they stayed and did the work. Later, Andru Jinda and others gradually left. In Nortölinga, in the Chinese regiment, there was the younger depön of the gunnery unit. At that time, the stableman from the Norbulinga stables was bringing slate in a horse cart. At the Kurusamba [Tib. ཀུ་རུ་ཟམ་པ] Bridge, there was an argument with the Chinese bridge guard and the stableman was killed. The deceased person's name was Künsang [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང]. When this happened, he also became suspicious, saying that something would happen. When this happened, to oppose Sera and the Trapchi Regiment, the Chinese Peding [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡིང] Regiment and—from Nortölinga Linga Sarpa [Tib. གླིང་ག་གསར་པ], there was the gunnery unit which was brought down. The head of this unit was the Chinese commander Jiang Huating. Later, Andru Jinda gave him the name of Lobsang Tashi. Then Lhasa and the Potala were to be taken care of by the new regiment, Magar Sarpa, and the Yamon [Ch. ya men] Regiment. Then Norbulinga and Drepung were to be taken care of by Gyangdra Linga [Tib. རྒྱང་གྲགས་གླིང་ག] and Nortölinga . So, since that time—that's how they had made war preparations. There were 12 automatic cannons. Four for Trapchi and Sera, another four for Lhasa and the Potala, and yet another four for Drepung and Norbulinga. So they were there, just ready to fire.   

**Q:**  From Nortölinga?   

**A:**  Yes. They were from three directions. Then there was a daughter of the warden of Linga Sarpa. This girl and the commander met . Later, the Tibetans didn't do anything and things subsided, right? He would be withdrawn to Nortölinga, right? He would not be kept at Linga Sarpa, right? So they met and they asked for permission from the headquarters to marry. They approved. So they were to get married and around that time, meetings took place. Secret ones, and they said that he liked Tibetans. They said that since his wife was Tibetan, it was not good, and so he should be cleaned up. It was said that to clean up meant to eliminate him and nothing else. When this happened, somebody told him about it, and he told his wife that things would not be good and that he needed a place to hide, and [asked] where a good place would be. The wife said, "I don't know [of] any place, but I think that if you run to the Trapchi Regiment, they will not hand you over. I also have a relative there called Lobsang Yönden, and I don't think there is any better place for you to flee than there." So [that's what] they decided. His superior commander was away in China. One day, he said that he wanted to go and see a movie, and with his servant, they rode horses. The servant had a rifle and he had a Canadian pistol. On the way, he told his servant not to come since that night he might stay with his wife. It would have been alright if he just said that and left. But he asked his servant for his gun and bullets. So thinking that all was not right, the servant told the military office. The office phoned and when he was behind the Potala, there was a jeep coming that way. Another jeep came from the Trapchi military side. There were three jeeps from different directions. Now, his horse was a trained one and so he and the horse both laid down in the river. When the jeeps passed each other, he got out of the water and came to our Trapchi military camp.   

**Q:**  Really, under the water?   

**A:**  The water was not that big [deep]. It was the one that goes to Lhalu. So he came to the military camp. At that time, we had eight sentries and one shengo. It was around 10 at night when he knocked. I was one of the younger ones among the leaders, and the sentry came and gave me a message saying that a Chinese had come and he was doing this with his hand, and so what should he do. I immediately...   

**Q:**  The Chinese did not know Tibetan, right?   

**A:**  He did not know [Tibetan]. I went to see Rupön Wangden and Gyagpön Wangden and said, "Such things have happened. What should I do?" Rupön Wangden said that there was nothing to do but to bring him in and interrogate [him]. We brought him in, closed the gate, and told the sentry and the shengo that if this incident got out, only they were to blame and we would punish them. We brought him to the Rupön's room. Though we were not that versatile in the bugle, the bugle master knew Chinese. We called him in and there he told us he was there when the stableman Künsang was killed, and how he met this girl and got permission to marry [her]. "However, in their intelligence meetings, they said that [though] I had good relations with the Chinese, that my wife was Tibetan and that I must be fixed up well and gotten rid of. Then I asked my wife and she said it was best to flee to Trapchi, and so I did. Since this is the case, please protect me and I will be very happy. However, if you cannot protect me, then don't hand me [over] to the Chinese, but just kill me." That "It will be good if you can kill me. Don't keep my horse. It will not be good." So we had one soldier and had his horse set free around Parikhug [Tib. བྲག་རི་ཁུག], not far from their regiment. Lobsang Tashi said that the horse would go home by itself. Lobsang Tashi's wife's relative, Lobsang Yönden, was in our regiment and he was called in and on asking him, he confirmed that he was indeed his relative's wife [husband]. The next day, we sent Lobsang Yönden to the girl's house and he said that it was full of Chinese and that they were searching everything. That they were even searching the hay sellers at Thebunggang [Tib. ཐལ་ཕུང་སྒང]. The next day, when we asked him, it's as I have related earlier regarding the gunnery positions—he said that "They are still in place and have not been withdrawn."   

**Q:**  Please repeat [that] again. I did not understand that.   

**A:**  Peding, Linga Sarpa and Trapchi Thishing trained on Trapchi and Sera. There were four automatic cannons. Magar Sarpa, Trip [Tib. གྲིབ], and Yamon had their guns trained on the Potala and Shöl. There were four automatic cannons here. The regiments around Nortölinga and Gyangdra Linga had four automatic guns trained on Drepung and Norbulinga. There were many cannons, but only 12 automatics. He said that "Now that I have deserted, I think that they will have a change of plans. Until [as of] now, they are still in place." He said that "Now, if you are not totally against the Chinese Communists, they will not do anything good. What they have done in China, you know very well, and what has happened to Eastern Tibet, you also know. So there is nothing good that they will do. So, if you need to fight against the Chinese, the first thing you should do is take over the Peding Regiment. Then Trip. Then the Nortö Regiment. If you do that, then, for the time being, there is nothing that can be done. Then later, the planes will come and something will happen. If you cannot take these military camps, then it will be very difficult. There are 12 automatic cannons that can fire 12 shells." So this is what he said. He made a map of all the military camps, the number of soldiers, who the leaders were, [and] the number of arms.   

**Q:**  I know where Trip and Nortölinga are. But where is Peding Linga?   

**A:**  It is towards Tse [Tib. ཚལ]. Towards the east.   

**Q:**  Is it near the main military base?   

**A:**  You know where Tse Gungtang [Tib. གུང་ཐང] [is]? If you go from Lhasa to Ganden, there is Tse Gungtang. It is inside .   

**Q:**  Trip is on the other side of the Kyichu [Tib. སྐྱིད་ཆུ] River, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So this is what he said. We said that we couldn't just leave things as they were. And in our typical tradition of Tibet, we said that we must consult the deities [Tib. ལྷ] and the lama. We consulted Trapchi Lhamo, and asked for a divination from Gungru Khentrü [Tib. གུང་རུ་མཁན་སྤྲུལ]. If it was divined that he was good, then we would keep him. If not, then we were to kill him. That's how it was decided.   

**Q:**  Were the depön informed of this?   

**A:**  At this particular moment, we had yet to inform them. Then we went to inform Tashi Berala and related what transpired and what we had agreed to do. And so what should we do? He said, "It's good now, and whatever the deity says, you do as you have planned. There's no point in keeping him here, but [it is] better to send him to Andru Jinda"—who had already left. The Trapchi Lhamo said that he was good and not bad, and [that he] would be useful. Gungru Khentrü said that he was good.   

**Q:**  These are all like oracles, right?   

**A:**  One is a deity, the other, [a] lama. Since it was decided, he now needed to be moved. There was a small monastery called Trapchi Gomba below our camp. There was a monk there who we were very close [with] and we said that it would be good to take him to his place. He stayed one night with us and the next night we took him to Trapchi Monastery. There, Andru Jinda and...   

**Q:**  Had Andru gone to Lhoka?   

**A:**  Not yet. Quite a lot of soldiers had left. Lobsang Tashi had a rifle, a pistol and 50 bullets [for] each. He was taken to Andru and [the] guns and bullets were given to Andru Jinda. When we related the situation, Andru said, "It's good. He will be useful and we are happy to take him." Andru was to send people to collect him and we were to take him there. This was the 4th month, day eight. At dawn, Radrü Ngawang, Lobsang Jampa [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བྱམས་པ] and two others came.   

**Q:**  To Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, sent by Andru Jinda. There was a full set of Tibetan clothes for Lobsang Tashi with a fox-fur hat, [and] a horse. So the five left via the Ramagang boat crossing. We had many people placed along the way. The 4th gyagpön (Wangden) and I went between Kündeling and Bamari, near the boat crossing. They were coming and there was no problem at all.   

**Q:**  If the Chinese came, what was your plan?   

**A:**  We would do what we could, but since we were few, there was nothing we could do.   

**Q:**  You were not planning on fighting, right?   

**A:**  We just had the feeling that the Chinese would not know at all. The reason being that Khambas were moving about, and he had changed his clothes and was not showing his face. We had prepared with pistols.   

**Q:**  You were not wearing uniforms?   

**A:**  No, civilian clothes, just pretending to be ordinary people. About 100 people were spread around. Our people stationed at the Ramagang boat crossing returned saying that they had crossed—so we were relieved.   

**Q:**  Later, Andrutsang, Radrü Ngawang and all went to Shang Ganden Chöngor to get guns. Then the Chinese came and could not go to Nyemo since the road was blocked, and they had to go north to Drigung, and then Andru went to Shotalhosum, right? Radrü Ngawang did not go with Andru Jinda and came to Lhasa around maybe the eighth or ninth month [in] '58. How did he have relations with you people?   

**A:**  Andru Jinda came from Lhoka to Shang Ganden [Chöngor] to get arms. They [he] came to Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར]. When leaving from there, there was this Chinese who was given the name Tempa Targye [Tib. བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས]. I don't know his Chinese name. Thinking that things were not good, he ran away from Chushul. He was fluent in Tibetan and had Tibetan clothes on. He rode up, straight to Lhasa. There was this Drawothang [Ch. jiao wu chang] Regiment into which he went. The one who returned the horse went to Drawothang and only there it was known. After that, Lobsang Tashi was very much suspected so he used to say, "Tempa Targye mindu [Tib. མི་འདུག]—I am not Tempa Targye." He seemed to be saying that he wouldn't act like Tempa Targye, but [he] didn't know how to say it. So when they went toward Nyemo, at Dokarsumdo, the Chinese had laid an ambush in which they walked into. When the fight began, Lomphel Tsering [Tib. བློ་འཕེལ་ཚེ་རིང] and 11 other Chantrengpa were killed. Quite a lot were killed. Now, Lobsang Tashi and the highest Chinese commander were shooting at each other at close quarters. Lobsang Tashi told him that "You have made a mistake and it's best to follow the Dalai Lama." He replied that "You are mistaken." That "You are selling out your country." They continued shooting at each other and because of the protective amulet [talisman], Lobsang Tashi was not hit and he managed to kill the commander. Lobsang Tashi had his watch and medals. Then they went to Shang Ganden Chöngor, got the guns and on the return trip, at Nyemo Karkhang [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་བཀར་ཁང], there was a lot of fighting and quite a few Chinese were killed, and some were killed on this side too. There they could not cross the river and so [they] came to this side. Then they came down from Karkhang and at a place whose name I don't recall—anyway, Chantreng Singa was killed there. Then they could not go to Lhoka and then went to the north. On the way north, at Damshung [Tib. འདམ་གཞུང], they ambushed a Chinese vehicle. Then while they were going, they said that a reconnaissance plane came, but there were no soldiers [who] came chasing them. Then they came to Drigung [Tib. འབྲི་གུང]. At Drigung Mashung, the Chinese laid an ambush in which they got caught. There was a lot of firing and Andru was wounded. Lobsang Tashi was also shot, but the bullets did not penetrate. He was wearing a protective talisman, Jigje Mahe, given by the Dalai Lama. Then people like Radrü Ngawang and Shalo Chömpel [Tib. ཤག་ལྷོ་ཆོས་འཕེལ] and many others were scattered. Andru Jinda went down to Shotalhosum, to Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན] and Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད], and then came up . Lobsang Tashi came from Drigung to Kongpo Giamda. He was wearing Abo hor [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་ཧོར] nomad clothes and he asked for shelter. He did not speak Tibetan well then. He had two guns with him. His "host" told him that "If you don't give me your pistol, I will hand you over to the Chinese." He had to give [it]. Then after some time, he was told that he was bad news and he demanded his rifle or else he would report to the Chinese. So he lost his rifle too. Then after some time, he noticed that there were Chinese there. He recognized one or two of them. Then he told his "host" that he was going to water his horse and then took off. He said he did not know the side routes and came right onto the motorable road, with thoughts that he didn't care whatever happened. He said some were saying that a nomad was passing. Others [said] that an Abo hor was going. He said he met some Chinese he recognized, but they did not recognize him. Then he ran out of tsamba and ate droma [a wild sweet potato] and came up to Lhasa.   

**A:**  The sentry would not let him pass, as the bridge was blocked at that time. He was feeling uneasy. However, there were many donkey herders and he sat among them. As soon as the bridge opened the next day, he thought that he would just go. If he was recognized, he would take that person's gun and shoot back and then jump in the river. They did not recognize him and then he went to his wife's house at Linga Sarpa. No one recognized him since his hands and lips were cracked. They were afraid to keep him there and took him to their relatives' house in Lhasa. He did not remember to contact us. Then with the relatives, he went before Gungru Khentrü, asking what was best. The lama said that he should be taken immediately to Lhoka, and the lama's attendant took him to Lhoka with a new protective amulet. His other protective amulet was taken away from him at Kongpo. At Lhoka, people like Amdo Lekshey and other guards said that he was a spy and put him in prison. He was then kept at Gongkar for a while and then sent to E Lhagyari. Now, people like Radrü Ngawang, Shalo Tsembey and others came from Phembo to Yünga [Tib. ཡུལ་ལྔ], and then from Sera to Lhasa. Gyagpön Wangden and I were told to meet them and we went. The two were there and Radrü Ngawang had a hand wound. They told the whole story. We said that "There is nothing to do now but to go to Lhoka." They said that they were going to make preparations. We then said to make good preparations, and [that] we couldn't do much and would give them bullets and guns if we could. That it was better to go. We gave [them] Sten-gun bullets and guns. Then they went...   

**Q:**  You gave your guns to them?   

**A:**  They could not take guns [they could not give them], and so we gave them some bullets.   

**Q:**  Did they say anything about wanting to meet Phala?   

**A:**  I don't know if they met or not. They had talks with Phala. This was later. Then they went to Phembo. From Lhasa, there were many Chinese trucks loaded with arms going via Gongkar to Lhoka. This they [Phala, etcetera] would have known, right? Radrü and Potalamphey were told that it would be good to leave immediately for Gongkar and destroy the trucks.   

**Q:**  Who said [this]?   

**A:**  Phala and they [did]. They didn't come out openly, but anyway, it was them.   

**Q:**  Paljor: Radrü Ngawang said that Kedramla said it.   

**A:**  Yes, we gave the message. We said that "You all must go down there," and there they destroyed the trucks very well and became famous. His companion, Shalotsang Bu Tsembey, lost his life. In this way, they got to Lhoka, and there he met Lobsang Tashi. And after Radrü Ngawang came, things went very well and what he did, he believed. .   

**Q:**  While he was at Lhasa did you say something like "Now it seems like the Dalai Lama cannot stay in Lhasa [for] very long," and "You make preparations."? [Was there] any talk like that?   

**A:**  No. We said that "The situation is not good and you all should do things well." Regarding the Dalai Lama leaving, even when he was to actually leave, very few people knew.   

**Q:**  Paljor: What Ngawangla said was that the situation was not very good. That "There is even a danger to the Dalai Lama's life, and so hand over the Dalai Lama to me." That he was young at that time and he said such things which didn't seem very good.   

**A:**  This is mistaken. We did not speak about the Dalai Lama leaving, but that the situation was not good.   

**Q:**  Paljor: He didn't say that the Dalai Lama would leave, but that the situation was not good and that there was a danger to the Dalai Lama's life.   

**A:**  We were not saying anything about [there being a] danger to the Dalai Lama's life, but that the situation was not good and so it was important for us to be careful and be on alert. Most importantly, we said that they must go soon and destroy the trucks. This they did exactly.   

**Q:**  And that idea definitely came from Chemmo? Paljor: Now this came via Chemmo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, via Chemmo, for all practical purposes, but he did not come out openly. From the time Chushigandru started, it was not possible without the connection with Chemmo. Like a wheel, Chemmo kept it turning.   

**Q:**  Athar and Lotse were dropped by the Americans, and did you at the regiment hear about this?   

**A:**  This we heard and they came to Andru's house. They stayed there and we went to meet them. They were dropped at the Samye Nashong [Tib. ན་གཤོངས] sandbar.   

**Q:**  Paljor: One thing Ngawangla said was that he was in Phembo when it was said that a lot of trucks were going from Lhoka to Lhasa and then back down loaded with arms. Did you send a letter to Phembo [about this]?   

**A:**  Yes, a letter was sent saying that "You need to go immediately." That at such a time, the trucks seemed to be coming and they should be destroyed.   

**Q:**  So who did you contact? Phala?   

**A:**  It was coming via Tashi Berala, who in turn, contacted Phala. So that's how it looked.   

**Q:**  Then Tashi Berala told you and you sent the message.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Now we jump to a different matter. The uprising and the Dalai Lama leaving Lhasa is clear. What is not clear is that after arriving at Lhüntse, there was a plan to stay [for] about a month, but the plan was not carried out and [the Dalai Lama] immediately left for India. So please tell me [about this] from the time of the first arrival at Lhüntse until the time of leaving.   

**A:**  At Lhüntse, the Dalai Lama arrived and started a Jey Shung or "traveling government [Tib. བྱེས་གཞུང]".   

**Q:**  What is Jey Shung?   

**Q:**  Jey means the one on the.... What is the other [opposite] word, Jey and...   

**A:**  It is Shi [Tib. གཞིས]. The Shi [Shung] is the one left behind and now the Jey Shung is the newly established one.   

**Q:**  Like the one at Dromo, the Jey Kashag.   

**Q:**  Oh, yes, spelled [Tib. བྱེས]. Now I understand.   

**A:**  This was at Lhüntse Dzong. It is a very ancient dzong and it was said that it was very "auspicious [Tib. རྟག་རྟེན]". A very large and elaborate ceremony took place.   

**Q:**  At that time, how many people were there?   

**A:**  There were many from Lhüntse Dzong. And many Chushigandru.   

**Q:**  Many means 100?   

**A:**  More than that. Considering just our soldiers [Trapchi], we had 150 odd persons. Then the Gusung, Gyantse, [and the] Police [regiments] were there. Including the villagers, there was probably more than a thousand.   

**Q:**  Excluding the villagers?   

**A:**  Maybe about 500.   

**Q:**  With the officials and all?   

**A:**  Yes. A ceremony took place and at that time, they [the Chushigandru] fired a kind of cannon [just obtained] from the U.S., but the shell did not explode as it should [have]. It seems they did not fix the fuse properly. Then at that time, it thundered [but did not explode].   

**Q:**  I see, it thundered from the sky.   

**A:**  All the Tibetans said, "Oh, it thundered. It's very good, it's very auspicious." Whether it was good or bad, we couldn't tell, right? There was a sound, but the shell did not explode. We did not know until much later that they intended to stay. However, news of the situation in Lhasa arrived and it's said that they could not remain.   

**Q:**  During this time, what was the plan. For example, whether the Chinese were coming or not, one had to send scouts. Who had the authority? Who were the Khambas under? Who were the government soldiers under? How was it?   

**A:**  For example, when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa and until he got to Kyishong Ramey, the manner in which he came—should I speak about this or just talk about from Lhüntse?   

**Q:**  Paljor: That may have also had to do with how the army was kept, who went forward?   

**Q:**  Yes, yes.   

**A:**  This is how it happened. We left the Potala and came down to Norbulinga as guards. Towards the east of Norbulinga, there were the Trapchi soldiers and the monastic soldiers [Tib. སེར་དམག] from the three great monasteries and the mimang's militiamen. Towards the north, there were the Gyantse Regiment, some monastic soldiers, and mimang. Towards the west and south, there were the Gusung Regiment, some monastic soldiers, and militia. We were staying at Kündeling's house at Dekyilinga. At that time, Kungö Kündeling and Kungö Tashi Berala called three of us [Trapchi officers] to meet: our 1st Rupön Sonam Dorje [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྡོ་རྗེ], our 4th Rupön Wangden, and myself, who was a gyagpön. So in front of the Dalai Lama's picture and the protector deity, they said that we had to pledge that whatever they had to say, we would not tell anyone, not even our wives and children. We agreed and made the pledge. They said, "Now the situation is not good," and that "It is possible that the Dalai Lama may have to leave and if such a situation arises, then we have to be prepared. Therefore, today, you, Rupön Wangden, Major Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ], myself, Major Chölung Nangpa [Tib. ཆོས་ལུང་ནང་པ], Kungö Kündeling and Tashi Berala, have to go to the Ramagang boat crossing." Kungö Tashi Berala and Kündeling stayed at the Ramagang boat crossing and we went on. Major Tashi Badro [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བག་བྲོ] and I were told to go to Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང] where some Chushigandru people were whose leader was the ex-government official called Damba Simkhang Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང་བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས] [Note: He was also known as Dawa Senge]. We were asked to bring him up [to Norbulinga] that night. The 4th Rupön and Major Jabo were told to go to Namgyel Serkhang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་སེར་ཁང] where about 100 Chinese soldiers were located. They were told to see if they were still there or not, but not to take any arms and to pretend that they were going to provide mangja (a tea offering) to the monastery's monks.   

**Q:**  Where is this monastery?   

**A:**  Namgyel Serkhang is just past Liu [Niu] Dzong. It was on the Dalai Lama's route and [so it was] very important. Thanks to the good merit of the Dalai Lama [Tib. སྐུ་བསོད] and the protector deities, the next night when the two went to where they were supposed to go [to do the surveillance], [they learned that] the Chinese soldiers had moved to Nortölinga [opposite Drepung Monastery]. I went to Nyetang and met Lobsang Yeshe and the others, and told them that there was chaos at Norbulinga so everything and everybody must be well prepared. When I asked them what they had done, they said they had not done anything. So [we] said, "You should destroy the bridges and the motorable roads, and if there is anything else like narrow passages along the river [Tib. འཕྲང], they should also be destroyed. Then Lobsang Yeshe came up with us [to Norbulinga]. At that time, the river was high. However, there were some places where trucks [could] cross. [We said,] "If there are Chinese trucks crossing, then inform Chushigandru if that place is closer to Nyetang. But if [it is] closer to Norbulinga, then inform the Command Center at Norbulinga." We left this message and came back. Lobsang Yeshe had 60-70 people down there. We dropped Lobsang Yeshe at Drönyerchemmo's house [in Norbulinga] and I came up to Kündeling's house. This was on the 6th. Then on the 8th, it was decided that the Dalai Lama would leave. Then, on wondering what should be done, we said that what was to be done was to be a secret. Then, regarding the role of the soldiers, we were wondering whether we should go to the airfield at Dam or to this place above Trip called Jakyag Garpo ("White bird's droppings") [Tib. བྱ་སྐྱག་དཀར་པོ]. It was said that we should make preparations for going there and that it was not useful unless we went. The 4th Rupön and the 1st Rupön each had 175 armed soldiers. For the machine guns and the others to be loaded (on animals), it was said that the secret would leak out if we took the mules from our regiment, and so we took mules from Kündeling's house. On the 8th, the Dalai Lama was leaving and we left about 8 p.m. The ones who would take them were the leaders, right? They would not take them to the airfield but to Jakyag Garpo. It looks like one is going there because one has to go towards that way . The 4th Rupön and 75 soldiers went to Nyiseylaka [Tib. nyi zad la kha ?]. The 1st Rupön and 75 soldiers went to Jakyag Garpo. Depön Tashi Berala and 10 soldiers went ahead. I and four soldiers went with the Dalai Lama's party. So this was what was done from our regiment. The Chushigandru fighters who came were on the other side of the river. There were about 20 odd of our soldiers guarding the boat crossing. Then we had a shengo from the Lewis Gun Unit. He fired a few shots. I thought, "Oh. Now things didn't go well." Trekhang Kungö Thubden Tsempel [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་འཕེལ] was there and we went to look. We asked, "What happened? Are there Chinese?" He said, "Yes, there are." "Where?" He said, "They ran up that way." [We asked,] "Why did you shoot rather than capture them?". He said he could not and that is why he fired. [We] asked if they were killed, and they were not. I gave him a few slaps on the face. As proof that the Chinese were there, a large handkerchief had fallen. They did indeed come, maybe to spy, who knows. Then from Norbulinga, Phöba Dorje [Tib. བོད་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ] came swiftly on his horse asking what happened. He was a seasoned trader and a favorite of Drönyerchemmo. We said nothing and informed [him] that they could come, that there was no problem. We could not take a horse for the Dalai Lama from the stables in case the secret got out, so we saddled a horse of Kündeling's, and Kündeling and I waited on the southern edge of the Norbulinga. The Dalai Lama, Chemmo and others came. The Dalai Lama asked, "Who is it?" He answered [asked] Kündeling. "Who is your companion?". "It's Kesang Dramdü." "Oh, the name is auspicious [Tib. མིང་བཀྲ་ལེགས་པོ་ཇུང]." Then the Dalai Lama went. He rode and I held his horse. We [went] to Ramagang. At the crossing, the Dalai Lama's horse was sent in the boat. We and the Dalai Lama went in a coracle. As part of the entourage, there was Jigyab Khembo Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] and the Dalai Lama's personal attendants, the Simpön Khembo, Chöpön Khembo, and the Söpön Khembo, Söyog [Tib. གསོལ་གཡོག], as well as Gusung Depön, Singa [Tib. གཟིམ་འགག], the monk official cooks, Söthaba [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ], and one Gusung Shengo and two soldiers. When we reached the other side, people like Kündeling were there. A Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] Khamba named Tempa Targye who was in the Chushigandru, offered the Dalai Lama a scarf [Tib. ཁཏ] and the Dalai Lama asked, "What is your name?". He answered Tempa Targye. "Tonight, the names are very auspicious." Then the Dalai Lama rode, and I did too. From my horse, I led the Dalai Lama's horse. Since Chushigandru had no discipline, they were kind of "disorganized" or "rough [Tib. རབེ་རོབེ]." I said, "You should not be so disorderly, the Chinese are just across the river." Since there were so many of them, it was disorderly, but thanks to the Dalai Lama's blessings and prayers [Tib. ཐུགས་སྐྱེད་སྨོན་ལམ] and the protective deities, the wind was swirling and [you] couldn't really see the people and couldn't hear the people talking. So it was very good. If the Chinese were there at Namgyel Serkhang, then the Dalai Lama would have had to circle the pass. Since the Chinese had left, the Dalai Lama was able to proceed directly. When we got to Namgyegang, Jawdang Ta Lama [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང་ཏ་བླ་མ] had arrived earlier and had left, but he had made preparations. At the crossing, ministers Surkhang, Liushar and Shanka [were there]. We came together and food was served. It was well arranged, and whatever there was, they were ready to serve it. This Tsomönling estate was very .   

**Q:**  During this time, how many people were there, soldiers and [question not finished]   

**A:**  The ones who came to Nyiseylaka, our soldiers, all came on foot. The ones to Jakyag Garpo were also on foot. There were 150 soldiers, however, there was only Depön Tashi Berala and 11 soldiers who were ahead. All the others were coming behind [the party]. The ones who were with the Dalai Lama were four of our people [Trapchi regiment], four Gusung regiment soldiers and the Gusung Depön. When we got to the sandy pass or Chela [Tib. བྱེ་ལ], Tashi Norbu [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ནོར་བུ], a stableman of the late Dalai Lama, was there. He presented a white horse. He somehow knew about it [the Dalai Lama's escape]. I don't know how. Maybe Kungö Ta Lama told him. A scarf was put around the horse and anyway, it was auspicious and ceremonious [Tib. རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཡག་པོ]. Then what was normally a three-day journey was done in an all day, all night travel in two days, and the party arrived at Chutsa [Tib. ཆུ་ཚག྄].   

**Q:**  During this time, were the Chushigandru fighters traveling together?   

**A:**  Yes. There were about 60-70 of them. They were very disorderly. However, it was good, wasn’t it? But since they were not organized, there was nothing to be done . When we got to Chutsa, Taktra Dzasa had known about it and was waiting with tea and snacks plus a horse with an attached mule. Food was served there and Dombor [Tib. གདོང་པོར] Tsendrön Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] arrived from Lhasa. From Lhoka, about 20 odd Chushigandru arrived to greet [us]. Then, way ahead there was the Chela and the Kumbela, both of which were sand passes. If one goes to Che la, the road is better. However, there was the son of Trodha [Tib. ?] Gonggar [Tib. གོང་དཀར] Rimpoche who said that one should not travel via Chela since it goes on to Logang, and it was better to take [the] Kumbela [Pass]. So this was done, and there the Dalai Lama dismounted and walked. At that time, Shasur, Phala, and Surkhang could not walk, you know, they were not used to it, right? They were having great difficulty and [were] sweating. The Dalai Lama told them, "You elder ones, ride your horses. Otherwise you'll be tired." However, unless the Dalai Lama rode, it wouldn't occur to them to ride, right? So [if] the Dalai Lama rode, then they would also ride. Kungö Chemmo had a Mauser rifle and a pistol, as well as a big knife and binoculars. He handed me the binoculars. I was already carrying a Sten-gun, a flare gun [Tib. གློག་མདའ], a pistol, many bullets, and many protective amulets. It was very difficult and out of fear, it was difficult to walk. Then before we got to the pass, there was a kind of grass [Tib. རྩྭ་རམ་པ] thrown on the ground. We did not see it, but the Dalai Lama did and he said, "Gyagpön, pick it up." I did and gave it to the Dalai Lama. He asked what it was and I said tsaramba. He said it was very good since tsaramba is a "treasure of life [Tib. ཚེའི་དངོས་གྲུབ]". At the top of the pass, there were two monks who were burning incense. The Dalai Lama asked me to put it on the burning incense, which I did. Then while descending—the Dalai Lama's cooks, who were tsidrung, had brought tea in a flask and bread. The Dalai Lama ate that and he also gave us some sweets (candy). The Dalai Lama was wearing a round Chinese hat, and a Chinese one around his mouth , a scarf, and he wore a brocade dress below [underneath] and a woolen dress on top of that. He had boots on [too]. He took the woolen dress off and kept the brocade one on. Then the descent continued and one could see Lhoka Gonggar. The place was teeming with people as everyone had already known.   

**Q:**  When you were traveling, did you keep guards behind?   

**A:**  Behind we had 150 of our soldiers coming.   

**Q:**  What was their plan? Were they about half a day behind?   

**A:**  They were all armed. They were trying to catch up as much as possible. There were 125 Gusung soldiers with Rupön Sötrela [Tib. བསོད་བཀྲས་ལགས] and Gyagpön Lobsang Tashila.   

**Q:**  So you were sort of coming together?   

**A:**  Not quite together.   

**Q:**  How far were they.   

**A:**  They were on foot and so probably, if the Dalai Lama was here [Dharamsala], they were around Kangra.   

**Q:**  Where is Kangra?   

**Q:**  About 20 kilometers [away].   

**A:**  Yes, something like that.   

**Q:**  So if the Chinese came, were they to immediately inform [them]—was it something like that?   

**A:**  Yes, they would stop them.   

**Q:**  Their job was to stop [them]?   

**A:**  Yes. Then once [they] crossed the Kyishong [Tib. སྐྱིད་གཤོངས] boat crossing, Chushigandru people were there and Lhoka Gonggar people were there with guns and knives. They were running up and down with badges on their chests which read, "The Volunteer Army to Defend the Religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླངས་དམག]". The older people were prostrating and crying and doing a lot of things. Then the Dalai Lama stayed at Kyishong Ramey Monastery. We arrived just before it got dark. Sometime after it got dark, our soldiers numbering 150 and the 125 Gusung soldiers with Rupön Sötrela arrived. We were serving at the Dalai Lama chambers and since we did not have any experience serving there, it was not going too well. So I spoke to Gusung Depön and said that it seemed it was more important for us to be on the outside. That it might have been better if we stayed on the outside and if the Gusung who had experience serving, stayed inside. Kungö Depön was very happy, saying that "Your opinion is excellent and I will talk to Chemmo [Drönyerchemmo]." He spoke with Chemmo and Chemmo came and said, "Gyagpön, he said you were saying something. Is that right?" I said, "Yes." "Oh, then it's good, and let Lobsang Tashi stay there." So Gyagpön Lobsang Tashi and soldiers served in the Dalai Lama's secretariat. I and the four soldiers stayed on the outside. Outside of that was Depön Tashi Berala, two rupön and 150 soldiers, and then the Chushigandru. Rupön Sötrela was immediately sent towards Dorjetra [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག] in case the Chinese were coming from there. Then, with the Dalai Lama was Kungö Gusung Depön, Gyagpön Lobsang Tashi and I, [who] were always moving just ahead. A group of our soldiers went ahead and another group followed behind. The Chushigandru were very sincere people, though without discipline. They arrived at Jedeshöl, stayed the night, and then another night was spent at Gyangko [Tib. ?] in Drag [Tib. སྦྲག]. Then another night at Jenye [Tib. སྤྱན་ཡས] in Chongye, and yet another at Chongye Riu Dechen [Tib. རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན]. At Chongye Riu Dechen, there was a plan to stay an extra day, but they heard about the Lhasa situation and decided to leave. At Chongye, Kungö Samjola and Kungö Namseling arrived. Then the leaders of the Chushigandru came for an audience and a ceremony was planned. But since they heard that Lhasa was lost, they decided to leave. They left and stayed at Ling [Tib. གླིང] Labrang Monastery of Chödegön [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་གོང]. Then [they] stayed at E Chundogyang [Tib. ཨེ་ཆུ་མདོ་ཀྱང]. The way we proceeded was just as I told you earlier . Then [they] stayed at Shopanub and then Lhüntse Dzong, like what we were discussing earlier. From Lhüntse to Jora [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར]. From Jora, there is a pass called Garpola [Tib. དཀར་པོ་ལ] on the way to Tsöna. At the top of the Garpola, Chinese planes came.   

**Q:**  From Lhüntse to Jora is one day?   

**A:**  One day.   

**Q:**  Jora to Tsöna [is] another day?   

**A:**  Yes. At Garpola, the Chinese plane came. At that moment, I can't remember whether I jumped from the horse or got off. But one of our soldiers had a Bren-gun, which you could shoot in the sky. I thought of shooting. But the Dalai Lama said, "Eh! Gyagpön, stay still, stay still. Don't shoot, don't shoot." The Dalai Lama looked through his binoculars but did not say anything. The plane was flying low and one could have shot at it. After that, it was said that we should not travel all bunched up, but a group should go ahead and another follow behind. The Dalai Lama and a group of 20 people traveled in the middle. Before we arrived at Tsöna, there was this place called Gisum where the reception from Tsöna was. Here, there was boiled meat, dried, meat, tea, and thü—but [I] just could not eat, thinking about the plane and that it might have landed near Tsöna. I could only drink tea and could not even eat bag. I ate a bit of the boiled meat but could not eat the dried one at all. When we got to Tsöna, the plane came and they said that it circled three times and left. That night, Kungö Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས] came from Norbulinga and so did the elder Tsador [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར] Khenjung Thubden Sangpola [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བཟང་པོ]. Then they told the full extent of the situation. Everyone seemed to be just crying, and there was nothing else. The next day, the party was to leave for Mamar to the Indian border. The Dalai Lama said that "There is no need for you, the military officers and the soldiers to come. You can stay if you wish. However, if you leaders want to come, then do so, but leave the soldiers here at Tsöna."   

**Q:**  Who said this?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama. So in a smaller group, we left. It was a two days' journey, but it was done in one day. There the Dalai Lama's tent was a miserably small one, fit for a single praying [Tib. བཅོས་བཏང] monk. All the houses were leaking water and it continued to rain. We did not bring anything to eat or drink and consumed whatever was given [to us] by the Dalai Lama's tsidrung cooks, his söthaba. The Dalai Lama sent Trekhang Kesang Thubdenla [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལགས] and others to the Indian border. The next day, the Dalai Lama seemed like he was not keeping very well. We were disappointed, though he behaved like he was not ill. The Dalai Lama said that "You depön, rupön and gyagpön, if you wish to come with me, then you can. If you want to stay, then stay. If you return, then the few cannot challenge the many and from the point of few of arms and whatever, you cannot manage. It's just a waste of lives and nothing else. However, you think about it." We were sort of stubborn and said that we were returning and would do whatever we could.   

**Q:**  During this time, did you hear anything like this: The U.S. government had the wireless [communicator] of Athar. Through that, they sent a message to Andrutsang saying that "You must hold on to Tibetan land." Did you know about this?   

**A:**  We did not know about this.   

**Q:**  Nobody [knew about this]?   

**A:**  No, nobody. We did not know, but whether those in important positions knew or not, we would not know, right? Athar and Lotse were together .   

**Q:**  Was Andrutsang there?   

**A:**  No. He was yet to come. Most of the people were yet to come. We were a smaller group [Tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས]. Sera Mey's Khembo Ngawang Drakpa was there. So was the ex-abbot of Gyüme, Ngawang Lengden [Tib. ངག་དབང་ལེགས་ལྡན], Trekhang Khenjung, Phala Phogpön [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན] and the Dalai Lama's entourage [Tib. ཆིབས་ཞབ]. Otherwise, [there were] no others. The next day, the people who fled from Lhasa arrived at Mamar. They rode many of the Dalai Lama's horses and since our stable person was here, he said that this was too much and he cried. We said, "There is no need to cry, such are the times. It's even good that the Chinese didn't steal the horses and ride them." Since we had agreed to return, Tibetan currency and protecting amulets, whatever, was given—the Dalai Lama was to go down. When we left, we could see where the Dalai Lama was and until [as long as] he could still be sighted, no one was riding his horse and walking up, only down. No one spoke a word and [they] were desperate and crying. Then, once we lost sight of him, we rode our horses.   

**Q:**  Then Athar and Lotse went with the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, together.   

**Q:**  You all went back, the Trapchi and who else?   

**A:**  Our soldiers, Tashi Bera and Gusung.   

**Q:**  What was your plan at that time.   

**A:**  We went back with the idea of fighting the Chinese as much as possible. We returned, but things were not favorable for us.   

**Q:**  You went from Mamar to Tsöna?   

**A:**  Yes, up to Lhoka.   

**Q:**  To Lhoka? Where?   

**A:**  Up to Chöde Gomba, where the Dalai Lama stayed. Yarlung...   

**Q:**  Was it near Nedong?   

**A:**  It was part of Nedong [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང].   

**Q:**  Was it a 2-3 days' journey?   

**A:**  More than that. About 5-6 days.   

**Q:**  The Chushigandru people were with you and..?   

**A:**  The ones who came with us stayed at Tsöna. The Gusung stayed at Tsöna and those who went further were only us Trapchi.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for them to stay?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama said not to waste lives and that the few could not challenge the many. And so they thought it was no use going. We went with the hope that things may turn out okay. We went there but it was hopeless. Since all were people without a plan, everyone was either fleeing or unprepared.   

**Q:**  Was Andrutsang met on the way?   

**A:**  We met him at E Chundogyang. He was very tired. One can understand this since he had to circle [around] and come. He said he had to rest. He said, "You guys go and do whatever you can, and I will rest and then come and do whatever I can." Namseling and Samjola were at Lhüntse and Andru came to Lhüntse. They said that they were going to discuss [things].   

**Q:**  Lhüntse was toward the south? And you were at E [Chundogyang]?   

**A:**  Yes, in the south. Were were at E Chundogyang. We were already in the north. They were in the south.   

**Q:**  They who? Namseling?   

**A:**  Namseling and Trekhang Khenjung Thubden Samjo.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama left for India, they stayed at Lhüntse?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And Gombo Tashi?   

**A:**  He was yet to come. We met him at E Chundogyang.   

**Q:**  So you met him and together with you guys, was he thinking of [going]?   

**A:**  He said that he needed to rest and he said he was going to go to Lhüntse and do [things].   

**Q:**  So he had plans to go to Lhüntse?   

**A:**  He went to Lhüntse.   

**Q:**  So did you guys go with him?   

**A:**  No. We arrived at Chödegön. Now, to fight we had to make preparations, right? It was just not possible to do this. Everyone was running away. The Chinese had shelled Lhasa and had made such a fantastic destruction that everyone said that we couldn't fight the Chinese. Then they came to Lhoka and bombed Tsetang.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for bombing Tsetang?   

**A:**  There were soldiers there.   

**Q:**  The Tibetan Army?   

**A:**  Remnants of the Tibetan Army, those who had run away and the Chushigandru. It was not our [Trapchi] soldiers alone, but Gusung, Gyantse, and Chadang regiment troops. They did not bomb Tsetang itself, but Trandru [Tib. ཁྲ་འབྲུག]. We went there and made some plans. But they just fell apart. Then another [set of plans], those fell [apart] too. So like this, we arrived at Lhüntse. We thought that the kungö would be there, but...   

**Q:**  You came to Lhüntse, went to Lhoka and then returned. Did you meet any Chinese?   

**A:**  The Chinese had not been able to come.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Our people who were coming on this side were fighting and retreating.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Whether it was the Trapchi, Gyantse, Gusung, or Chadang, they were fighting and retreating. So in this way, they fought at Chundogyang. So the Chinese could not come. When we got to Lhüntse, it was said that the Chinese had arrived at Tsöna, so all the kungö could not stay there.   

**Q:**  Approximately what date was it?   

**A:**  What should I say, I think there were Chinese spies.   

**Q:**  No. No, when you heard about the Lhüntse situation, what day was it more or less?   

**A:**  I don't remember the date. So in this way, when we got to Lhüntse, the kungö were not there and they had left for Jora. When we got to Jora, they had left for Khata. When we got to Khata...   

**Q:**  At this time, Andrutsang and they were together?   

**A:**  He was together [with them] from Lhüntse. Everyone was together. When we got to Khata, at Tsöna, Ganden monk militias, Chushigandru, Gusung and some Trapchi were there, but Tsöna was already lost to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  I see. Already lost? How did the Chinese come?   

**A:**  They came from Tsang, via Lho Dongkar [Tib. ལྷོ་མདོ་མཁར] and Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་པོཏལ]. Then they had come to Khata and there was nowhere to go but to Tsöna. But if we did go there, the Chinese were already there. Then we were taken via Mönpa country and [we] finally reached Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང]. So that's what happened. On the border between Tibet and China, there was a high pass called Tholungla [Tib. མཐོ་རླུང་ལ]. There was a small path which was created by Kungö Namseling and others by driving yaks. If you misstepped, either way, you fell. When we were at the pass, the plane came. Right then, the clouds came and we didn't see the plane, [and] neither could they see us. They could have killed as many as possible. People could not go anywhere. We were just like this [in a queue]. Horses were dead, one could take as many belongings as one wished, but who would? One couldn't get by. So in this way, we got to the Indian border.   

**Q:**  During this time, did Andru and Namseling and all say that "Now it's good if we fight at Tsöna?"  

**A:**  When it was said that territory was lost, they never had the idea of fighting. They thought that if we didn't leave, we wouldn't be able to leave.   

**Q:**  Do you have any questions? That's it. It was very good, thank you.   

