# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0041.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 69  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kedram [Tib. སྐལ་དགྲམ] was a famous gyagpön in the Trapchi Regiment. In this interview, he discusses the argument about carrying the Tibetan and Chinese flags by Tibetan soldiers, Tibetan soldiers converting into People's Liberation Army soldiers and about changing the army's uniforms. He mentions the Tibetan government's decision to reduce the Tibetan Army to 1,000 soldiers and the soldiers submitting a petition directly to the Dalai Lama. He talks about the appearance of the Chinese when they first came to Nagchu, the nomads' impressions when they first saw the Chinese momos, Sten-guns, and about Kündeling Dzasa being appointed as magji with Andrutsang. Additionally, he discusses the Chinese deserter named Lobsang Tashi and describes the Tibetan soldiers in Norbulinga, the Potala, and Jogpori during the revolt.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0041_02/H_0041_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  As we have just spoken, please tell me about the military.   

**A:**  I had forgotten to mention to you last time that when the Chinese first came, what they said was that it was not okay to carry only the Tibetan military banner. We had to carry the Chinese flag also. Then they said that the Tibetan flag must be carried behind the Chinese flag, and also at a lower height. So for awhile, in our regiment, we decided not to carry anything for the time being. So they [Chinese] bothered the Kashag and they told us that we had to carry [it]. So we carried the Tibetan flag in the front and the Chinese flag behind, and we also carried it higher than the Chinese flag. Usually, we didn't carry [it], only during Chinese celebration days like National Day [Ch. shi yi] and the Army's Day [Ch. ba yi] and the like. Then when the Chinese became stronger in power, they said that this could not go on. They said the Chinese flag had to be carried higher and in front. So through the Kashag and then through the military headquarters, we were ordered to carry it [higher than the Tibetan flag]. So during the ceremony, our regiments carried it in front, but lower. As soon as the ceremony was over, we returned with the flag wrapped. This also, they said, was not good enough and complained, saying they were acting like that. [That] we had to carry the flag both ways (there and back) in the same fashion and it had to be carried higher. We didn't carry it higher many times. That's how it happened, regarding the flag. In 1955 ['54], when the Dalai Lama went to China, Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> went as the overall in charge of the preparations for the arrival, etcetera [Tib. ཕེབས་སྒྲིག་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ], as a part of the entourage. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang was also the head of the Granary Office called the Drukhang Legung [Tib. འབྲུ་ཁང་ལས་ཁུངས]. The soldiers' salary was provided by the Drukhang Legung. In the 17-Point Agreement, there was, I think, something about how the Tibetan military should gradually convert to [become part of] the People's Liberation Army. There was a lot of talk down there [China]. In one of the articles, there is talk of the Tibetan military changing to the People's Liberation Army. After the Dalai Lama returned [from China], there was a meeting for three or four days at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིང་ག] A park/grove in the southeast part of Lhasa by the river.">Tsidrung Linga</a> [Tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིང་ག] in which the Dalai Lama related about his trip to China, what was done between the Tibetan government and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> (Lashung [Tib. བླ་གཞུང]), how he went, and how the conversion of the Tibetan Army into the People's Liberation Army was discussed. Regarding the Tibetan military, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Surkhang mainly spoke. He said, "At this moment, the Central Committee is going to guard the borders. They [Chinese] said that there are too many Tibetan soldiers, not too little. Therefore, we agreed to a number of 1,000 Tibetan soldiers. From this 1,000, 500 will be the Bodyguards and the other 500 will be Police, and there is no need to go to regional areas. In the old days, there were the 3,000 Tibetan soldiers from the old regiments. From this category, the soldiers will be chosen. However, with the 500 Bodyguards, the members of the present regiment will be selected according to the wish of the Dalai Lama. The rest forming the 1,000 will come from the 3,000 [of the] old regiment. So the rest—I'm sure many will return home. So do so by all means. Those who don't want to leave, the military officers will be transferred to civilian work. The soldiers, we will form a committee and transfer them to civilian work and give them some construction work or something. The 1,000 soldiers will be given a salary of more than what they are getting now. Things like grain will be given by the Tibetan government. The money salary and the uniforms will be given by the Central Committee. Therefore, the talk is over and gradually, it [things] must change." At that time, nobody said anything. But in Lhasa, the Kadang Gusung Regiment, the Khadang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> Gyantse Regiment, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Police Regiment discussed this and said, "At a time like this, when the Dalai Lama is still alive, as the Dalai Lama's bodyguard and for safeguarding the border, there is absolutely no need to make changes. At this moment, there is a problem of too few soldiers and not too many. Therefore, like the proverb, "The head and the shoulders cannot be separated [Tib. མགོ་དང་དཔུང་པ་བྲལ་ཐབས་མེད]," we will not leave the Dalai Lama and will absolutely not accept the changes." So through the military headquarters, we filed numerous petitions-about three petitions. But we were not getting any answers from the Kashag. So while waiting for an answer, we were wondering about the changes and what was going on. Then the Dalai Lama was invited by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] The monastery that is the sea of the Karmapa Lamas in Tölung County.">Tshurpu</a> [Tib. མཚུར་ཕུ]. During this time, one shengo from our Trapchi Regiment, one shengo from the Gyantse Regiment, and another shengo from the Chadang Regiment were sent to Tshurpu to hand in our petition. In the petition, we stated in full detail the petitions that we had made, and for which we had received no answer, [and that said] "At this time, when the Dalai Lama is still alive, may we not go home? It is like the proverb, 'The head cannot be separated from the shoulders.' And if the government is really having difficulties paying us a salary, then we will not take a salary, and we will serve the government and bring our own food, but we will not leave and we will not change." This is what we petitioned. So at Tshurpu, Kungö Drönyerchemmo also treated them well and while the Dalai Lama was circumambulating, they were able to hand in the petition. Usually, when the petition was submitted directly to the Dalai Lama [Tib. གདོང་ཞུ], there would be some kind of punishment and arrest. None of that was done and thanks to this, within one to two months, the order came that there were not too many Tibetan soldiers but too few. [That] there was no need to make changes, and things were to be kept as before. During this period, the military salary was not even given [paid out] by the Drukhang Legung (Grain office). They had cut it off deliberately. So the salary was given one time and it was already short by six months; 4 month's money and 2 months barley. So then all was given and so everyone was satisfied and happy. So that's the way we stayed. Now, as I mentioned to you last time, I went to Tö for the Road Survey as the Kashag's representative. During this time, the Tibet Autonomous Region was to begin, and they said that the Tibetan Army had to wear the Chinese uniform. So we all insisted that as long as we had Tibetan uniforms, we wouldn't change over to the Chinese uniform. Then they didn't have any choice and became helpless, and the Kashag sent orders that most of the regiments from the rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡིང་དཔོན] A non-commissioned military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of 25 soldiers (a platoon). It is an alternative name for Shengo in the army.">dingpön</a> on must wear the Chinese uniform and the ordinary soldiers could wear the Tibetan uniform. The Bodyguard Regiment's uniform was not Tibetan but a foreign one, and so they had to wear the Chinese uniform. So all the military officers and the soldiers of the Gusung Regiment wore the Chinese uniform. The other regiments from dingpön up wore Chinese uniforms given by the Chinese. The rest of the soldiers did not wear them. So that's how it happened.   

**Q:**  From last time, there are some things that I need to ask. There is one name, Tsador Thubden Sangpo. The word Tsador, is that his name or some work position?   

**A:**  Tsador is his family name. His work was the Changji.   

**Q:**  After the fall of Chamdo, you were at Nagchu. You said you didn't know, but they knew from the wireless. Who were "they"?   

**A:**  They refers to Taktse Rimpoche, Shali Trülku, Shar Ganden Gyatso and some Chinese. They had a wireless set with them. They said, "Why do you do this to us since Chamdo is lost and Ngabö has surrendered?" So we learned from there.   

**Q:**  When they were coming, they were detained for a while. Some of their things were temporarily confiscated.   

**A:**  They were detained at Chunaka and not permitted to come further. Finally, Taktse Rimpoche was sent ahead. Later, when we were ordered to allow them to pass, we sent the lamas to Lhasa and the two Chinese wireless operators were sent to Phondo towards the south to Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང].   

**Q:**  Therefore, what I wanted to ask you was, why were they sent to Lhoka?   

**A:**  They were not sent to Lhasa. I don't know what the government policy was.   

**Q:**  I see. You had government orders not to send them to Lhasa.   

**A:**  Yes, not to send them to Lhasa, but to Tsetang. They stayed at Tsetang for about a year. Then the Chinese came, right?   

**Q:**  When you were at Nagchu, about how many days were you with them?   

**A:**  Not many, about 10 or 15 days.   

**Q:**  When they first came, what was their policy like?   

**A:**  When they first came, like I mentioned to you last time, they were very [kind of weak?]. Their leader, Wangzhen Wang, and a few, except for them, the others came on foot. About 200 or so. They had their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> bags, and a mug tied around their waists. From the way they looked, it seemed even a push would overcome them. All of their lips were cracked. And their faces—[everything] was too much since they came by the Northern Plains [Tib. བྱང་ཐང]. They said that they had come to help the Tibetan people and to do construction in Tibet, and once that was done, they would return. They were eloquent like this.   

**Q:**  When they came, did you have any contact with them, like holding meetings?   

**A:**  No, not at Nagchu—since we were about to leave for Lhasa and they were just passing through and they did not stay there.   

**Q:**  How many days did you say?   

**A:**  About 10-15 days.   

**Q:**  Oh, so they didn't stay for more than that?   

**A:**  No, they did not, they left just ahead and we followed.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came, a payroll office [Tib. ཕོགས་ཁང] was started. So how did they get their food supplies?   

**A:**  You mean at Nagchu?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Generally, it was done by the 2 Changji. So whatever yak or sheep that had to be given to them [Chinese], was paid for [by the Chinese]. Whatever they needed, they asked [the Changji] and then bought it. So at that time, they were not doing what they are doing now [later '50s]. They really behaved like they had come to serve the Tibetans, and the buying and selling of things were done willingly. So it was like I mentioned to you last time, if we take, for example, a sheep—they have a horrible way of killing [them]. They play with it by skinning it from the sides of the neck down to the body, and then they leave it. The sheep leaps around and then they laugh at it. So we were just shocked, saying that they had said the Communist Chinese were no good, now it was really true. Then after a while, they killed and ate it.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a payroll office established there?   

**A:**  [There was] nothing like that.   

**Q:**  Then it must have been later.   

**A:**  Yes, later. Later, they set up the payroll office and stores and many things. This was much later. [In '52-53, see Lhautara interview] At that time, they all left for Lhasa.   

**Q:**  You said that you went on a two or three day's journey to meet the Chinese.   

**A:**  Yes, to make preparations and to entertain them.   

**Q:**  Now, who gave the order?   

**A:**  This was given from the Kashag to the Changji, and since we were the bodyguards for the Changji, we got the orders. The Changji then were Rasagyagen and Tsador.   

**Q:**  So, was the order coming from the 17-Point Agreement where there was a clause to help the Chinese army?   

**A:**  I don't think it was because of that. Because, by the sea route, the representatives had come to talk. So the ones who came via this way [the northern route] also became kind of for [in favor of] holding talks, so it was like helping them and receiving them.   

**Q:**  You mentioned something which was not clear on the tape. Something about Womja Shengo.   

**A:**  It is Womjang Shengo. The one who went with me, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, the one you said, "Let's not go to Lhasa together, but a little later," to.   

**A:**  Oh, that is Womjang, the name of a place. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a>'s name was Lomden [Tib. བློ་ལྡན]. I was at the place that was nearer, a day away from Nagchu. At the place, that was a two day's journey, Lhomtenla was there. When he was done with the reception, then he came to where I was. The Chinese came first and then he came after. So after the Chinese left, we said, "Let's not go with them. Let us go a bit behind." The name of the place was Womjang and the person's name was Shengo Lomden.   

**Q:**  You said when you were at Nagchu, Dingri Depön Drangjun was there. Our Wön Depön and the others were not there, they were already withdrawn. So who do "the others" refer to?   

**A:**  Wön refers to our regiment's Depön Omulungga and others, nobody else was there.   

**Q:**  That's all I wanted to ask about the Nagchu area. Then you came to Lhasa later. You said Nagnga Langkhor Tatsö Rukhag. What does that mean? Let's take the word Nagnga?   

**A:**  Nagnga [Tib. ནག་ངའ] means Nagchu and Ngarigar.   

**Q:**  I see. And Langkor [Tib. རླངས་འཁོར]?   

**A:**  Means motor, a Chinese word. Tatsö Rukhag [Tib. ལྟ་ཚོད་རུ་ཁག] means that we are just surveying for the road.   

**Q:**  So this work was for the road construction?   

**A:**  Yes, [they were] just beginning to look for roads. From Nagchuka to Ngarigar.   

**Q:**  There were some words that I did not understand. Yes, since I went to an English medium school.   

**A:**  Please tell me. I don't blame you.   

**Q:**  Gadrung Dumra said the you had been appointed as Kashag representative for the Langkor Tatsö Rukhag. Then to Magji Kheme. I did the Ngagcha [Tib. མངགས་ཆ]. What does this mean?   

**A:**  Ngagcha means, "What needs to be done, I have instructed". That the Kashag had already instructed Magji Kheme so you go see Kheme.   

**Q:**  Then you said "Kagong". Does it mean [Tib. བཀའ] (order) and [Tib. དགོངས་པ] (wish)?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then you said, "Thubden bayö je kore".   

**A:**  It is "[Tib. ཚུལ་མཐུན་བག་ཡོད་བྱེད་དགོས་རེད]". [It] means you have to be good and diplomatic. [Note: this means doing things properly and lawfully.]   

**Q:**  Yes, some of these words, like "thuthön bayö", we don't know.   

**A:**  Yes, I don't blame you.   

**Q:**  Then when you left, you could take one servant and no arms, right? Then there was one word, "nyekhö", or something, that was to be given by the Chinese.   

**A:**  It is [Tib. ཉེ་མཁོ]—what one needs, like food etcetera.   

**Q:**  I see. What did you take from the Kashag? It must have been some documents, right?   

**A:**  The Kashag had given a letter to Kungö Magji stating that [I] was the Kashag representative and whatever the Nagnga Tatsö Rukhag needed from the various places, men, food, whatever, I should see to it that it was done. So it was that the people should adhere to whatever I told them.   

**Q:**  So, what they needed, food and other things, how did you provide?   

**A:**  The Chinese did not need anything since they brought everything.   

**Q:**  Oh. I see, including food?   

**A:**  Yes, food items and things, flour, rice, vegetables (which they brought from Lhasa, like cauliflower and pickled vegetable [Ch. shui yan tsai] types since they do not get spoiled easily). What we had to do was, when we got to the various places, we had to get the people ready. Then if they needed, sheep, yaks, milk, butter, or cheese, we arranged for them to buy them. So that was it.   

**Q:**  When you got to the various places, who did you have to contact?   

**A:**  About the person, it was also in the first one [Interview 1]. We contacted the two district [Tib. རྫོང] officials' and it was decided. When we left Nagchu, whichever place we arrived at, we contacted the persons concerned and said, "I have been sent by the Kashag for this purpose. They say that they need these things and so you have to supply [them]. The price is whatever you ask. However, you can't ask too much. But at the same time, you can't sell at a loss." I always made sure we Tibetans got a fair price. So then they got what they wanted without the Tibetans losing out.   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> knew you were coming and they were notified by the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes, they had done all of that, as I mentioned last time. Even the people were ready, about 200, and from, that 50, were chosen.   

**Q:**  You said that Liu Jingli was the leader, that he was the "Kongshi Jikyab or Kongsi Chikyab".   

**A:**  It is Kongsi [Ch. gong si]. It is Chinese [and] which means company. He was the main in charge [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] of the Procurement Office, Khodrub Legung. The one that collected needed items.  

**Q:**  So [it/he] is the head of the Khodrub Legung, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the main one.   

**Q:**  So before you left, you said that there was quite a lecture about where you had to go, etcetera.   

**A:**  Yes, in Kapshö's house   

**Q:**  So he gave the lecture and who else did? Didn't anyone from our government give a lecture?   

**A:**  No, no one from our government. So he just told us about how we were going to undertake the trip.   

**Q:**  Yes, that's right, and you were going to leave so early, around 5 a.m.   

**A:**  Yes. When we were going to leave, Kungö Magji Künsangtse came.   

**Q:**  One hundred people were to be collected, for what?   

**A:**  To level the motorable roads where they needed to be leveled. There was nothing much to make [to level] since they were flat, empty plains. At places like the gorges, it was filled, and in Tibet, there is a lot of ice [in the hollows]. If they were not firm, then stones were [used to] fill [them in].   

**Q:**  Now, the 100 people were rounded up, was it done according to the traditional tax system, or what?   

**A:**  The two dzong—you know there are various groups, or shoga, from which they saw how many needed to be recruited to make 100. From this, they needed only 50.   

**Q:**  They did an exam, why?   

**A:**  It was a medical exam by the doctors.   

**Q:**  To see if they were fit or not, and then the 50 were chosen?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. At first, it seemed that they were to be changed in various places [typical traditional thinking]. This was told to me by Magji Künsangtse. But that was not the case. It seemed the Chinese informed them that they did not want a change. Then they sent an order to Nagchu and had everything ready. The 50 were recruited for the round-trip.   

**Q:**  So then, were the 50 paid on a daily basis?   

**A:**  Yes, they paid [them] wages. I don't remember the payment, but, mainly, they provide flour, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, [and] butter. These [items] were given and then deducted from the wage.   

**Q:**  So when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> said to get 100 people ready, then the various households would send someone?   

**A:**  No. Each place had a headman or headmen, gopa [Tib. འགོ་པ]. So they would collect them. So from the 50 chosen, some places would have [to send] people and others wouldn't.   

**Q:**  So the government informed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, saying that they needed 100 people, right? Now, who did the dzong tell?   

**A:**  In the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, there were a lot of people who worked there, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒན་བོ] A village headman. Such headmen were responsible for organizing the different households to pay the village&#x27;s taxes in-kind and labor. They also played a role in settling minor disputes and were the link between the village and the higher authorities. In some areas they were elected by the village households, while in others the position was hereditary or appointed.">gembo</a>, gopa, etcetera. They would collect [them].   

**Q:**  When they collected the people, did they do it according to the traditional tax system [with households sending someone] or did they say, "Wages are being offered and so those who want to come, come."?   

**A:**  They said, "According to the traditional tax system, we need so many men and from different sections [Tib. ཁུངས], such and such people are expected."   

**Q:**  Then there was one place where borax was extracted.   

**A:**  Yes, Bangkaw [Tib. ?] Tshoka [Tib. མཚོ་ཁ].   

**Q:**  They were Labrang misers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Previously, when they were under the Tibetan government and it was good then, they said. But now, after Labrang came, it became worse instead of better. We were being forced into buying a lot of things and they took away all the things we had, like wool. They said, "The Panchen Rimpoche has now come to Tibet." That "He was enthroned and with all of these things, we are having a lot of difficulties." [Note: It's hard to say how the Labrang people behaved. But obviously, there was a lot more work when the lama was around than when he was not. This is natural.]   

**Q:**  There is this word, that on both sides of the car you did "thobaw <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཡབ] A roof-like projection or verandah located on the top of a house.">gyab</a>". What's the meaning [of this]?   

**A:**  You know there is the motor-road, in order to know where the road was when we [would] go up and down, we took out some turf and piled it this high. This is called thobaw [Tib. ཐོ་པོ], in order to mark it.   

**Q:**  The passage reads that the photo of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Rimpoche was given to the Abo hor. Then a movie was being shown. What kind of movies did they show?   

**A:**  They mainly showed movies of the wars that they had fought. Then they showed various kinds of spies in the movies. The movies were shown in every place for one night. We had to go and call the nomads in the area. The two smaller cars went to call them. So as I've said, they were given photos of the Dalai Lama, Mao Zedong and the Panchen Rimpoche celebrating the Wood Sheep New Years in China with decked [out] fried cookies. They also gave them cigarettes, rosaries, tobacco, sugar and they said that "We are relatives." That "It has been a long time since we have seen each other. Now it's so nice to meet. We have come to develop Tibet and to make her better. Once that is done, then we will return. We have come to serve you."   

**Q:**  So when they were told to come and see the movies, did they come out of curiosity?   

**A:**  Since we went, they came and—poor fellows, since they hadn't seen such things, they saw them as strange. It was very strange. They showed a story about the Guomindang. The Guomindang spies came as monks and lamas. When the Abo hor saw the monks and lamas, they thought it was really something and they started prostrating. Then the Chinese thought that this was really terrible and said, "Don't prostrate. These are liars and ones who cheated people."   

**Q:**  Then the Ngarigar Garpön and others, when they were coming to [be] received, then you got out of the car, cleaned it and tied colored flags, dartshön [Tib. དར་ཚོན], on it. Something that you tied to the car.   

**A:**  Yes, at Doringgang [Tib. རྡོ་རིང་སྒང]. They arrived at Doringgang, right? Just before that, we who were coming, wiped the car, got out, and tied a horizontal flag [Tib. འཕྲེད་དར] that had the name of our group [onto the car], and letters were also stuck onto the car. So when we met, we put them in the car and we walked.   

**Q:**  Yes, there was this word, "dartshön", which I couldn't figure out.   

**A:**  Yes. It's various types of flags.   

**Q:**  During this period, Liu Jingli asked you to give your opinion.   

**A:**  This was at Gyamu. So we would arrive at Ngarigar tomorrow.   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. Finally, you did not speak, right?   

**A:**  The Labrang representative, Sonam Targye, spoke.   

**Q:**  Therefore, what I'm trying to ask you is, who else spoke?   

**A:**  There were many. Among the Chinese, there was Liu Jingli, then there was a chief of staff [Ch. can mou zhang] who was staying there, and many others. Among the Tibetans, Kungö Garpön Lobsang Tsewangla spoke. And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>'s Sonam Targye. That's it.   

**Q:**  So did the Chinese say the same things that they were saying at this time?   

**A:**  Yes, the usual. On top of that, Liu Jingli spoke about the journey—how they came to develop Tibet and serve the Tibetan people, the whole thing. Then the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གར་དཔོན] The head of the gadrukpa [tib. གར་ཕྲུག་པ] ceremonial dance troop of the Dalai Lama.">garpön</a> read what the Kashag had said and the Chinese translated it into Chinese.   

**Q:**  What was in the Kashag's letter?   

**A:**  I don't remember it well, but [it was] something like, "For the arrival of the Nagnga Langkor Tatsö Rukhag, we want to say Tashi Delek [congratulations] on your safe arrival." The rest I don't remember, but it was mainly a welcome statement. It was the same with the Panchen Nangmagang.   

**Q:**  What did the Garpön say?   

**A:**  They mainly said, "We want to welcome your group's safe arrival here," and, likewise, in the Ngari areas, they had stores and a lot of other things, and Lobsang Tsewang said that even in Tibet the help had not been very vast. In regards to our help, we had done everything possible. Kungö Garpön Lobsang Tsewang was very defiant, or tough [Tib. གྱོང་པོ]. On that day, he said things that made them [Chinese] change their facial expressions.   

**Q:**  During this time, what did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> person say?   

**A:**  It was a Tashi Delek and the rest I can't remember. Sonam Targyela gave an account of when we first came. He said that in Tibet, hospitals, bridges, roads, and airfields [were] built, and schools [were] established. [That was] all that he wanted [me] to say. In the beginning, I did not have these things in my speech. So they said all of this was missing. Then I said that then there was no need for me to say it, the two garpöns would say it. He [Sonam Targye] said that he better say it because one never knew what <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> would say later.   

**Q:**  Okay, now you have already come to Nagchuka, Lhasa too. At Lhasa, through the military headquarters, they asked you to come to Yuthok, and so there was a celebration of sorts, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was to give a medal for the successful trip of the Motor-Road Survey Brigade.   

**Q:**  So, during this time, what happened? Who spoke?   

**A:**  There were so many who spoke. The Chinese spoke and from our aristocrats, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang and the like, there were many.   

**Q:**  Who had come during this time?   

**A:**  There were so many speakers.   

**Q:**  Let's say generally, from among the Chinese, who spoke?   

**A:**  The main one who stayed at Yuthok.   

**Q:**  Who was that?   

**A:**  Zhang Jingwu. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> at the Chinese military headquarters [Ch. si ling bu]. I don't know his name well. He was there. The others, I don't remember.   

**Q:**  From the government side?   

**A:**  [It] seems like most of the kalön were there. Then there were a lot of government officials. Let alone others, even Janglojen Gung [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་གུང] said a lot.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  That it was a great accomplishment. It was tremendous, making this road from Nagchuka all the way to Tö Ngari. That the future main road had been opened, and he praised [this] a lot. This <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> liked the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Why was Janglojen one of the speakers? What was his rank?   

**A:**  He was a guest. He was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> and a staff of the Drukhang Legung.   

**Q:**  What did the kalön have to say?   

**A:**  Surkhang was the only one who spoke, not the others. Surkhang said it was great and all the good things. It was all praise since there was nothing to say but that.   

**Q:**  From Nagchu, you came to Lhasa in what year?   

**A:**  It was 1955.   

**Q:**  When did you go there?   

**A:**  That was in 1955. We stayed there for four or five months.   

**Q:**  Then—a lot of your talk is concerned with 1959. So during this period, after you returned to Lhasa, what happened? Where were you?   

**A:**  I was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, at the barracks themselves.   

**Q:**  What is a Ting-gun, a machine gun?   

**A:**  It's a Sten-gun. A small one with many holes on the barrel.   

**Q:**  I see, it's the one with the round loader.   

**A:**  No, the one that has a vertical cartridge.   

**Q:**  How many rounds does it have?   

**A:**  Actually, 30 bullets, but no more than 28 are loaded into the cartridge.   

**Q:**  Is it automatic or semi-automatic?   

**A:**  If you press it once, about 2 bullets will go.   

**Q:**  So if you keep on pressing [it], then all would fire?   

**A:**  Yes, all [of them].   

**Q:**  Then it's like a machine gun?   

**A:**  Yes, like a machine gun. You know, these days, the Indian bodyguards carry a gun. That's the one. Isn't Sten-gun an Indian word?   

**Q:**  I thing it's English, but you know we don't know much about guns. What's the difference between a Bren-gun and a Sten-gun?   

**A:**  A Bren-gun is a big gun. It uses the same bullets as the 303 English Carbine.   

**Q:**  Is it the one fed from the side?   

**A:**  No, that's a machine-gun. A Sten-gun has a small bullet which can be used in a handgun and this bullet can be used in Mauser Pistol. It has a vertical cartridge. A Bren-gun is fed from this side. The number of bullets is the same. It goes 28 bullets in the cartridge.   

**Q:**  I see, it's much bigger?   

**A:**  Yes, a lot, the gun is larger too. If you put it over your shoulders it's bigger than the normal 303 English Carbine. It has a 3-legged stand.   

**Q:**  So now we come towards the uprising period. During this period, the Dalai Lama was asked to come to a theatrical show. Did the people consider this to be a very critical and dangerous situation?   

**A:**  Yes, because in the Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> areas, they did the same. First, they were very nice, saying that they came to serve. Later, they gave big drama shows and dinners. So when the people were all assembled, that's when they caught and huddled them together. Then the general populace couldn't do anything since the big lamas and leaders were caught. So they thought that something like that was what was going to happen. For that invitation, besides the Dalai Lama, all the important lamas were there, and also the important government officials. So it seemed that was really what they were going to do.   

**Q:**  So was the invitation the real reason for the people rising up, or was the situation so bad that they said that it would not be okay if they didn't take the Dalai Lama? Was there a plan from much earlier on to take the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Unless there was some plan at the highest level, the lower levels only knew about it right then and there. So the actual [plan], Kungö Gusung Depön knows [would know] in detail. He was asked to come to the military headquarters by the Chinese and they told him that they wanted to invite Dalai Lama, but that no guards were allowed. Then, "If you take guards, then you cannot take many. They are not permitted to carry any arms." So they said things that were never said before, and so people became alarmed and the Drönyerchemmo [Phala] sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Barshi Jedrungla [Tib. བར་གཞིས་རྗེ་དྲུང་ལགས]. We were at the Potala and he was sent to our regiment. He said, "Tomorrow, the Dalai Lama is leaving. There are a lot of things going on and there is a danger that the same thing might happen here that has already taken place in places like Kham and down there. Therefore, what can best be done—and from your regiment, you have to be careful and alert. And similarly, you guys have relations with Sera and it would be good to give them an appropriate message." So on top of one danger, now another one emerged and we were so worked up and couldn't bear the responsibility. At that time, our Depön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] The name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families.">Samdru Phodrang</a> [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] and Tashi Berala were at the Potala, and some of us <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> discussed. I was told to go to our regiment and discuss with a few of the rupön and gyagpön, and tell them to be on alert since we did not know what the situation was going to be like the next day. Then I was told to go to Sera since we had good relations with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> abbot. So when I went to Sera, it was already night. I couldn't just mention [this] only to the abbot, and [so] they called a selected meeting, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu, and they asked me to speak. So I said, "Tomorrow, the Dalai Lama is being invited to the Chinese military headquarters to see a drama. That's what the Chinese told Gusung Depön and looking at what transpired down there [the Kham side], exactly [the same thing seems to be happening here]." They said, "Even all of the abbots have been asked to come. So it was good to hear that." And they were very concerned. So they asked, "What should we do tomorrow?" I said, "There is nothing. If there is no commotion, then it is the best. If there is, then, whatever needs to be done, it's time to do it." So the next day, they sent people to act as spies. So that night, I couldn't return. Early the next day, I rode my bicycle and went down to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>. At that time, nobody was there. Then when I was returning, then the masses were teeming. They were mostly from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>, the ones I met. They were all saying, "The situation today is precarious. Where did you go?" I didn't say where I went. I just said I had gone to Norbulinga and that I was now returning. So they said, "Well, you guys have better come down right now." So we were secretly ready. That's what happened. So before that, there was already danger. When the Dalai Lama was on his procession, our soldiers caught the person with the Sten-gun. That was one case. Then at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང] 1. A major open market in Lhasa in the traditional era that was near the Jokhang and traditionally sold miscellaneous foodstuffs and new and old goods. 2. The location of the of the Police Regiment, which was also sometimes called the Tromsikang Regiment.">Tromsikang</a> field, the man with the bomb was caught. Then when the Dalai Lama went to the Potala, the person with a bomb was caught by the Bodyguard Regiment. So a lot of this had already taken place. Moreover, looking at what had happened at Kham and what they told Gusung Depön, they had not thought about doing something nice. So what we had done was well done and it was supported by the protective deities.   

**Q:**  During this time, you said the Gusung also had cars. So they took the person in the car?   

**A:**  Yes, they had [cars]. Yes, they took the man in their car. Then when another Chinese came, he took off his watch and gave it to him. That was to send the information that he was caught.   

**Q:**  Why a watch?   

**A:**  It was to send a message saying that he was arrested. So just as the Gusung Regiment thought that they would really interrogate him, the Chinese had already told the Kashag, and the Kashag ordered the release. Nothing could be done.   

**Q:**  There are a few words to clarify. Depön Tashi Berala and 11 [others] were to go ahead. You and four soldiers did chimdri [Tib. ཆིབས་ཁྲིད]. Does chimdri mean to lead the horse?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then what is "Nyiser Lakha [Tib. ཉི་ཟེར་ལ་ཁ]"?   

**A:**  It is the name of a place called Nyiser. If <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> is here, then it's over here on the road.   

**Q:**  Then Jakyag Garpo is the name of a place?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then there is another place, Lamogang Drukha?   

**A:**  It is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> Drukha, the ferry site.   

**Q:**  From <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a>, the horses were sent in what?   

**A:**  In the ferry.   

**Q:**  Since we were small, we don't know these places.   

**A:**  Yes, [you are] not to blame.   

**Q:**  Then the Dalai Lama went in a phebko? A coracle?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then some donkey herders were met on the way. What is "tachag khecha"? Was it fodder?   

**A:**  No, it's not that. It was [Tib. རྟ་འཕྱགས་ཁེ་འཕྱགས], which means horses and pack animals that were driven as [a tax].   

**Q:**  Söntsha [Tib. གསོལ་ཚ] means what?   

**A:**  It means the stop for the meal, tsabaw [Tib. ཚ་ཕོགས].   

**Q:**  Then you came to Chutsa?   

**A:**  It is Kyurtsag [Tib. སྐྱུར་ཚག].   

**Q:**  Then you said "chibga randrig [Tib. ཆིབས་སྒ་རང་སྒྲིག]".   

**A:**  This means a mule that is fully saddled.   

**Q:**  You had a pistol, a Sten-gun, some bullets and a longda [Tib. གློག་མདའ]. What is this?   

**A:**  It is the flare to be fired for sending signals- white, yellow, red, and blue burners. It's like a big pistol, but the muzzle is wider.   

**Q:**  Is there a place called Cheshong?   

**A:**  It's Kyishong [Tib. སྐྱིད་གཤོངས] at Rakhame [Tib. རག་ཁ་སྨད].   

**Q:**  Is the word "Tensung Tanglang Magar"?   

**A:**  Tensung Tanglang Magar. It was written on a cloth on the shoulders.   

**Q:**  Then you had some eye problem and you could not write the orders? What were the edicts about?   

**A:**  Yes, the edicts were issued in Kyishong Rakhame [and stated] that the Traveling Kashag was traveling with the Dalai Lama and in Lhasa, the Acting Prime Ministers were now formally appointed as the Prime Ministers. So everybody must do their utmost. It was an announcement.   

**Q:**  Where was this sent?   

**A:**  To Lhasa, and I think to the Shigatse side too.   

**Q:**  What is the Traveling Kashag? [Does this] mean the new one that was made later?   

**A:**  Yes, like Surkhang, Neushar, Shasur and them—[they] became the Traveling Kashag, since they went later.   

**Q:**  What do you mean your eye had "karda gyag [Tib. དཀར་མདའ་རྒྱག]"?   

**A:**  It means something bright and blinking.   

**Q:**  I'm also taking the opportunity to learn a few words . Okay, you are now in Chongye Riu Dechen where Samjola and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> were. The party was going to rest for a day. Then from Shopanub to Lhüntse, where there was a celebration for the starting of the new Kashag- now, what was the ceremony like?   

**A:**  It was an elaborate one held in Lhüntse Dzong with droba shema [Tib. བྲོ་པ་གཞས་མ] dancers and singers. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang read a proclamation. I think it was also the one that was written at Kyishong saying, "For the time being, the Dalai Lama has to leave under these circumstances, and the two acting prime ministers have now been appointed as the actual ones." I think he may have said this. They [the locals] then performed dances and songs and the opera. The opera was not actually performed, but they just came out and it was a grand show. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, at this time, tried to fire their cannon, the one that was air-dropped. The shell was supposed to burst but did not. As soon as the shell landed, there was thunder and everybody said how auspicious it was.   

**Q:**  The shell did not explode?   

**A:**  No, it did not explode. They probably did not adjust it well.   

**Q:**  During this period, did the Dalai Lama speak?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Now, the party had arrived at the border, at Mama. Most of the soldiers stayed here.   

**A:**  Yes, they were left at Tsöna. You all went with the Dalai Lama. Then you said they were also there.   

**Q:**  Were Gyagpön Lobsang Tashi and others there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that, the Dalai Lama said you could return or go to India. There is this word [phrase] [Tib. མང་སྣེ་ཉུང་གིས་བཏན་ཡ་ཡོ་མ་རེད].   

**A:**  Yes, this means that a few cannot match the many. We were few and the Chinese were many.   

**Q:**  I see, and then [the Dalai Lama said], "Don't waste lives." What does betsang [Tib. སྦས་འཚང] mean?   

**A:**  To hide the arms and ammunition.   

**Q:**  Those who were returning received 500 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>, etcetera, and also a chagtsa [Tib. ཕྱག་ཚ]?   

**A:**  It's chagtsa [protective talisman]. It is the clay statue of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Mahe. This was given [to them].   

**Q:**  During this time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> abbot Ngawang Drakpa, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] The Lower Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüme</a> Khensur Ngawang Lengden and some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་པོ་རག] A medium size khamtsen in Loseling College in Drepung Monastery.">Bombora</a> monks [20 monks]—were they also together?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So how come they knew about it?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> abbot and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] The Lower Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüme</a> ex-abbot left one day before.   

**Q:**  Yes, but how did they know?   

**A:**  Kungö Chemmo may have told them, they may have had a secret discussion.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for their coming?   

**A:**  It seems that they were reliable people and [would] possibly [be] helpful later on.   

**Q:**  Otherwise, they could not have helped by carrying guns and fighting, right?   

**A:**  That's correct. However, one can say later that the Sera abbot has come out. Maybe something like that.   

**Q:**  And then, there were 20 other monks with the abbots?   

**A:**  Yes, later. They mostly stayed as bodyguards of Kyabji Trijang Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  Who was with the Dalai Lama when he left from Lhasa?   

**A:**  At first, the talk about the Dalai Lama leaving was with Kungö Kündeling, Tashi Bera, our 1st and 4th <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a>, and myself. So we made the pledge, right? So I went to see and all of that, right? So on the night the Dalai Lama was to leave at 10 p.m., we left at 8 p.m. for Ramagang. The elder Trekhang Khenjung was there and he also brought Kelsang Thubdenla, who's in the States now [Khethubla died last year]. Then there was Phala Phogpön [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན] and there was the monk official Kündeling Tempa Söpala [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ], who is now in Mundgod. When the Dalai Lama was leaving, Kungö Depön and the monk official in charge of serving food to the Dalai Lama, Söpön Khembo [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], the monk official in charge of religious offerings, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] One of the three monk attendants of the Dalai Lama. He was in charge of religious offerings/rituals.">Chöpön Khembo</a> [Tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], and his assistant, Chöyogla [Tib. མཆོད་གཡོག་ལགས], the Dalai Lama's monk official bodyguard, Singa Chantrengpa [Tib. གཟིམ་འགག་ཆ་ཕྲེང་པ], Kungö Gadrang, [went with him]. Kungö Surkhang, Liushar, and Shasur went separately. That's it. So in the Gusung, there was Gyagpön Lobsang Tashi and others.   

**Q:**  When did Uncle <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> come? [A depön.]   

**A:**  [It] must have been later. He must have heard and came soon after the Dalai Lama left. Just before the commotion. We left on the 8th night. The uprising was on the 10th. [He] must have left on the 9th.   

**Q:**  Did Kungö Kündeling become the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>?   

**A:**  He was appointed as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> when he reached Tsöna. Together with Andru Jinda.   

**Q:**  Did Andru Jinda have the rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, he was given the rank of dzasa. From <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a>, Kungö Kündeling sent Tempa Söpala back to that side. [I] don't know what message he sent with him. Then he got left behind and suffered what he had to suffer.   

**Q:**  He's in Mundgod now?   

**A:**  Yes, as the Settlement Leader [Tib. གཞིས་འགོ]. Later, he came out from Tibet after the relative visits began.   

**Q:**  What is the meaning of "ralang chalang [Tib. ར་ལང་ཆ་ལང]"?   

**A:**  This means disorderly. It is our southern talk which means reckless, mess, helter-skelter.   

**Q:**  Each one for himself, right?   

**A:**  Yes, no exact talk. One says this, another says that, and each person thinking in his [own] way.   

**Q:**  At Chongye Riu Dechen, there was Shanggo Sambag.   

**A:**  Shanggo Sambag came to Chödegön.   

**Q:**  What did he tell you to take?   

**A:**  He told me to take something for myself. His previous plan was to call our regiment there, saying that he had enough food and clothing for several years. When we told him that this was useless, then he told me to take something like 10-15 golden coins, like with the elephant brand, and I refused because I never thought they would be useful.   

**Q:**  So then you said that we were not able to fight and so we returned. You mean towards India?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then later you said that when you reached Dragla, you said something like [Tib. དམག་བགོས་འདྲ་ཆགས་པོ་ཇིག་བརྒྱབས་སོང]. I couldn't understand this.   

**A:**  This means when we arrived at Phagkö, from Lhüntse, they made a very good sounding military assignment.   

**Q:**  Yes, what does that word, [Tib. དམག་བགོས], mean?   

**A:**  This means the areas were divided into the different groups, and then they said they were going to fight. At Yartö Dragla, Chantreng, and Litang, many of us were assigned. When we went to Yartö Dragla, no one was coming. So we returned to Nyen [Tib. གཉན], and it seemed that at Chundogyang, it sounded like [there was] cannon fire. Jama Jinda and others seemed to have come from there. The Chinese were shooting after them it seems. So when we went to Lhüntse, I think I mentioned it already....   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. Then you said a lot of people were at Jora. You also said [talked] about Shatra.   

**A:**  No, it was not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a>, but Shagjang.   

**Q:**  Then Khata Rimpoche showed a secret passage in Thulung la. Is there a place called Gang?   

**A:**  It is Gangla [Tib. གངས་ལ], the snow mountain pass. After passing this, we got to Thulungla.   

**Q:**  Then you said that you stayed in a le, right?   

**A:**  It was not a le, but it was a sheep's corral [Tib. ལྷས] where we stayed for the night.   

**Q:**  Then on Thulungla, you said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> made a small path, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Kungö Samjola, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, and Khata Rimpoche made the path.   

**Q:**  You said that a lot of the animals died, right?   

**A:**  There were people who were running away and the animals, like horses, basically died of exhaustion. There were many dead and so we had to pass over them. If you went a little bit off [the path], then there was snow. So they made the road by driving the yaks.   

**Q:**  Is it "Mekyo Namyug [Tib. མེ་སྒྱོགས་གནམ་དབྱུགས]," the ones that were airdropped?   

**A:**  It's [Tib. མེ་སྒྱོགས་གནམ་བླུག], a 2 Mortar which is loaded from the muzzle and to be shot in the air.   

**Q:**  I see, a mortar. What is the number 2 for.   

**A:**  It means 2 inches at the muzzle. Then there's also the 3 Mortar.   

**Q:**  What is the ladder called [Tib. སྐས་འཛེགས་འདྲེ་སྐས]?   

**A:**  It is a tree trunk where steps are cut into it.   

**Q:**  Is it one trunk?   

**A:**  Yes, and it's not that broad either. And so footwells were cut out. And so stubbornly, people dragged the horses along. Some would fall off and some amazingly made it with a person pulling and another pushing.   

**Q:**  So we have now come to India and I have asked you something about Lhasa. The Chinese Regimental Commander [Ch. thuan zhang], Lobsang Tashi, met a girl. How did it happen?   

**A:**  Previously, in Metro [Tib. མལ་གྲོ] we had a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆིབས་གཡོག] Stable boys in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s stables. In addition to looking after the animals, during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s time they also delivered personal messages for the Dalai Lama.">chibyog</a>, a stable boy of the Dalai Lama's stable called Künsang [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང], who went to get slate in a horse-cart. When it approached the bridge Kurusamba, the Chinese were blocking it. Then, I don't know whether he was alright or not, [but] the Chinese shot the chibyog. His name was Chibyog Künsang. Then the Chinese suspected that the Tibetans might rise up and they made preparations. Lobsang Tashi was the Junior Depön of the Dongkar Shogo Cannon Regiment. He was stationed at Linga Sarpa [Tib. གླིང་ག་གསར་པ] [located on the east side of Lhasa] as the opponent [Tib. ཁ་གཏད] against Sera and Trapchi. During this time, he met this girl in Linga Sarpa who was then the daughter of the caretaker of the park. He sought permission from the Military Office to marry her, and permission was given and they got married. Then, as time passed by, there was a lot of criticism about him—that he had a Tibetan wife, that he liked Tibetans, and this was no good. He stated that his life may have been in danger. Then, one night, he said that he was going to see a movie, and it coincided with the time that his superior had to make a trip to China. He [Lobsang Tashi] had asked his wife earlier where he should defect to. She told him that our regiment would be better. So along with a servant, he escaped to our regiment. I think this was said the last time.   

**Q:**  At Trip, there were there were 12 automatics. What do you mean by automatic?   

**A:** They were the cannons, not the real machine guns. Automatic ones that they use 12 shells. So there were 12 of those. Then four were for the Drepung and Gusung barracks, four for Lhasa, and four for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> and Sera. [So for Lhasa, this was quite a lot of firepower with 144 rapid firing shells with each loading.]   

**Q:**  Then there is this place, Draothang?   

**A:**  Yes, Drauthang [Ch. jiao wu chang].   

**Q:**  So now, when Rupön Gugur fired the cannons, could you specify the directions?   

**A:**  Sombü is towards Sera to the north. The hospital is towards the Potala to the west. Silingpu, the Chinese military headquarters, is towards the southwest. It was fired from Lubu.   

**Q:**  I think that's about it. However, later, after the Dalai Lama had already left, was there a People's Association or [were] meetings started? How did it happen? Did they fight?   

**A:**  The people [Tib. མི་དམངས] were there the moment the uprising started. So many came and surrounded the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and our soldiers and the people were intermingled [intermixed]. At the Potala, the military headquarters, Bhamari, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a>, only our soldiers were there. At Norbulinga, towards the west, was the Bodyguard Regiment. The north, the Gyantse Regiment. East, we [Trapchi] were there. Then there was the Mimang and the Sermag, the monk army from the three monasteries. Then, the People's Meeting [Tib. མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་འདུ] began that same day, and there were so many appointed and the meeting was held at the Shabden Lhagang [in Shöl]. Likewise, the big meeting was at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Lhagang [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད་ལྷ་ཁང]. Then the Women's Association rose. Kündeling Gurteng Künsang [Tib. གུར་སྟེང་ཀུན་བཟང] was the leader and the women went shouting everywhere.   

**Q:**  That's all I have to ask, but I wanted to ask you just a personal question. During this time, in 1959, what did people say that my grandfather did?   

**A:**  missing   

**Q:**  Are there any people here today who were at that meeting?   

**A:**  Oh! That's difficult. I don't remember.   

**Q:**  Were there some government officials?   

**A:**  Yes, there were many.   

**Q:**  Please keep [this] in mind, there may be someone.   

**A:**  Yes. If they had taken up what Kungö Tsarong had said, then it would have been very good. But that didn't come about.   

**Q:**  Who did not agree?   

**A:**  Mainly the people's representatives.   

