# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0041.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:**  Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 69  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kedram [Tib. སྐལ་དགྲམ] was a famous gyagpön in the Trapchi Regiment. In this interview, he discusses working as a shengo in the Trapchi bodyguard soldiers for the Changji. He talks about the arrival of Taktse Rimpoche via the northern route and about detaining them. He discusses in detail his going to Tö on a Chinese-Tibetan road development inspection team. He talks about several incidents between Tibetan soldiers and Chinese troops, and the March 10th event, and about accompanying the Dalai Lama when he left Norbulinga to go to India. He gives a very detailed account of the Dalai Lama's flight to India. Then he discusses in detail how he returned to Tibet to fight again, but how that was hopeless as everyone was fleeing to India. He also discusses how the Tibetan soldiers fought in Lhasa and how some Tibetan troops and Khambas fought well in Lhoka after the Dalai Lama fled.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0041_01/H_0041_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I want to ask you what you were doing from 1949 or '50 to 1959?   

**A:**  In 1949, I was in Nagchuka as part of the bodyguard unit of the 2 Governors of the North (Tib. ཆངཇི), Tsadora [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར་བ] and Rasagyagen [Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན].   

**Q:**  You said something about Tsadora, and some kind of tax collection?   

**A:**  Tsadora was Khenjung Thubden Sangpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བཟང་པོ]. Rasagyagen was a fourth rank rimshi. They were the two were the changji. As their bodyguards, we had 100 soldiers from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment, including one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> and four shengo. At that time, I was [one of] the shengo. Since the Chinese situation was getting tense, 500 soldiers from the Dingri Regiment, with Drangjun [Tib. བྲག་འཇུན] as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, arrived at Nagchu. Then 250 soldiers from our regiment arrived with Depön Omulunga [Tib. རྔོན་མོ་ལུང་བ]. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Ragashag arrived at Nagchu with his entourage as the main northern commander-in-chief [Tib. བྱང་རྒྱུད་སྤྱི་འདོམས་ཆེན་མོ]. He stayed and was supposed to give the orders and make the necessary preparations. However, before that, the Chinese had already arrived in Chamdo. They [the Tibetan army] couldn't manage in Chamdo and Kungö Ngabö had already been captured. Many incidents occurred and [we] were not able to prepare properly. We did not know about the situation and so we just stayed, thinking that the situation might not be that bad. They [Taktse Rimpoche, etcetera] knew it [found out about it] over the wireless.   

**Q:**  You didn't have wireless there?   

**A:**  We were just making preparations and wondering what was next. No order was issued. At this time, Taktse [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར] Rimpoche, Sharli [Tib. ཤར་ལི] Rimpoche, Shar Kanden Gyatso [Tib. ཤར་སྐལ་ལྡན་རྒྱ་མཚོ] and some Chinese arrived via the northern route. They said that they came to have discussions. In the Atsabesogoba area [Tib. ཨར་རྫ་བེ་སོག་འགོ་པ] [Note: It is also called the Nyenrong Dzong [Tib. གཉན་རོང་རྫོང], at a place called Chunaka [Tib. ཆུ་ན་ག], they were detained and not allowed to proceed. What they said was that they had come to discuss things for the benefit of Tibet. So it would be better to let us go up [to Lhasa]. However, they [Changji] told them that nothing could be done without government approval. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> had gone to Shigatse at that time. So while at Nyenrong Dzong, though I did not go, our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a>, Pema Künsang [Tib. པད་མ་ཀུན་བཟང], was there. They [Taktse Rimpoche etcetera] had heard over the radio that Chamdo was lost. They were saying, "Why are you stopping us since Chamdo is lost anyway?" We maintained that there must be government orders, and their belongings were confiscated and kept under lock. That's what had happened there. Just before they confiscated their belongings, it was at that time that the Dalai Lama took over the reigns of the Tibetan government. And the reincarnate lamas were very happy and led the offering incense rituals [Tib. བསངས་གསོལ] and said that now it was well done. Anyway, the fact of the matter was that they were detained and not allowed to proceed. Then the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and Taktse Rimpoche was allowed to proceed ahead. However, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> and others did not present necessities to them and they were afraid since there were no government orders. Taktse Rimpoche then received orders that he could proceed ahead to Lhasa, but the others were temporarily detained. Then when they were allowed to go, the two reincarnate lamas were sent to Lhasa, but the Chinese and the radio operator were sent to the south, Lhoka. On the way to Lhoka, when they came near Phondo [Tib. ཕོད་མདོ], they had a map and said that this was not the way to go, and that they wanted to go that way. But they would take them under duress and that's how they were sent to Lhoka. We were still there [Nagchu] and learned about the defeat of Chamdo. What we did was that the Dingri regiment and our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment had a discussion. We said that Chamdo was lost, Riwoche also. In Tengchen [Tib. སྟེང་ཆེན] at Setsa Tashiling [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་གླིང], there were the Drugna [Tib. དྲུག་སྣ] soldiers led by Gyangkar Nangpa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་ནང་པ]. The local people alerted them about the coming of the Chinese and that made them run away. So we said that whether it was to Tengchen, Riwoche or Chamdo, it would be a good idea to go there. Under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱང་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet in the traditional era.">changji</a>, when the 13th Dalai Lama went to China, there were a lot of horses presented. During Changji Phala's time, these were distributed to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>s. They were of exceptional quality and each miser household looked after one or two of them. From this we said about 200 soldiers would go. In addition to that, each soldier would take two horse, totaling 400 horses. This was decided and we made a petition to the Changji. But the Changji could not decide. Lhalu was at Lharigo [Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ], so we sent one petition to him. Another was sent to Yadong and yet another to the two acting Prime Ministers. The reply we received said, "While the peace talks are going on between Tibet and China, you cannot excessively attack and cause disturbances. Stay as you are and guard your own place." So there was nothing we could do and we remained. In the meantime, via the northern route, the Chinese officer Wang Zhenwang arrived. There were not more than 200 soldiers with him. Instead of fighting, we were sent for about 2 or 3 days to a number of corvée transportation stations [Tib. ས་ཚིགས] to make preparations for them-to pitch tents and have some food supplies, like meat, ready to entertain the Chinese. We had one shengo by the name of Tomden [Tib. སྟོབས་ལྡན], who was sent to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>. I was sent to Chibra [Tib. ཆིབས་ར], which is one meal stop from Nagchu. We had to go, however, we were very distraught about it. If we had really fought them at that time-they were really nothing [easy to be handled]. They had a bag of yellow <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, which had all kinds of flour, pea oil, etcetera, mixed together that hung on their shoulders. They had some bedding, a mug, chopsticks, a gun and bullets. They were all on foot except for the officer who was riding a horse. Their faces were all swollen and terrible, lips chapped, since the weather was cold, and a push may have made them fall over. However, there wasn't anything left [like government orders] except to show them respect. They were also very diplomatic. They said they came to improve the Tibetan country, to serve the Tibetan people, and when that was done, they would leave. They were touching our heads [head to head] and clasping our hands. Then they left and the shengo in Gomang and I said, "Let's not return with them." But later, when we got to Nagchu, there was the Changji and the Dingri Depön Drangjün. Our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and them were not there, they were already withdrawn. Only our bodyguards were there. What had happened was that they had organized a march past for the Chinese. Everybody was so sad and there was a lot crying. However, since they were government orders, they would do it. Then there was a meeting in which they said that they came to liberate Tibet peacefully, to develop [the country], to serve the people and that when all was done, they would return to China. The whole thing was said. We arrived just after the meeting adjourned. Then it was decided that only 25 changji bodyguards would be required and the rest were to return. We returned almost together, with the Chinese just ahead. At Nagchu, we had a lot of fodder for the horses and this we needed to sell. The Chinese were offering a better price, so we approached Wang Zhenwang and told him that we were returning and that it would be good if he would buy the fodder. He said, "It is our land and we won't pay for it." Then he said he was kidding. He said he would serve our needs and gave a fairly good price. While they were staying there, it was strangely interesting. They didn't kill the sheep. They skinned the sheep alive from both sides of the head to the body. Then they beat the sheep to go and then they jeered and laughed. Then later they killed it. Then, almost simultaneously, we came to Lhasa and stayed at the barracks. While at the barracks in Trapchi, the Chinese were staying at the Mechanic Electric Office [Tib. གློག་འཕྲུལ་ལས་ཁུངས] and we were just a wall away to the west. We were not getting on too well. They were friendliest with the Gusung Regiment. We were the Khadang Regiment and the Chinese called us the 2nd [Ch. er] Depön. They didn't like us, and even though we were not capable [of beating them], we just showed our bad side. When they came to show movies or to act in plays, there were a lot of disorderly younger kids and we instigated them to throw stones, cut the electric cords, throw dust while the play was going on, etcetera. And so they did not like it and used to say that the 2nd Depön was really bad. Since we were living close by-this was much later-they built some bunkers and dug ditches. All along the east [side] of our barracks we dug about one story into the ground, thinking that the Chinese might have dug underground tunnels, but we did not find any underground tunnels. In 1955 [1954], when the Dalai Lama went to China along with the Panchen Rimpoche-at that time, the Kashag said that on the second day of the Tibetan New Year, the order came that from the military camps, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> or a gyagpön should go from Nagchu to Tö Ngari Gar [Tib. མངའ་རིས་སྒར] as the representative of the Kashag and the leader of the Nagchu-Ngari Motor Road Surveying Brigade [Tib. ནག་མངའ་རླངས་འཁོར་ལྟ་ཚོད་རུ་ཁག] [in 1955]. So all of the regiments were assembled with the depön, rupön and the gyagpön, and when the lottery was cast, our regiment was drawn. Then within the regiment, we had a discussion and I happened to be the youngest of the rupön and the gyagpön. They said that I had spend a lot of time in the northern areas and that it may be suitable for me to go. I said that was true. "However, the best suited should go and I don't feel comfortable accepting this task immediately." But Kungö Tashi Berala and some of our rupön said, "Oh, don't talk like that. A lot of them don't even know how to write. Besides, you're the youngest and you have the experience. This time, we request that you go." So I was unable to refuse. Usually, we had to take formal leave [Tib. ཐོན་ཕྱག] and many things. This time on the 2nd day, Kungö Tashi Berala took me to the Kashag and Gadrung Dumra [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར] said, "You have been confirmed as the Kashag representative to the Nagchu-Ngari Motor Road Survey Brigade. All of the instructions were given to the Magji Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད] and you have to act according to the order. It is absolutely forbidden to take actions detrimental to the relations between the Chinese and the Tibetans. You have to go there and behave lawfully and properly." So there was nothing to do but that. Then Kungö Tashi Berala took me to Magji Kheme's house. He had all the Kashag's documents, like the instructions, and he said, "It's good that you are going. You've also spent a few years in Nagchu. Your duties are all spelled out in the documents, so there is no need for me to mention them. You can take only one servant and no arms are ever permitted. Your necessities will be provided by the Chinese, you don't need to take them. In the various regions that you travel, whatever is needed, like butter, meat, animals and the number of people, you have to arrange and provide liberally according to the documents. So this time, you have to do your duty conscientiously. The overall in charge [Tib. spyi khayb] is Liu Jingli, who is the manager of the Procurement Office [Tib. མཁོ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་ཁུངས]. He is staying at Kapshö's House. He will be going. Come tomorrow and I will introduce you to the Procurement Office." With that, I returned to the barracks for the night and told the officers what I was told. Then on the 3rd day of the Losar, on the 4th, I was told to stay the night at Kapshö's house since we had to leave on the 5th. On the 3rd, I was introduced. And you know the Chinese are so diplomatic, shaking hands and serving Chinese tea. They didn't serve sweet tea, but they had a lot of candies and cigarettes. Kungö told the Chinese that I knew the place. That I had been well instructed, etcetera. So the Chinese guy told me to come tomorrow evening, which I did. They were all gathered at Kapshö's house, all of those who were going to Ngarigar. Liu Jingli was the overall in charge of the Procurement Company [Tib. གོང་སི] from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> to Ngarigar. Under him was the section leader, Ji Kezhang, then the director, Chen Chuzhang. Then Thu Buzhang, who had a wife and children and who later went to China, was going with us. He did not seem to be working for this group. Then there were other workers and drivers, the whole set. Then he gave a tremendous lecture citing reasons why they were making the trip to seek roads for the development of Tibet. So we had to make the accomplishment. That's why we were going to leave the next day at 5 a.m. There were 20 large 6 wheeler trucks. Among these 20 trucks were two trucks with 10 wheels and two jeeps. And we were told how we were going to go and how we were going to be seated. Then they gave us dinner. At Kapshö's house, there was an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ་བ] A person from Amdo.">Amdowa</a> whose name was Gyamtso, who was in the previous Siling Army and was the interpreter. I told him, "Please, I don't want to stay here tonight but would like to go and stay with a relative close by at Rabse [Tib. རབ་གསལ] House. Is that okay? Please ask Liu Jingli." He said, "That's okay, come at 4 since we are leaving at 5 a.m." This was agreed to and I did as planned. The next morning we left at 5 a.m. sharp, lined in a convoy through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street. The Magji also came to speak with Liu Jingli, and to me he also said "Go well, be attentive," repeating what he had said earlier. So I was seated in front with the driver and in another small car, he [Liu Jingli] and his two bodyguards and two servants were there. Yet another smaller car consisted of the cartographer and a few soldiers. In the lorries were the drivers, and other soldiers and equipment. That night we stayed at Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན]. [Our] arrival was well prepared with sumptuous food. The next day we arrived near Nagchu at a place called Dunag [Tib. ?] where we stopped for a meal. It was not like our Tibetan meal stops. All there was was hot water and bread. Then from a truck, a large box of "propaganda papers" fell and the documents were blown away by the wind. Then we had the vehicles in a circle and they had us pick up all the papers, making sure not one was lost. Usually, the journey is long-and one stays one night at Yangpajen-and if we didn't have to stop to pick up the papers, we would have reached Nagchu before nightfall. However, we got there around 10 at night. They had everything ready there. I knew a lot of people in Nagchu and I said that I wanted to go and visit, but they said no and to stay right there. The next day I went to see the Nagchu Dzong as customary. Since the changji were not there, Kungö [lay official] Chumtre [Tib. འཆུམ་བཀྲས] and [the monk official] Jawdang Shabdö [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང་ཞབས་སྡོད] were there. "The Chinese told me that you two have to arrange the persons and necessary things. So please go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> to discuss this. Whether or not the Chinese said that or not, I had to go see the two dzong," who were customarily called the Nagchu Khenang Nyi [Tib. ནག་ཆུ་མཁན་ནང་གཉིས]. The two Kungö said, "We have already received instructions from the Kashag and have 100 people ready. What can we do to help you?" I said, "I have nothing to ask but [for] the 100 people. Please arrange that well." I had nothing further to say so I returned. We had our 25 soldiers. The changji was Minkyiling [Tib. སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང], but he was not there. But the 25 soldiers and a shengo were there as bodyguards. I don't know how, but they had heard that I had come and brought tea and bread. So I asked [the Chinese] if they could come in. They said okay and we sat around drinking tea and talking. I couldn't visit close friends. Then two days later, the Chinese did a medical examination of the selected 50 of 100. Then they divided them into tens and provided [them with] a tent, a bellow and kitchen supplies. I was given one too. We pitched our tents at a spot called Tramshingang [Tib. ?]. Then they said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> representative was to come, but he was not able to [meet them there]. We left after about two or three days, and at the place called Bangko [Tib. ?]tsopa—where borax is found—the party stayed an extra day. They were misers of Tashilhunpo. At this place was the Tashilhunpo representative by the name of Dewashar Sonam Dargye [Tib. སྡེ་བ་ཤར་བསོད་ནམས་དར་རྒྱས], and his wife, a servant and an assistant. Quite an entourage, with guns and everything. I was told it was not permissible to carry those things-the two of us had nothing. They gave us whatever food we wanted. Vegetables, flour, cheese, tsamba, butter-they had the whole thing. The Aba hor—the nomads from the north-were given a one-month salary at Nagchu. In the evening after the day's journey, the first tent erected was of the wireless operator. Then Liu Jingli's tent, then Ji Kezhang and then according to the ranks. Our tent was the last. In the evening we had come a long way, and on both sides of the road we took people with shovels and hoes and went to pile up stones. We collected cow dung and in front of every vehicle, we piled a sack of dung in case the vehicles didn't start in the cold weather. The next day our tent was the first to be folded and then the others in order. The wireless operator's tent was the last since he would send a message just before leaving. Only Liu Jingli and Chen Chudrang were permitted [to go] into the wireless tent. Otherwise, no one was allowed to go there. Since it was the first time that the Aba hor had seen cars, they were afraid and ran away. Then when the vehicles caught up to them, the Chinese told them, "Now we relatives have met, and it is very good." And they touched heads and stroked their cheeks and were very nice. They said that they had come to develop the country to serve the Tibetans, and then [they would] return the whole thing. The Chinese had brought a lot of copies of a photo of Mao, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama during the New Year [in Beijing]. They distributed this along with rosaries, cigarettes, tobacco, candies and tea. Then when all was settled for the evening, they showed movies. They went around in the jeep to call the people to see the movies and the heads of the Aba Hor received extra gifts. So in this way we arrived at Ngarigar. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གར་དཔོན] The head of the gadrukpa [tib. གར་ཕྲུག་པ] ceremonial dance troop of the Dalai Lama.">garpön</a> were Kungö Lobsang Tsewang [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་དབང] and Kyarasiba [Tib. སྐྱ་ར་སྲིབ་པ]. They had soldiers and a lot of other workers, and they had come to receive us after our few days' journey. They came to receive us at Tengtse Doringang [Tib. སྟེང་རྩེ་རྡོ་རིང་སྒང]. They were communicating by wireless. We got out of the car, cleaned it and tied colored flags [Tib. དར་ཚོན]. When we met, they were put in the car and we had to walk while the vehicles moved slowly. Then we arrived at Tö Ngarigar, there was a great reception. We had our own place to sit and there was a Chinese woman as a servant, and Tibetan tea, tsamba, cheese and sugar, and Chinese candies, fruits and cigarettes. These were all decked out. The grand afternoon lunch was attended by all, including the officials of the Ngarigar, the two garpön. It was now about the 11th day and when we were about to arrive at Gyamu, Liu Jingli asked us to come to his place. He said, "Tomorrow we will be arriving at Ngarigar. The Motor Road Surveying Brigade has made a great accomplishment and the two of you have to state your opinions at the meeting." So we asked, "What opinions do we have to give?" He said, "How Tibet has really developed and how we overcame the difficulties of the journey." I said, "I doubt we should give our opinions." He said we must since they were our accomplishments. There was nothing to write about my accomplishments in Tibet earlier. So I wrote about how we made this journey and showed it. There was an interpreter called Temba [Tib. བསྟན་པ] Kezhang and another Amdowa interpreted to him. Liu Jingli's face turned red and said, "This will not do. In Tibet, roads have been constructed, airfields, bridges, schools established and many other improvements [have been made]. You have to write about this in your speech." I said, "Well, if I have to write it, I should do as you have commanded. But I came to fix the roads on this side and I know nothing about all of the other things. So I cannot write it. If what I have written is not sufficient, then I cannot write otherwise." He said, "No, you have to write it." Then [Tashilhunpo] Kungö said if I didn't write something, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> would scold me. I said, "Well you write whatever you like, but I'm not going to." So I went with the interpreter and said that there was no need for me to make the changes since there were representatives of the Tibetan government there, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and a rimshi. "I am of a very low rank. Actually, I am only a supervisor for the ula. I don't need to say anything and I have never said [anything] like this. The two of them will say it." I just left it like this. So Liu Jingli was very angry. When we got to Ngarigar, I told the two garpön and they said that I had done alright. The two Kungö were very nice and got along well together. Besides, Lobsang Tsewang, who had first gone to receive the Dalai Lama's incarnation, had a very strong character. He said, "You did well, forget about it. You wrote what you did and if they don't like that, then leave it. We will say something, whatever is within the instructions of the Kashag." The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> and the Tashilhunpo representative said something. In the evening, Liu Jingli asked me to come over. He was a curious sort and sort of fair and said, "When we made the journey, you worked much more than the Tashilhunpo representative. Since you didn't say anything, you have belittled your own kind of glory. As for the Central Committee, it doesn't make any difference. You didn't get the credit [Tib. ངོ་སོ] for your hard work." I said, "I didn't do the work for my own credit, but only to carry out the orders of the Kashag." Then he smiled and patted me on the shoulder saying, "It's alright." From this area, Mount Kailash was very close, but no way did they allow us to visit it, though I said that I was going to visit it. They said, "We have come to survey the road conditions so we must now return, and you cannot go to Mount Kailash. We have made a great accomplishment and later we will send you a car specially for your pilgrimage to Kailash." Liu Jingli and a group went to Xinjiang and the rest of us were to return. Then I was told to go with them to Xinjiang and China where I would make great accomplishments, receive honors and see Mao Zedong. I said, "I don't have the Kashag's orders to go to Xinjiang, but only to Ngari and then return. With your help, later I will eventually see Mao. Just now I don't have the Kashag's orders. Besides, you told us that we cannot go see Mount Kailash, but only later. So I will also see Mao later." With that, I left. They took about 10 vehicles and we took the remaining 10 or so. They took both the jeeps. Five vehicles went to the dzong where we would stay overnight. Five others had 10 people each. One group of 10 would stop and pile up the stone piles, then the next 10 and so on all the way. On the way, they examined the rivers, rocks and water, and took many samples. Then when we went to Nagchu again, there was a great reception prepared. It was so funny to see the Aba hor dancing away. You know we used to know these same fellows before. They told us to dance too. We said we didn't know how. Then we got to Lhasa and the Shigatse Kungö went straight to Tsang. One day I was told to come. It was an order from the Magjigang (Tibetan Military Headquarters). I went and they said come to Yuthok. I went there and there was a great meeting. During this time, the Nagchu-Ngari Road Survey's work achievements were being greatly acclaimed. So there was nothing for us to say, and we only listened to those who were talking. For the Tashilhunpo representative and for myself, there was a plaque with Mao's head in the middle [of] a flag and on it was written "the Nagchu-Ngari road inspection team" [Tib. ནག་མངའ་རླངས་འཁོར་ལྟ་ཚོད་རུ་ཁག], and the Kashag's representative Trapchi Gyagpön Kesang Dramdü and something written in Chinese. I don't know what. They said this was for our great achievements. A scarf was given and then they took us to the restaurant and dined us. And they said to let them know what we needed since they would provide whatever we needed and whichever office we wanted to work in. We were most welcome and the diploma we received of our great accomplishments was highly prized and recognized wherever we would go. Later, our regiment and the Chinese never got on well. Some of our soldiers went to Lhasa and when they were returning, bumped into some Chinese soldiers on bicycles. Each one was blaming the other and a scuffle ensued. One of our soldiers knifed a Chinese, and as a result, they sent soldiers from all directions. From the sandy area, Jera, [and] from Jautang [Ch. jiao wu chang], the Lhasa side. They killed two of our soldiers, and wounded one.   

**Q:**  Did they shoot them?   

**A:**  Yes. So we went to talk and the Chinese were all lying in the fields. Our soldiers were coming, but we stopped them thinking it would lead to disturbances. Our military headquarters' representative was there, and on examining the wound, the shot was from the back while the person was running. They said, "No, it was from the front when he was going to knife." But what was good was that the Chinese who got knifed never admitted to being knifed. I don't know why, must have been some policy. In another incidence when we were at the Potala, some soldiers went to Lhasa. This was the time when some turmoil was about to start [Read: towards the later 1950s]. On the road, our soldiers and some Chinese must have had some kind of argument. From Yuthok House, they started to [fire] machine-guns. One soldier was killed and two were arrested. One Gyantse Regiment soldier, for no reason, was coming on the road and was shot. Some Xinjiang people who repaired bicycles and [did some] odd repairs were machine-gunned for no reason at all.   

**Q:**  What happened, really?   

**A:**  Our soldiers and the Chinese got into a fight. Our soldiers said t<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> the Chinese were driving the carts on us. So one of the cart drivers was knifed. Only much later did they say that they were knifed. One soldier was killed right there. The Gyantse Regiment soldier was killed and the Xinjiang man too. One soldier was wounded, but at night, he was brutally beaten and killed. One was in prison, but we could not at all figure out which prison. Just before all of the commotion, when we left [1959], he was released. Just before he was released, he was fed very well, and [they] made him more [weigh more] than what he was before. When we asked him he told us what transpired. He said that he had to admit on tape that the Tibetan soldiers provoked the Chinese and that they knifed him, and that because of this, the problems started. But they [soldier] would not tell us. So that's how the Chinese behaved and their behavior became more and more sinister. When the Dalai Lama came to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> to attend the assembly [Tib. ཚོགས་ཕེབས], below Janglojen's house, we had spread out our soldiers and one Chinese had taken out a Sten-gun. He was arrested and the Sten-gun was taken away. Then on another occasion, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> oracle was going into a trance at the front of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང] 1. A major open market in Lhasa in the traditional era that was near the Jokhang and traditionally sold miscellaneous foodstuffs and new and old goods. 2. The location of the of the Police Regiment, which was also sometimes called the Tromsikang Regiment.">Tromsikang</a>, there was a lot of commotion. One Chinese was caught wearing Tibetan clothes and a bomb was in his dress pouch. He was caught. We had a lot of plain-clothed soldiers from the police and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, Gyantse and Gusung Regiments, and they were able to catch him. He was locked up by the police, and the Chinese approached the Kashag and made an important issue out of this. The Kashag sent orders to the military headquarters and the military headquarters had to release him immediately, right then and there. We never had the opportunity to do anything. Yet [on] another occasion when the Dalai Lama was going to the Potala, there was talk of a Chinese with a bomb and the Gusung soldiers caught him. The Gusung had cars. Then he was taken in a car, and behind the Potala, it is said that this man met another Chinese to whom he gave a watch. He was taken to the Gusung barracks, and the interrogation was hardly completed when the Chinese told the Kashag and the Kashag told the military headquarters that he had to be released. So these things happened. We, Trapchi, were supposed to consist of 1,000 soldiers, the Gusung of 500 and when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> Regiment was to be called, it consisted of 500. Gyantse was 500 and the Police 500. That's all there was in Lhasa. And when the disturbances were increasing, 200 were posted at the Potala, 100 at the military headquarters, 100 at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a> and the ammunition dump, and the rest were in the barracks. So it happened that the Dalai Lama was to go from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to the Silingpu, the Chinese military headquarters. Gusung Depön was taken by the Chinese many times to the Chinese headquarters and was told that no soldiers and no arms were permitted. Thanks to that, it dawned on people that there was a grave danger unless the Dalai Lama left. Then there was this situation enacted many times in eastern Tibetan areas where prominent lamas and leaders were invited to shows and parties and then arrested. And all the work was done through them. So people thought about this and said that the Dalai Lama could not go to Silingpu. In the first place, it is a military headquarters. Secondly, no bodyguards and guns were permitted. All of this spread. It was mainly Kungö Phala. Even at our barracks Barshi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> [Tib. བར་གཞིས་རྩེ་མགྲོན] came to give the message and we contacted Sera. In this way there were contacts made and on that day we were all able to rise up, so we went down to Norbulinga. Meanwhile, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang very cleverly came on foot from Jara [Tib. སྦྱར་རག]. Still, the people gave him a hard time trying to stop him from going in. They told him, "Don't you trade our Dalai Lama for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> and all sorts of other things." Shasur also came in the same manner. Liushar [Tib. སྣེཨུ་ཤར] probably [did]. I don't recall. Sawang Ngabö they say came, but then back tracked his way. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> came in a Chinese car. Since he had the Chinese rank, he was entitled to a car. So the people shouted, "The Chinese have come, the Chinese have come," and he hardly got out of the car before he was stoned and fell. A few of our monk officials and other officials gave him some water and put him back in the car, and even we were being stoned. We were really stupid. We could have taken him to Norbulinga and sent the car away. We didn't do that and took him to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</a> from where the Chinese took him. This was the result of us uneducated brainless people. Chamdo Phagpalha Khenjung [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] came to the Drungja team meeting wearing the whole Tsidrung outfit. Then later he came in a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a>chuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ], wearing a Chinese hat, and a white cloth covering his mouth and riding a bicycle. The people must have known that generally, he was a good for nothing guy, saying, "A Chinese is coming, a Chinese is coming." They stoned him. Then he ran away and landed in the crowd of people where they said he was caught and knifed, but that didn't work. Then there were gun shots and apparently, it was Phagpalha who did the shooting. He shot in the air. Then some of the Lhasa women spat at him and dusted their aprons. One of them struck him and he bled some, and after that, it was a free for all. He was killed just outside of Norbulinga. I went to the Potala to bring some soldiers to Norbulinga and upon my return, a line of people was dragging the body of Phagpalha Khenjung by means of a rope around his leg. So we went as far as Chamgo Samba [Tib. ཆབ་སྒོ་ཟམ་པ] and we, the officers, stayed at Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>'s house. Our regiment stayed at Jogpori, Bhamari, Potala and the military headquarters. Below <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Döpe [Tib. ཞོལ་འདོད་དཔལ] was the Gyantse Regiment. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Regiment was in Lhasa City protecting the Jokhang. Most of our soldiers were at Trapchi at Jautang. The Gusung Regiment was always down there [at Norbulinga]. When a storm of people began gathering, the streets were just packed. They thronged all over, went down to Norbulinga to protect the Dalai Lama. Our people had no education/training and there were many accidental gunshots. However, no one was killed. So the various areas were divided. On the 2nd evening some tanks went and the Chinese fired a cannon. Norbulinga was not struck but it fell into the ditch called Tsetang Yurbu [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང་ཡུར་བུ]. One evening, an endless stream of vehicles came lead by tanks and then the vehicles. All the way from Tse Gungtang [Tib. ཚལ་གུང་ཐང] to Drepung, the convoy had still not ended. The Kashag had come down that day to talk to the Chinese and the people searched their cars to see in case they were hiding the Dalai Lama. People told them not to trade the Dalai Lama with dayan and so on, and they must have been terrified that day. They say the Chinese leaders were bursting with anger. Thank God they were allowed to return, otherwise the Chinese could very well have captured them. God definitely showed the way. On the 6th, myself, a servant, Rupön Wangden Tashi [Tib. དབང་ལྡན་བཀྲ་ཤིས], his servant, Kungö Kundeling and Tashi Berala decided to go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> ferry site and the Jakyag Garpo [Tib. bya syag dkar po] [on the other side of the river] area to see what was going on. I went to Nyetang [Tib. མཉེས་ཐང] to see Damba Simkhang Lobsang Yeshela [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང་བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས], who was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and asked him to come and see what was going on there. In certain areas of the Lhasa River, the vehicles could be driven, and I was asked to instruct some of the local people. With that, I went down with a servant, Major Jarbo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ], no it was Chölung Nangpa [Tib. ཆོས་ལུང་ནང་པ]. At the Nyetang narrow passage, there were about 20 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>was. Among them, the late Amdo Chunden [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་ཆོས་ལྡན] was there. Immediately they pointed a pistol and asked us, "Where do you think you are going?" I said, "There's no need to be so show-offish. We are just going to see Lobsang Yeshe la and go over to the Chushigandru soldiers." We crossed over to the Tsangpo and they were sitting around very relaxed. We said, "The situation has become an emergency and you have to be on alert. The bridges on the way to Chushul have to be dismantled, the roads too. Something has to be done and Lobsang Yeshela, you have been requested to come up." So Lobsang Yeshe brought about 60-70 Chushigandru men and that evening we returned. The people who were closer to Nyetang were to report down and those closer to Norbulinga were to report up regarding Chinese troop and vehicle movement. The 4th <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> was sent to check on the 100 odd Chinese at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Serkhang [Tib. rnam rgayl ser khang]. We arrived late that evening and the local guards with their guns were asking, "Where are you going?" So we explained. Lobsang Yeshela was taken to Kungö [Drönyer] Chemmo's house and I returned to Kundeling's House. The 4th rupön reported that there were no Chinese at Namgyal Serkhang, thank God. He said they were afraid and had moved to Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག]. They went on the pretext of giving Mangja but actually went to check on the Chinese. That's what happened on the 6th. That morning, myself, our 1st rupön, 4th rupön, Kungö Tashi Berala and Kundeling were there, and the latter two said, "You have to make a pledge/oath." I enquired why. They said, "First you have to make a pledge not to tell anyone, not even your wife and kids." So in front of a photo of the Dalai Lama and Shri Devi, Panden Lhamo, we took an oath not to tell about whatever we were about to hear. Then they said that the Dalai Lama was thinking about leaving and that's why we had to go towards Nyetang. Well, I got sequence a little mixed up. Then we made the pledge. Then it was decided that the Dalai Lama would leave on the 8th evening. Tashi Berala and 11 soldiers would leave ahead. I and 4 soldiers would help with the Dalai Lama riding horses. The 4th rupön and 85 soldiers were to go to the mountain Nyiserlaka [Tib. ཉི་ཟེར་ལ་ཁ]. The 1st rupön and 85 soldiers were to go to Jakyag Garpo. That's how it was assigned. The Dalai Lama left at 10 p.m. on the night of the 8th. We left about 8 p.m. And when he arrived at Ramagang ferry side, Phala Phogpön [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན] had arrived. The elder <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] An important aristocratic family that commonly provided monk officials.">Tregang</a> [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང] Khenjung had come, the one who's in the States now. He also brought Tregang Kesang Thubden [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཐུབ་བསྟན]. Phala Kungö brought one child. While we were there, one of our soldiers, a shengo, fired a Lewis machine-gun. I thought something terrible happened. Tregang Kungö Khenjung and I went and asked, "What is it?" "There are Chinese," he replied. "Where?" I asked. "Even if there are any, why did you fire? There could not have been many." I gave him one slap across his face, although I would never do that. So when we went to investigate, a brand new large handkerchief was left behind, a sign that the Chinese were there. It seemed that that might have helped, sort of frightened them. The Chinese reconnaissance soldiers probably were unable to come and returned. Then this guy called Böpa Dorje [Tib. བོད་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ] was coming at full gallop. On asking him what the matter was, he said, "Nothing, everything is quiet." He was close to Kungö Chemmo. Then Kungö Kundeling and I took our horses and waited for the Dalai Lama at the riverside on the other side of the river. All the horses were provided by Kundeling since we dared not to take them from the government stables. Then the Dalai Lama and party were coming and the Dalai Lama said, "Who is it? Who is it?" "I am Kundeling," he replied. Then the Dalai Lama said, "Who's your companion?" He replied, "He's Trapchi Gyagpön Kesang Dramdü." The Dalai Lama said, "The name is auspicious for the evening." Then the Dalai Lama rode on the horse with me holding his horse, and that's how we came. From Ramagang the horses were sent in the ferry, and Kungö, the Dalai Lama and I came in a coracle. On the arrival on the other side, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> Temba Dargye [Tib. བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས] provided a ceremonial scarf. "What's your name?" he [Dalai Lama] asked. "Temba Dargye" he replied. "A very auspicious name for the evening," he replied. So we moved on and I was holding his horse accompanying the Dalai Lama while riding [normally one would walk along the horse holding, so this circumstance was recalled with some uniqueness]. We dared not to bring even our own horses and borrowed some horses from some Amdowas in Norbulinga. Since our people are so undisciplined, they were making so much noise. Shining their torches even though I told them not to do that and they were galloping their horses. At this time, it was very strange, like it was windy and even the paths could be seen. Nortölinga was close by and so was Gyangdra Linga [Tib. རྒྱང་གྲགས་གླིང་ག], and since we were passing on the same side, the Chinese should have seen us but they did not. At Namgyegang [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་སྒང] there was an estate of Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང], and Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོག] had arrived earlier and they had prepared a lavish welcome. The Dalai Lama and the ministers and others had noodles. We had the broader noodle [Tib. ཆི་ཙེ] and New Year items, like elongated deep-fried dough called Könden [Tib. སྐོལ་ལྡན], a beer-<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> gruel, cheese and any amount of tea. Then we arrived at Tsenang [Tib. ཚལ་ནང], and an old stable person of the previous Dalai Lama by the name of Tashi Norbu offered a bluish horse to the Dalai Lama with a scarf on it. I don't know how he knew about it, but someone must have told him. Usually, it was about 3 days journey, but we moved along and before reaching the place called Jutsag, around dawn, many donkey herders were returning. The Dalai Lama was feeling cold and he dismounted and began walking. There was a small boy herder and the Dalai Lama put his hands on his shoulders and said, "Where did you guys go?" "We heard that there was war in Lhasa and we went to provide horses and pack animals as a tax [Tib. རྟ་འཕྱགས་ཁེ་འཕྱགས]. They now say that there is no war and so we are returning." We thought about pushing the boy away but the Dalai Lama said not to. Then we arrived at Jutsag where <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> Dzasa had prepared a meal for the stop. He brought some horses with their saddles. At this place, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> Kungö Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར་ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] arrived. Some of the Chushigandru arrived from the south. Until this place, Kundeling's horses were used. From here, there is the sandy mountain pass, Jela [Tib. བྱེ་ལ], and the Lumbala mountain pass. The former is a sandy pass. Then there was this person from Gonggar called Drugulhe [Tib. ?], who was a tsodrag. He said Jela was the pass where the scapegoat during the Mönlam Lugong would go and so we had to take Lumbala. Although it was steeper, it was taken. Since it is a sand pass, the Dalai Lama was thinking that the animals would have a difficult time and he dismounted. Kungö Shasur, Gadrang, and Phala were so tired. Shasur and Phala were intermittently holding on to the tail of their horses. The Dalai Lama looked back and said " Oh! You guys are tired, ride your horses." They obviously couldn't dare to. So he said, "Okay, then I'll ride," which he did. Kungö Chemmo had binoculars, a pistol and a rifle. He gave me the binoculars. It was the old model and very heavy. I was already laden with a pistol and a Sten-gun (light machine-gun), bullets, a flare gun and an amulet. He said, "Here Gyagpön, carry this!" and gave the binoculars to me. I had no choice but to bring them. I tried to hold on to the Dalai Lama horse but it was impossible since my feet just sank in the sand. However, laden with fear and perseverance, I managed to go along. Just as we were about to reach the top, there was a monk burning incense on the summit. Then the Dalai Lama asked, "Gyagpön, what is that?" It was tall cogongrass [Tib. རམ་པ]. "Oh! That's good. It's cogongrass and it is an auspicious sign of getting the siddhi of longevity. Put it on the smoldering incense," he said. I tried to go ahead but it was almost impossible. But I managed to get there just ahead. So I asked that it be put on the fire. When we got to the top of the pass and looked below, we saw a throng of people at Lhoka Kyishong [Tib. སྐྱིད་གཤོངས]. It was no longer a secret and nothing could be done. Then just below, the Dalai Lama had tea in a flask, which his monk official cook [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ] had made. There the Dalai Lama stopped for a meal and he was wearing a woolen maroon dress, which he took off. Underneath he was wearing a Tsechuma made from satin velvet called [Tib. སྤུ་མ་ཀྲང་ཏོན]. He also gave us some sweets and biscuits. Upon arrival at Kyishong, there was a lot of commotion. The Chushigandru people were there. There were some who said that they were local militias and had the words "Tensung Tanglang Magar" written, wearing white chupa, and who had brought the swords and spears from the temples. There was a lot of commotion. That night, the party stayed at Kyishong Rakhame [Tib. རག་ཁ་སྨད]. Here, our 2 rupön, 150 odd soldiers, the Bodyguard Regiment's Rupön Sötrela [Tib. བསོད་བཀྲས], Gyagpön Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and 120 odd soldiers arrived after dark. Immediately, Sötrela was sent to Drag since it was suspected that the Chinese might come over the pass. I stayed at the Dalai Lama's quarters and I considered myself blessed for this. However, it was frightening and difficult, and I had never served in that capacity. The Bodyguard Regiment guys had previously stayed at the Dalai Lama's quarters and since I was also serving close by, it was very awkward and I was not happy. So I said to Kungö Gusung Depön, the present one, "Kungö, as for the duty for the Dalai Lama's chambers, please give it to Gyagpön Lobsang Tashi and the others. What do you think if I served a little below [further away from chamber]? In case they are not unhappy." He said, "Oh! That's an excellent idea." He was immediately happy about it. He said that he would talk with Kungö Chemmo. Phala approached me and said, "Gyagpön, did you say such things?" "Yes, I did," I replied. "Then that's good. Lobsang Tashi will serve at the chambers and you below." So the internal sentry duties were done by them and I did the intermediate. In the outer were Kungö Depön and 160 odd Bodyguard soldiers, and the Chushigandru. That night, a lot of edicts were written to Lhasa, like the appointment of the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> as the real prime ministers and how the Travelling Kashag was setting up and others. My writing was no good and since a lot of the edicts were not finished, I was asked to write some. But I just could not write. I stayed at Norbulinga without much sleep and the journey was difficult. My eyes were just burning and I had a pain in my eyes. So I explained to Kungö Jawdang and Chemmo. They said it was okay and [was] more important to be on duty. So I returned and when I slept for just a bit, my eyes were okay. Up to now the main horse holder for the Dalai Lama was me. From here on, Kungö Gusung Depön, Chemmo and Lobsang Tashi took turns. Ngari Rimpoche was a lot of help since a lot of people gathered and he acted as a diversion. Then the party went to Jedeshöl [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ], and to Gyangko in Dranang [Tib. གྲ་ནང]. When we were passing Dranang, the cannons were firing at Lhasa. We said that it was dynamite for splitting stones. Only later we realized it was cannon fire. Then we got to Chongye Jenye [Tib. འཕྱོངས་རྒྱས་སྤྱན་ཡས], then Chongye Riu Dechen [Tib. རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན]. Here the party stopped for a day to relax for a while. Here Kungö Samjog [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> came. They had left earlier to talk with the Khambas. While they were thinking of relaxing for the day, it was also at this time that they learned about the situation in Lhasa. So they couldn't stay around and left right away. The party arrived at Chödegön [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་དགོན], an estate of Lingtsang [Tib. གླིང་ཚང] and stayed. Then they left and stopped at Shopanub [Tib. ཤོ་པ་ནུབ] and then Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ] where there was a formal ceremony of the beginning of a new Travelling Kashag. The local people put on an opera and a dance show, and the Chushigandru fired the American delivered cannon [Tib. མེ་སྒྱོགས་ཕྲེད་རྒྱག]. As soon as they fired the cannon it didn't go off, but it thundered. As it thundered, they all cheered saying how good it was that it thundered. Then the party arrived at Jora [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར] and then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>. I was asked to go and get Kyabji Trijang Rimpoche [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྗེ་ཁྲི་བྱང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] since he had not arrived. I backtracked to Jora but Kyabji Rimpoche said he was about to come and insisted that there was no need for me there since there were so many helping him and that it was more important that I should go back to the Dalai Lama. So I returned and as I approached the mountain pass Garpola [Tib. དཀར་པོ་ལ], a Chinese plane was coming. I couldn't figure out anything and I didn't have any idea. With all of the noise, my hair was "rustling." I dismounted and one of our soldiers had a Bren-gun which you can shoot at a plane, and a thought occurred to use it. The Dalai Lama said, "Gyagpön, Gyagpön. What are you doing?" I said, "Le, le." "Stay still, don't shoot!" The Dalai Lama and others dismounted and the Dalai Lama looked in the binoculars but did not say anything. Then we decided to break the party into smaller units with the Dalai Lama and a small group in the middle and two larger groups in front and behind. At Jisum of Tsöna Dzong, a meal was prepared. There was plenty to eat, like boiled meat and a lot of stuff. However, it was just not physically possible to eat any bag, only tea. A person has just really become something else. There was a feeling that Tsöna was full of Chinese. So that evening when we went to Tsöna, they said that the plane made 3 rounds and then left but we didn't know where to. That evening Kungö Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས] arrived and gave us the full news of Lhasa and there were tears all over. Kungö Khenjung Tsador Thubden Sangpo arrived wounded. The next day, the Dalai Lama was pretty close to the border, to the place called Mama. Most of the soldiers stayed here and myself, Gusung Depön, Rupön Wangdenla and the 1st rupön went as Dalai Lama's entourage, and so was Gyagpön Lobsang Tashi and others. Then we had to descend down a very steep slope and arrived at this place called Mama and the borders just about there. It was drizzling constantly and the Dalai Lama was staying in a new tent which, however, wasn't holding water very well. The houses where the cabinet ministers were staying, the roofs were fitted with planks so that water didn't come in. The Dalai Lama gave us an audience and advice. He said "You, the military officers, like Depön, if you want to go down with me you can, or if you want to go back you can too. However, a small number cannot challenge with the large number [Tib. མང་སྣེ་ཉུང་གིས་བརྟན་གྱི་མ་རེད] and don't waste people, and as for the arms and ammunition, it would be good if you can build something to hide them. Later I will probably have to come [to Tibet] so I will advise you as I go. We said that it seemed that whichever way, there is no choice but to go back and report that we would try to do whatever we could. We had an audience with the Dalai Lama and we were given the protective talisman called Chagtsa Mahe [Tib. ཕྱག་ཚ་མ་ཧེ], some Trangga garbo and 500 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> in Tibetan notes. Trijang Rimpoche was not there. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> abbot Ngawang Drakpa [Tib. ངག་དབང་གྲགས་པ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད] The Lower Tantric Monastic College in Lhasa.">Gyüme</a> [Tib. རྒྱུད་སྨད], and an ex-abbot Ngawang Lengden [Tib. ངག་དབང་ལེགས་ལྡན] who had brought 20 odd <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་པོ་རག] A medium size khamtsen in Loseling College in Drepung Monastery.">Bombora</a> monks also had an audience. So we and Kungö Tashi Berala returned while the rest were to go to India, and people were sent to the border to talk. The Dalai Lama was also not keeping well and we were feeling so sad. By then, from Lhasa, people of Dargye [Tib. དར་རྒྱས] monastery had arrived. They had brought some of the horses from the Dalai Lama's stable. The two stable persons who were there were wailing away. So we said, "Nothing of the sort happened. It's all right." The next day, when we were returning, none of us could ride and leave. We kept looking back until a hillside covered the spot where the Dalai Lama was camped. From there we rode in silence. No one said a word nor did anything. We continued and stayed under a pass that evening. There we met Surkhang Depön, his mother, Lhayum [Tib. ལྷ་ཡུམ] and his wife Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ], and Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ] Rimpoche were there. They told us the whole story of Lhasa. Kungö Depön, who had been thrown by a yak, had some leg problems. The next day, we went to Tsöna and the number of people fleeing resembled a formal procession of monks. All kinds of people, monk and lay. Kungö Kundeling, who was a companion of Andru Dzasa, was appointed as Magji. So he was at Tsöna. It would have been much better if we stayed at Tsöna and made good preparations, however, probably from being uneducated and inexperienced, we said we were going back. Kungö Kundeling and Gyagpön Lobsang Tashi and 50 soldiers stayed at Tsöna. People from Chantreng and the Chushigandru also stayed. There were so many people and there were some hopeless captured Chinese prisoners in their blue uniforms. They, like us, were escapees, nothing else. We arrived at Chödegön where the Dalai Lama stopped, the place belonging to Ling Labrang. There was nobody but escapees. With questioning, they said it was just unbearable. Planes came and started machine gunning, likewise, there were large guns. Tsetang was lost, Yarlung Phodrang [Tib. yar lng pho brang] too, so we fled. Then we met some of our Lhasa soldiers who were assigned at the Potala and the military headquarters, two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> and 150 odd soldiers. When they met us they started to weep saying it was no good. That it was not possible to fight since there was no discipline and only individual efforts, and it was just chaotic, so now that we had gathered what should we do. Then we said that maybe we should go from Chödegön to Yarlung Phodrang. On our way we met Andru Jinda at E Chundogang [Tib. ཨེ་ཆུ་མདོ་སྒང]. He said, "I have to take a rest for a while and then we can talk when I get back," and he left for Lhüntse. At Lhüntse, Kungö Namseling and Samjola were there. We talked and Jama Jinda was there at Phodrang. When we said come up to talk, nobody came. Chongye Riwo Dechen's Shanggo Samba [Tib. ཞང་འགོ་བསམ་བག] came and said, "You must come to Riu Dechen. We have 2 to 3 years food supply and the monastery is well fortified." You know this could not have been done and so we said, "Shanggo this is not possible. We have to stay united here and then we have to see what to do next. I think it is better you return," he was told. Shanggo was crying a lot and said, "The Chushigandru also abandoned us taking food and drink with them. And you, our own people, have abandoned us. I'm not leaving my monastery," and he left. He brought a lot of gold coins, which he told me to keep as it would be useful. I asked, "What will I do with gold coins when I'm engaged in a life and death situation?" He said, "Take 10 or 15." I didn't and he returned and I said, "Please don't be angry, we have no choice." When we were there we just couldn't talk, everybody did their own thing. Even if the Chinese were not around they talked as if they were there. So we were not able to fight and backtracked our way some more. When we arrived first, a very nice looking military assignment was made [where?]. But when we reached Yarlung Dragla with Chantreng people and many others, when we were going back [north], nobody was coming, only escapees. There was nothing one could do and Jama Jinda's group was probably fighting around Chundogang. I guess one could call it fighting, but they were shooting at the Chinese. So even though we said let's go, there was no use if we didn't have any backing as it would be useless to be there when they were all running away. Right about then the gunfire subsided. When we returned to Lhüntse, not a soul was there. At the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་དྲུག] Name of a famous incarnate lama and his labrang or religious corporation.">Ditrug</a> Labrang [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག་བླ་བྲང], the Chushigandru's flag was there. We thought there might be somebody there, but no one was there and there was nothing with all the foodstuff being already taken. Then we arrived at Jora. Kungö Samjola, Namseling and our Kungö Depön had also left, so he was there. Tseja and Shagjang [rimshi] [Tib. ཤག་བྱང] and many others were there. A lot of people were also there and then we decided to go to Tsöna. However, it was reported that Tsöna was lost and some wounded people had come. So they said that they were going to go that way and they took us at night to Jora Khata. When we got to Jora Khata, they said, "There is a way to go to Tsöna from here. Let's go." When we went that way, Chushigandru Khatring Labrang Chandzö and many people had arrived. A lot of the people without arms were sent via one valley and those who had guns but who said they did not want to go with the Chushigandru were handing over their guns and they [?] were taking their guns. So we thought there might be an encounter here, but when it got dark they all left. They were taken by Khata Rimpoche and he showed them a secret passage that took them towards Mön. While coming this way, one would reach the snow. When we reached Thulungla, one night we were staying at Lhe when there was a big commotion about the Chinese being present and we were taken. When we got to Thulungla, there was a tiny path. It is said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> (Samjola & Namseling) had it carved out by driving yaks. Everyone was lined like a formal procession of monks on this path. Then a Chinese plane flew over but there were clouds above and so they could not do anything. Otherwise, they could have picked off as many as they wanted. So the people coming behind were telling the people to go in the front while shooting. One could have picked up as many things as possible, and the horses and mules were dead and people were stepping over them. So when we reached the summit of Thulungla, that was it. We had reached Indian soil. Then it was downhill steps. Then there was a lot of gunfire, like it was war. We were wondering what it was all about, maybe it was an encounter with the Chinese or was it the Indians? When we went down Lhüntse Dzong, the late Gadrung Ngawang Chösang [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཆོས་བཟང] was there so we stopped for a meal. We didn't have any tsamba but those who had tsamba had returned, all of them were from Jora. We had nothing to eat and Kungö gave us some bag and he said that all the gunfire was from our guys who were just being undisciplined. They had to surrender their arms at the border and so they decided to shoot and waste the bullets. When we got to Chunag [Tib. chu dangs], Kungö Tsipön [Namseling], Tashi Berala, Samjola and Tseja all looked wasted like corpses, and their faces were swollen. It must have been both physical and mental, everything. They asked how things went and I told them. They said, "Don't worry now, and if you need tsamba I will write to Ditrug Labrang's Dechang and he will give you [some] since he has a lot." So I went to him and he had brought a whole lot of tsamba and a lot of things. Since they were close, they had brought a lot of horses, mules and yaks. I and a companion went to get tsamba and he got decent bag and tea, but as far as tsamba is concerned, his wife called out his name and asked to give some tsamba and brought a small basin, measured it and gave some. I thought that it was not even worth taking and I thought I should refuse it saying that you should give at least a load of tsamba. But, I thought it would be like the proverb, "Bullying the inner people when one cannot handle the outer people [Tib. ཕྱི་མ་ཐུབ་ནང]." I thought that it was not proper to say that and I thanked them. When we got back, each of us had only this much. So we stayed here for 2 days. There were 25 Indian Border guards among which was one by the name of Jamdar Sangye who spoke Tibetan. The Chushigandru people had a scarf put around one horse and told the Indian guards, "Please don't be angry. We are going. Show us the way," and they left [for India]. Our regiment's soldiers agreed to stay for one or two days since they [Chushigandru] said that they would parachute supplies. We waited for two days but nothing was parachuted. And we stayed and boiled corn that was to be used for horse feed. There was no use in staying. We couldn't manage and we told them, "Now, we are leaving. There is no need to fear since the Chinese will not come. Even if they do, you have the wireless, and you can call for help and the Indians may come." We left 2 Bren-guns, bullets, a mortar and some shells for it, and then we went to Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང]. We just didn't have it in us any longer. The Mönpas sent us the wrong way instead of sending us through the better road. The better road probably had their animals and they thought they might be killed. On the bad track, most of the horses and mules died. Some managed to get through, I don't know how. Even on the ladders made of a single log, the animals were taken. Before we got to Tawang a lot of Indian soldiers were going up. And on the way, they took our bolts and so we went with non-functioning guns. When we got to Tawang, the ones who had arrived earlier received good rations. We arrived when the rations were low since the weather was bad and the plane was unable to make drops. Then we arrived at Missamari and that's what happened.   

**Q:**  During the uprising what did they say happened in Lhasa? There was the People's Association, right?   

**A:**  In Lhasa, they did very well. On the 10th of the Tibetan date, just about the end of dawn, the Chinese fired their cannons. What the Chinese had written in their version was that the Tibetans were the ones who fired first. This is definitely not the case. They shot first, with cannons. How they planned it has been revealed by the Chinese Lobsang Tashi who was a Regimental Commander [Ch. thuan zhang], or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> at Dongkarshogo [Tib. གདོང་དཀར་ཤོ་སྒོ] Cannon Regiment. He fell in love with a Tibetan girl and on account of that, he was in danger and he defected into our army and asked us to save his life. We looked after him and sent him into the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. He later came and died in Mysore. He told us the Chinese plan. One of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> stable-boys was killed by the Chinese at Kurusamba [Tib. ཀུ་རུ་ཟམ་པ] Bridge. The Chinese plan was to use their Palding [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡིང] Regiment and Jautang forces against Sera and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>. Nortölinga and Gyangdralinga forces were to attack Gusung and Drepung. The military headquarters, Magar Sarpa [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ] and nearby forces were to fire on Lhasa. At Trip, there were 12 automatic cannons. 4 were to fire on Trapchi and Sera, 4 on Lhasa and the rest for Norbulinga and Drepung. "This is the plan," said Lobsang Tashi. "But since I ran away, I cannot say whether this plan will become a reality." It did become a reality, the guns were fired in exactly the same manner. The firing began just after dawn. They said there was no chance of challenging the Chinese since the attack on us was solely large guns. Our positions at the Potala fired some cannons at the Chinese military headquarters, the Tibet Autonomous Region Office and others. Those who were at Trapchi fired at Jautang. One shell landed on their gunnery positions thus nullifying them. The Gyantse Regiment also fired at the Tibet Autonomous Region Office. Our positions at the Potala had to fire on the Chinese who were trying to reach <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a>. On their first try, we fired guns from the Potala and shot from above, and their attempt failed. Their second attempt was thwarted too. However, they took Jogpori on their third attempt. On Jogpori we had 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> and 70 odd soldiers. The shengo was firing a Bren-gun. When he was shot and bleeding, he said to his son Kesang Wangdu [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དབང་འདུས], "Son, son. I'm no use," and handed the gun to his son who took up the shooting. The wall had fallen and both were crushed. A lot were killed there. Those who were at the Potala did not suffer many fatalities and wounded, and they were able to do some damage to the Chinese who were taking Jogpori. Then the hunchback Rupön of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Regiment took the cannon and shot up at the Somphü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད], down at the hospital, and this way at Lubu (directions). He fired so many that he became famous. So they tried what they could but they were outmatched in numbers, technology and training. After the 2nd day, the battle was decisive. Most of the people who fled did so from Sera via Nyangra, another from Rigya, and another via Ramagang. The place was littered with dead bodies. When the Chinese first arrived at Norbulinga, they were looking at all the head-shaven monks who were there in case the Dalai Lama was still there. Norbulinga and surrounding areas were littered with the dead. The people of Lhasa had cut the electric wires, dislodged the poles and did whatever they could. After every shell that was fired at the Potala, people said it disappeared and they cried. When the dust cleared and the Potala appeared, they yelled, "May God be victorious [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱལ་ལོ]!" So they fought what they could. From those who were fleeing, they put up a stiff resistance at Jagsam ferry site, our soldiers and Chushigandru. Then another valiant show at Lhoka Gonggar. Then those that came from Samye near Wön, Rupön Gugur, some of our soldiers fought well. These Chinese they say wore Tibetan dresses, pretending to be Tibetans. Then they met and as soon as they fired, the exchange began. They all had Tibetan dresses and were riding fine horses from the stables of aristocrats. Then at Tsetang, a good effort was made. Our Gyantse Shengo, Pema Gyalpo [Tib. pad ma rgayl po] lost his life here. Many of the Gusung were wounded and Chushigandru were also. Then there were battles at Trandru, [Tib. ཁྲ་འབྲུག] Halogang too where our soldiers fought, and Yarlung Phodrang. Nearer toward the border, the best resistance was from Gusung Rupön Sötrela and Dargye Gompa Pachen [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ་དཔའ་ཆེན]. Some of our Trapchi, Gusung and Gyantse seem to have been there. This was at Thowa Dzong [Tib. དོ་བ་རྫོང]. This was a fantastic battle, very impressive. Presently at a Tibetan restaurant, Dawa Tsering [Tib. ཟླ་བ་ཚེ་རིང], he says he killed 60 Chinese. We used to say, Oh! come on, how did you count? It's like our Khambas saying they killed 100 and did such and such. It's same as that." He used to say, "I didn't count earnestly. But I did definitely kill 60!"   

