# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0041.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Kesang Dramdü (Kedram) [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ (སྐལ་དགྲམ)]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 69  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kedram [Tib. སྐལ་དགྲམ] was a famous gyagpön in the Trapchi Regiment. In this interview, he talks about how Chinese wireless operators were sent to Tsetang and remained there under house arrest. He describes the political situation in Lhasa in '51-52 and the people’s reaction to the arrival of the Chinese. He discusses the creation of the People’s Association, the petition to the Kashag about how they should not convert the Tibetan soldiers into members of the People’s Liberation Army and how they were needed to protect the Dalai Lama. He then discusses the delay in implementing the reforms, and the fighting and battles among the Chushigandru and the Chinese. Additionally, he describes the meeting to discuss ending the disturbance between the Khambas and the Tibetans.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0041_03/H_0041_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I have something to ask you, first, from 1950. At that time, you were in the Nagchu area in the bodyguard unit of Changji Tsador and Rasagyagen. During this time, Taktse Rimpoche came along with two lamas. They were to come up and you mentioned the Chinese were taken to Lhoka. They were not permitted to come up [to Lhasa], and so where were they taken?   

**A:**  Taktse Rimpoche, Shali Trülku and Shar Ganden Gyatso - when they arrived at Nyenrong Dzong, part of Atsa Besog Gopa, they were detained there. Even <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> really dared not send things to Taktse Rimpoche, and so they had some difficulties as they were detained. However, Taktse Rimpoche came first to Nagchu while the two lamas and the Chinese stayed at Nyenrong Dzong. When this happened, we at Nyenrong Dzong did not know that Chamdo was lost. They had a wireless and they were saying that "Chamdo was lost, Ngabö has been arrested and surrendered, and so why are you stopping us?" Anyway, whatever they said or did not say, we were to stop them, and so we did. Finally, Taktse Rimpoche came to Lhasa, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and then India. The two lamas came to Lhasa. Soldiers escorted the Chinese, along with the wireless, via Phöndo to Lhoka Tsetang. When they got to Phöndo, they said that "This is not the way for us to go. We were supposed to go that way up [north to Lhasa]." They said that they were not going. So for the moment, there was nothing they could do, right? So our soldiers took them to Tsetang where they remained for about a year. Then the Chinese arrived, right?   

**Q:**  At Tsetang, did they just stay around?   

**A:**  They were sort of under "house arrest [Tib. བཟང་བཙོན]".   

**Q:**  Were there soldiers stationed [there]?   

**A:**  No, we handed them over to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, the Lhoji.   

**Q:**  When you were at Nagchu, since Chamdo was lost, you were to go to Chamdo, Tengchen, [and] Riwoche, right? Since the government was carrying on discussions, at that time, is it right that you received the order not to go? So, before the discussions took place, the Dalai Lama took over the reigns of the government, right? What I heard was that the Dalai Lama sent a letter saying that "During the Regency period, relations have deteriorated, and so I would like to establish relations." So after the Dalai Lama took over the reigns of the government, did the relations with the Chinese cool down or not?   

**A:**  Things were not really cooling down, but at that time, it was the period when the Chinese were tricking us. The situation, as you have mentioned regarding the Dalai Lama, I don't know. Therefore, since that was the period when they were just coming up with their trickery method, it was just that [diplomacy], and except for Chamdo, there was no militant action. And so it stayed like that.   

**Q:**  Now, when Wang Zhenwang came up via Nagchu, was the 17-Point Agreement signed or not?   

**A:**  They may have just [signed it], I can't say for sure. He came from Chamdo straight to Nagchu and then to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  After you finished your service at Nagchu, it must have been 1951, maybe '50. Anyway, during this time, '51-52, when you came to Lhasa, what was the political situation?   

**A:**  Now, regarding this. When Wang Zhenwang left, we left Nagchu for Lhasa. We followed slowly. The two northern governors remained and the bodyguard unit was returned. When this happened, since the Chinese had not actually arrived in Lhasa, there wasn't much commotion saying that the Chinese had arrived and so on because many Chinese had not arrived. Later, the Chinese arrived and Zhang Jingwu arrived from India. Later, when the Chinese came, they brought photographs of Mao, Zhude, and Zhou Enlai, and beat their drums and came in a huge procession and in a majestic manner. Since they did not have any place to stay, they stayed in the field at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> where the crops had already been harvested. So they placed their tents there and like pigeons landing, they even picked up the scattered remains of beans, etcetera, and ate them. At that time, their situation was poor.   

**Q:**  Generally, when they came up—well, at least from the government side, they had to welcome them, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the government welcomed them and brought them up.   

**Q:**  Generally, what did the people do? Just look? [Were they] amazed? How was it?   

**A:**  There were various reactions. Many said, "The Chinese came and now it's a disaster and it is finished." There were also some who were sort of careless and didn't pay attention, and some implied that it was good that the Chinese had come.   

**Q:**  During this period, there was the Water Dragon Year People's Association in '52. During this time, what was in the minds of the people. Were they thinking that these government officials, these kudraks, the government, were not doing things well at all? That they were working with the Chinese? Now, from the government side, since the 17-Point Agreement was signed, they had to work with the Chinese. What were the people thinking? Even later, there was the Women's Association and the Youth League that began. What were the people and the monks generally thinking about these students?   

**A:**  The People's Association stated that the Chinese must leave Tibet. That we could take care of our own business. That it was not alright for the Chinese to stay. This was what they were saying. The Women's Association and the like, I don't know whether they sincerely liked the Chinese or not, but from the perspective of most of the people, they thought that they were running dogs of the Chinese. Since that was the case, the monks caught some of them and beat them up.   

**Q:**  Were the monks saying anything to the students?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And they were saying something to the Women's Association and the Youth League members?   

**A:**  Yes, earlier at Trungji linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག], there was a meeting and it seems that the wife of Tangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད] said a lot of things. So the monks waited in "ambush" and beat her with a stick quite a lot.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes. And likewise, people like Shölkang Jedrung [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང]—he did not get into their hands, though if he did, they had thoughts of really fixing him up. Most of the people, though, one can't say that these people sincerely liked the Chinese, but from their behavior, the majority did not like them at all.   

**Q:**  And the government, likewise?   

**A:**  Nothing really specifically against the government. Nothing really. They didn't imply that the government was not doing anything, but a few of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were doing it [implying things].   

**Q:**  In the earlier tradition, it would seem to me that there was no tradition of the People's Association and of doing something, right?   

**A:**  It was rare.   

**Q:**  So this organization, the way it formed—well, on the one hand, of course so many Chinese came, but from my perspective, it seems that in the 17-Point Agreement, there seems to have been a lot of power given to the people. For example, it's said that if the people agreed to it, then one could have reforms, etcetera. So from this perspective, was that a reason for the formation of the organization?   

**A:**  No. It was not like that. Everyone was against the 17-Point Agreement, and so they were not leaning on the 17-Point Agreement and doing work accordingly. At that time, the more prominent of the people had the understanding and they talked amongst themselves. Then it gradually spread and they said that we had to do something, that we must now do things well and be careful. So this is the way the People's Association rose.   

**Q:**  One thing I hear—there is this talk that in the People's Association, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were there, and so were other government officials. There were also some military representatives at the People's Association's meetings. So how was it? During this time, there was also the secret group of Drönyerchemmo Phala. Now, I don't know when this actually began with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla [Tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས], Kungö Depön Tashi Berala and probably Namseling. I can't be so sure. So, during this time, had some officials already started an organization? For example, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> [Tib. བཞི་སྡེ] [monastery], [did] some military representatives go to the meetings? How was this worked out?   

**A:**  I can't be sure whether the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</a> had already started their organization or not, but, it was something that came about with one person inciting [Tib. རྒྱུད་སྐུལ] another person. So even in the military, it was thought that "The people have done so much, and so we also must try and do something. However, we can't openly come out and do it," but it was thought that unless we support them, it would not be alright. So with this thinking, they went there [to meetings] and told them that "Whatever it is, we support you."   

**Q:**  During that time, did you go to the meetings of the Water Dragon People's Association?   

**A:**  I did not go to the their meetings, but they came to the [Trapchi] Regiment. They came to the regiment and brought letters saying that "We are making a pledge." So the regiment said that "We agree with you and we support you."   

**Q:**  So from the government side, the officials, what was the connection?   

**A:**  I think there were many officials.   

**Q:**  Did they do it voluntarily?   

**A:**  Yes, voluntarily. Like, similar in fashion to the military. Each one came out and said, "Now we have to do something like that. Now we just can't stay like this." So they thought in this way [and] they came.   

**Q:**  Now, what about the talk that the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were in the organization?   

**A:**  At that time, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were in power. And so people said that the sitsab "incited" the People's Association. I don't know whether they did or not. However, it was definitely an association that got support from the sitsab.   

**Q:**  I see, so you are saying that since the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were working against the Chinese, then they had the same objectives?   

**A:**  Yes, [it was] that way.   

**Q:**  From '51 all the way to '54, what were the changes that were taking place politically? Were things getting worse, or how was it? How was it between '51-54?   

**A:**  So from '52-54, it sort of stayed like that. They said they came to serve the Tibetan people, to help Tibet. Just deceiving and luring us. Then they had finished making the motorable roads, right? Then they had finished making the airstrip in the Northern area, right? So from that time on, they became more and more rude and defiant. So then, whatever it was, they started talking in a different way to the Kashag and showing different attitudes toward the people. Their disposition changed after the roads and the airstrip were completed.   

**Q:**  At one time, you worked in the Road Construction Survey, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in '55, at Nagchu.   

**Q:**  Yes, after that, you came to Lhasa and went to the meeting in Yuthok where certificates were given for the good work done and dining [there was a dinner]. So this work was done and you returned to the military, right?   

**A:**  Yes. While I was in the army, I was sent as the Kashag's representative. When I returned, I was back to my original military service.   

**Q:**  So during this time, it was already '54?   

**A:**  '55.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama [had] already gone to China and returned, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I was going to ask you what the situation was in the military at that time, but now I remembered something. After the Dalai Lama returned, in the Trungji linga, there was a meeting for 3-4 days. What was the meeting mainly about? About what happened [in China]?   

**A:**  It was about the arrival of the Dalai Lama and his entourage in China, and [about] what talks took place between the Chinese and the Tibetan government and what work was done. All of this was explained [Tib. གསལ་བཤད].   

**Q:**  To whom was it explained?   

**A:**  To all the government officials.   

**Q:**  So at this time, the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region had not begun?   

**A:**  Not yet.   

**Q:**  So this was only for the government officials?   

**A:**  Yes. Only the government officials and from the rank of Drungtog [Tib. དྲུང་གཏོགས] [clerks] and above.   

**Q:**  So a lot of the things that were said, what were they about? Were they saying that they went down and made good achievements?   

**A:**  [I] can't quite say that. I guess, but it was said as a summary of their work.   

**Q:**  What I was thinking was that—well, the 17-Point Agreement was signed a long time ago and so they had to do things together. And the Kashag was working within the confines of the Agreement, right? So at this time, it seems that they saw the establishment of the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region, rather than the Military Administrative Committee, as something good.   

**A:**  Maybe, it seems [that way].   

**Q:**  Yes, that it was something from the civil side rather than the military [side].   

**A:**  Yes, maybe.   

**Q:**  Yes, so I was thinking that when they were talking and saying things, I was wondering whether they maybe said something positive about the accomplishments in China.   

**A:**  Yes. When they spoke of the relations between Labrang and the government, about converting the Tibetan soldiers to [those of] the People's Liberation Army and various other [things], it seemed, on the one hand, that they were saying something positive. On the other hand, when one looks at it, it was a summary of the work done. Like today, we say the Dalai Lama went to this place and that and did such and such etcetera. Kündeling said most of this. Regarding the change in the army and the relations between the Labrang and government, [this] was announced by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang. So when they said all of this, it seemed like a work summary.   

**Q:**  I see. Now, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang mentioned the change in the military. Just after that, at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] The monastery that is the sea of the Karmapa Lamas in Tölung County.">Tshurpu</a>, a direct request was made, right? How did this come about? After Surkhang made the announcement, did you have a meeting or what? There first had to be some talk, right? How did this come about? Whether it was just within the military or some government officials?   

**A:**  Now, this was just the military officers, and the government officials were not there. So when they discussed, the situation was such that there were to be only 500 Bodyguard Regiment [soldiers] and 500 Police. The rest were to be converted into the Chinese army, and it was said that those who wished to return home, could do so. So the military people thought and said that this was really no good, and the Kashag and the others had no choice since the Chinese forced them to do this. Since this was the case, we could not separate our head from our shoulders. As long as the Dalai Lama is alive, it is a question of too few soldiers and not one of too many. So we said that we would not listen to it at all. So the military officers got together and in the end, we made a petition. We petitioned the Kashag twice, but they never looked into the matter and we got no reply. However, today when we look at it, it seems that they were not to blame because under pressure of the Chinese, even if they thought about doing it, it was [things were] uneasy. Earlier, we thought the Kashag did not treat us fairly. So since they did not reply to our petition, there was nothing to do expect to hand in the petition at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] The monastery that is the sea of the Karmapa Lamas in Tölung County.">Tshurpu</a> while the Dalai Lama was going for his circumambulation. We stated that there was this plan to reduce the army, that there were too few Tibetan soldiers and not too many, and so while the Dalai Lama was still there [alive and in Tibet], "We Tibetan soldiers do not wish to disband. We cannot separate our heads from our shoulders, and so we request you do us whatever favor is possible." At that time, the Granary Office also stopped paying our salary, saying that the barley hadn't arrived. So we said, "If we are going to get a salary, then that's it. If not, we will serve by feeding ourselves. But the issue of returning [disbanding], we will never do it." It was also said that among the existing bodyguards, the ones the Dalai Lama preferred would remain. The remainder of the 1,000 soldiers would be composed [drawn] from the 3,000 Tibetan soldiers. Since that was the case, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> soldiers were not included in the 3,000. The Kadang were not to be in it either, but it was said that those preferred by the Dalai Lama would be allowed to remain. So from among the Khadang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a>, [and the] Cadang, the Khadang and the Ngadang were always down there [Lhasa], but the Cadang and the Gadang were at Shigatse and Dingri. Their leaders had come down [to Lhasa]. They were already returned by the Chinese since they had come from Kham. So anyway, when we got together, they were there and we discussed together.   

**Q:**  If I were to ask you in detail, then, when you discussed, where did you meet, who was there and when the petition was handed [in] at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] The monastery that is the sea of the Karmapa Lamas in Tölung County.">Tshurpu</a>, who went?   

**A:**  The place where the discussions took place was in the Police barracks in the Tromsikang. The ones [who] were discussing were the 4th <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a>, Sötö [Tib. bsod stod ?]. He was known as Sötöla, but I don't remember his real name. [And] the Cadang [Regiment] was represented by Dingri Gyagpön Tamdrin Tsering [Tib. རྟ་མགྲིན་ཚེ་རིང]. Our regiments of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> and Khadang, all the rupön and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> were there since the full regiments were in Lhasa. That's how it happened. So we made the petition and the ones who were sent to present the petition were from our soldiers. At that time, he was a major. Later, a shengo—so we sent Major Tashi Thöndrub [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དོན་གྲུབ]. From the Gyantse Regiment, we sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> Pema Gyalpo. From the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Regiment, we sent Shengo Sonam Wangdü [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་དབང་འདུས]. Yes, like that.   

**Q:**  So, would any letter writers send them with [a note] or no?   

**A:**  No, since we had made the petition.   

**Q:**  So only the three of them?   

**A:**  Yes, no other. All they had to do was present the petition.   

**Q:**  During this time, when you were making the petition, was the Tsangrel [Tib. གཙང་རལ] Oracle consulted?   

**A:**  [The oracle] was not really consulted, but we just asked the oracle to go into a trance [Tib. སྐུ་གསོལ], saying, "We need to do this, so please bestow us with your help and your blessing." The deity said, "Help and [my] blessing will be granted. Go ahead and make the petition." We asked the oracle [medium] to go into trance [for] Shri Devi of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, Trapchi Lhamo [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་ལྷ་མོ] in Tsangrel.   

**Q:**  What's she called?   

**A:**  Tsangrel <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Lhamo.   

**Q:**  Yes, sometime after that, around '56, the Dalai Lama went to India. Around this time, what problems were there? Now, when we say '56, the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region had already started and politically, the Chinese wanted to, what shall I say, they wanted to do the reforms. But they said that they could be postponed for several years, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the democratic reforms.   

**Q:**  Yes, that's right. So were they saying that they wanted to do the reforms?   

**A:**  It seems that they were saying that it was good to do reforms. The ones who came out in front [against that] were the three great monasteries. Behind that, the army and everyone else was there. At that time, [the monasteries] they made a petition saying that it was not alright to do the reforms.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes, and it was said that the reforms would be postponed for six years.   

**Q:**  Did the military support this?   

**A:**  The ones who openly came out were the three monasteries, and the military and all were supporting them. In this, there were also many government officials.   

**Q:**  So this was before the Dalai Lama left?   

**A:**  I don't know if he had left <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> for India or not.   

**Q:**  But he had already left Lhasa? I'm talking about '56.   

**A:**  Yes, he had left.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was in India, you were in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Since the Dalai Lama was there in India, what were the people thinking? Did they think that it was better for the Dalai Lama to remain in India or to return?   

**A:**  The people—now, it's difficult to say everyone thought in this way, but there were those who thought that it was better for the Dalai Lama to remain in India. At this time, there was the People's Association [which] consisted of people like Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག], Bumtang Trunyi Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས] and Alo Chöndze, [and they] rose up. They were the ones who rose up, but the three monasteries and the military were all there. They were saying that the reforms were not acceptable, that the Chinese must return.   

**Q:**  Yes, so when their association was organized, how did things happen? Were representatives being sent from the military, were they having meetings?   

**A:**  No, they met by themselves. But at times, the military made relations and met their leaders. And they would say that they were doing such and such, and we would say that we supported them. If we didn't agree on some things, we said we didn't agree. So like that. In addition to that, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> rose.   

**Q:**  I want to ask you a little bit about this. You probably cannot tell me everything since you were not in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. However, after the Chushigandru began at Drigutang, where were the large battles fought? [Interviewer Note: Tibetan Army personnel generally do not like Chushigandru. So he is probably the wrong person to ask, but any information is worth it. To compare with the perspective of Namgyel Wangdu, another soldier.]   

**A:**  After they started at Drigutang, at Tsetang, they fought once or twice. This was like teaching the Chinese to be smart [Tib. སྤྱང་སློབ་མཁན]. It was fighting and then leaving them alone, and then fighting again, it was as if they were getting the Chinese ready. Andru Gombo Tashila went to Shang Ganden Chöngor from Lhoka via Jagsam to get the guns from Ganden Chöngor Monastery. So at Nyemo Dokarsumdo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་རྡོ་མཁར་སུམ་མདོ], they really had to fight.   

**Q:**  What's the name of the place?   

**A:**  Nyemo Dokarsumdo. At that time, a lot of Chinese were killed and they also suffered a lot of casualties.   

**Q:**  This was after they got the arms?   

**A:**  Before they did.   

**Q:**  They were going there?   

**A:**  Yes, they were going there.   

**Q:**  So then as far as arms are concerned, then they were using their own?   

**A:**  Yes, each had brought their own. Then they went to the monastery, took the arms, and when they were coming down, at Tölung Karkhang [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་བཀར་ཁང], they [the PLA] laid an ambush and they had to fight quite a lot.   

**Q:**  Who laid the ambush, the Chinese?   

**A:**  The Chinese did. At Tölung Karkhang. So they could not cross the Jagsam ferry site and went towards the north. At Damshung [Tib. འདམ་གཞུང], two Chinese vehicles were destroyed. Then they went in the Northern Plains and arrived at Mashung [Tib. རྨ་གཞུང] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> [Tib. འབྲི་གུང]. When they got there, the Chinese had laid an ambush there too. At that time, Andru Jinda was wounded severely. He was only saved by his protective talisman. So when they fought there, some of them got scattered [separated]. Even the Chinese Lobsang Tashi was hit by bullets once or twice, but nothing happened to him with [because of] the bullets. Then Andru Jinda and others went to Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད] and took out some arms and then came up. That's all the battles that they fought . Even that was because they were stopped and had to fight, and they never specifically attacked them [went on the offense].   

**Q:**  Regarding the taking of arms from Shang Ganden Chöngor, it is said that Phala secretly had talks with the monastic officials.   

**A:**  Yes, probably, it looks like that. It appears that Drönyerchemmo Phala did a lot of work. The complete arms of the 500 bodyguard regiment from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང་པ་སྐུ་སྲུང] were there. If that was not the case [Phala's talk], Ganden Chöngor would not [have] given [the arms then], right?   

**Q:**  Maybe there was not only the monastery, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> must have been there, and soldiers too.   

**A:**  No soldiers.   

**Q:**  Nobody to protect [them]?   

**A:**  Since the monastery itself was good, they were stored there.   

**Q:**  Now, I want to ask you this. After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> began, the Chinese said that they had to be destroyed, and a meeting was held.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The meeting [was] referred to as "Mollifying the Central Committee and to quelling the Khambas' disturbance [Ch. zhong yang; Tib. dgongs pa dangs thabs dang/ khams pa'i zing cha 'jags thabs]." You must have been at this meeting. How did it happen? Tell me in detail how it all started.   

**A:**  The way it actually began was under orders of the government and we were there as representatives of the regiment. There were about 65 people. It was headed by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang and it took place in Surchong [Tib. ཟུར་འཕྱོང] at the Jokhang. So when we met and gathered, they formed tsogchung or teams [sub groups]. We were on the 3rd team. Kungö Mengyiling was on our team. It was said that he was a very learned and nice person, but the way he spoke, we were not in agreement.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  He said, "A lot of disturbances have been created. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s did something unnecessary and so everyone has landed in an uneasy [Tib. མི་བདེ་བ] situation. Since that is the case, we must mollify the Central Committee and quell the Khambas and Tibetans' disturbance [Tib. ཁམས་བོད་ཟིང་འཁྲུག]." So we said, "What you are saying is not at all correct. This is not a disturbance between the Khambas and the Tibetans. The Khambas and the Böpa, Tibetans are not fighting. The Khambas are against the Chinese and [are] not among fellow Tibetans. So what you are saying is not acceptable. Secondly, we don't see any reason to apologize to the Chinese. What the Chinese did all the way from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>, because of this, our people could not stand it and gradually, [they] came up and up, and so now this is the situation. Even in such a situation, they still could not bear it, and so out of desperation, they rose up. And so when this is the situation, it is something created by the Chinese and there is no reason why we have to apologize to the Chinese. Since this is the case, we don't accept [what you are saying] at all." So he said, "If you don't want to call it a "Khamba and Tibetan disturbance", then it's alright, but we have to apologize to the Central Committee." We said we would never apologize. And so in our team, we did not at all come to an agreement. Then we thought about it and we, the various military regiments, discussed this and said, "It is alright if you say that you will not refer to it as a Khamba and Tibetan disturbance. If you have to quell the Khambas' disturbance, then we from the various regiments will go, but the arms must be supplied by the Central Committee. If they give us the arms, then we will destroy the Khambas." What we were thinking was to get a good supply of arms and then to join the Khambas. How could that be possible? They were more clever than us. It was said that we couldn't say this [to the Chinese]. So in our team, we did not come up with a good agreement. Anyway, the various teams discussed back and forth. Ultimately, the majority criticized the Chinese. So the Chinese had this meeting dissolved. And it seems that they really gave some serious orders to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang. So when this happened, on one side, the common monk and lay officials, the various military regiments, [and] the representatives of the three monasteries got together. About 30 odd persons, and we all met in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> with Sawang Surkhang and said that "The way this meeting began was that the Chinese instigated it and told the Kashag to call the meeting. Now it is not alright to break the meeting up, and so the meeting must continue and everyone has to attend it." So we united, made a pledge and sent notices to everyone saying that it would not be okay if they didn't attend the meeting. We were able to gather everyone for the meeting. However, it was just for that one time and from the next day on, it was impossible and we were not able to meet.   

**Q:**  They were scared and did not come?   

**A:**  No. The government sent an order saying that they could not meet.   

**Q:**  I see. When the meeting first began, then according to tradition, didn't the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> have to attend?   

**A:**  Yes, they were there. Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and many were there.   

**Q:**  Ngabö did not come, right?   

**A:**  No, only Surkhang.   

**Q:**  During this time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang must have said something. What did he say?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang said that "The meeting is about quelling the Khambas and Tibetans' disturbance and mollifying the Central Committee. Regarding this, all of you have to discuss this and we will do it in teams." They did not decide in a large gathering but in teams. Each team had a leader. Kungö Mengyiling was our leader.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang say that it was now time for all, the people etcetera, to work together? It seems, wouldn't it be necessary to say something from above that you can meet and discuss whatever you want?   

**A:**  When he said, "You all discuss," then [he said,] "You can discuss anything." At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang said good things. I don't remember the exact words, but he said very good things. Prior to this, Sawang Surkhang was considered [to be] like a running dog of the Chinese. From our military side, we considered him very bad. When they destroyed the regiments, he was the head of the Granary, Drukhang Legung, and he cut off our salary. He talked all about the instructions from the Chinese State Council [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང] regarding the Tibetan Army. As one looks at it now, it appears that the Chinese were instigating all of this, but we used to think that he did it on his own. Now it seems like that was sort of the way it was. So he said good things and from that time on, the story began that Surkhang was good.   

**Q:**  So this talk that Surkhang was good began from 1958 onwards?   

**A:**  Yes, '58 on. Otherwise, the Chinese used to say t<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang Wangchen Gelek was such a great person. So from that time on, at a Tibet Autonomous Region meeting, the Chinese related how bad Sawang Surkhang was. From that time onwards, the hat on Sawang Surkhang was completely taken off and he became good.   

**Q:**  In the teams, who was there? The military representatives? Common monk officials?   

**A:**  In the teams, it was not organized in that way. Out of 65 people, excluding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang, then, out of 64 people, it was divided.   

**Q:**  How was it divided?   

**A:**  A list was made. I don't remember them all, but there were many teams. There were about 15-20 in a team.   

**Q:**  Who was in your group?   

**A:**  The military and the monastic representatives. From the monk officials, Kungö Temajok [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོག] was there. Then there, there were a few [others], but I can't recall now.   

**Q:**  When you say Kungö Temajok, you mean the one who worked with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla?   

**A:**  Yes, they shot each other and died.   

**Q:**  In this meeting, it is said that Barshi Jedrungla became really aggressive [Tib. ངར].   

**A:**  Yes, he said things very well. At that time, Barshi Jedrungla was very good.   

**Q:**  Earlier, what I was saying about the secret organization of Phala, when did that begin?   

**A:**  I swear by the Three Jewels that I don't know the date.   

**Q:**  If we talk in terms of years, I doubt if it was there in '51-52.   

**A:**  No, not then. Maybe around '54-55. When the Dalai Lama went to India, this organization was there.   

**Q:**  Beside this, the People's Association and Alo Chöndze's group, what other secret groups were there?   

**A:**  Other than that, there weren't any conspicuous, secret organizations.   

