# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he talks about Kujar Künphel's rise to power and about the establishment of the Trapchi office which incorporated the office that minted gold coins. He also discusses the history of the printing of Tibetan currency notes and coins, as well as a description of Tsarong's power and demotion. Sambo discusses the origin of the Tibetan army and about wars with the Nepalese and with the Chinese.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_02/H_0205_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How did Kujar come to power?   

**A:**  First he was of the one young boys recruited as a tax for copying government documents (Tib. itruk [ཨེ་ཕྲུག]), and then he became a favorite of the Dalai Lama so probably he did not enjoy any rank or anything at all.   

**Q:**  Is that true?   

**A:**  That is definitely true, but later, I heard that he was given the rank of Ta lama [Tib. ཏ་བླ་མ].   

**Q:**  Is that true?   

**A:**  Yes, actually, this is only what I have heard,I don't know it because at that time I was just a young kid about 7-8 years old who was going to school. So I really didn't experience anything. This is only what I have heard and came to know later. When Kujar was the favorite, though the Dalai Lama had to deal with the Kashag through the Drönyerchemmo, in the case of important matters and matters which have to be obtained quickly, he would send Kujar to the Kashag to find out what was the kalön's opinions were and how they had solved the matter. His personal duty was to take the responsibility of the Electric Machine Office in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་གློག་འཕྲུལ་ཁང]   

**Q:**  When was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office established? Was it established by Kujar?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time there was an office called Setram (Tib. གོལད་ཅོཨིན [སེར་ཏྲམ]) where they minted gold coins with the name of the Tibetan government [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང་ཕྱོགས་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] on it. Later this office was combined with this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office which was established by Kujar.   

**Q:**  In the meanwhile, what had happened to Tsarong? Was he left in between? There was a song in Tibetan, "The water in the canal of gold coins that was running and running has been stopped. The great <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> Sawangchemmo, while coming and coming, has disappeared." [Tib. སེར་ཏྲམ་ཡུར་བུའི་ཆུ་དེ་ཡོང་གིན་ཡོང་གིན་ཆད་སོང། མི་རྗེ་ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ་ཕེབས་ཀྱིན་ཕེབས་ཀྱིན་བརླགས་སོང].   

**A:**  Yes, Tsarong was the one who started making the gold coins and probably they had minted the gold coins for about 2-3 years. After that it was merged into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> and then Kujar was in charge. I didn't know what happened after that.   

**Q:**  At that time the Gold Coin Mint and some other offices were merged together to set up the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It printed currency notes and a few things made from iron and they even made the 303 English Carbine. As for the guns they made, the shape was kind of the same as the 303 English Carbine, but when they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a>t them, they didn't work well. Instead of the point of the bullets hitting the target, in some cases the side of the bullets hit the target. While making the guns, a 303 English Carbine and some bullets were sent to India to the British to show to the gun factory. They explained the problem we had saying, "This is the gun we are able to make in Tibet and these are the bullets that we have been able to make. Please advise us what is wrong, what mistakes have we made and tell us your advise." That was sent to India for expert opinion from the British because at that time, Tibet had a good relation with the British. The British replied to the Tibetan Government saying, "There are 27 faults in the manufacturing of your guns. So it would be better if you stop producing the gun." They simply said there were 27 and did not mentioned what the faults were. So the government stopped making the 303 English Carbine. As far as the bullets were concerned, we still manufactured some Tibetan bullets, which we called "local bullets." They were quite good but when you had a choice between the company made bullets and the local bullets, people choose the company bullets because they were British made, but the local bullets worked. All this bullet-making was studied by the Rimshi Changöba [Tib. བྱ་དངོས་པ་རིམ་བཞི]. That was not the present Changöba, but his father who had gone to London and studied there. He had been able to study it properly so we were able to make it and that was quite useful. However, I heard that the gunpowder had to be pulverized by hand, not by wood, metal or stone. As far as the currency was concerned, there was a new sho [Tib. ཞོ] coin. There had been a one sho note printed by them earlier but then during Kujar's period he had minted a new one sho coin, and after that made a ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> coin [Tib. བཅུ་སྒོར] and a three sang coin [Tib. སྲང་གསུམ་སྒོར་མོ]. Thereafter, many different currencies were made like the twenty-five sang note, the fifty <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> note and also the hundred sang note.   

**Q:**  Twenty-five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> note was very late and the hundred sang note was printed during the time of Reting Regency, right?   

**A:**  Yes it was very late.   

**Q:**  I heard that 50 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> note, or rather the seven and a half <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> currency note [Tib. བདུན་ལོར], came first, and is that true?   

**A:**  Yes. The 50 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> note which had a design of a tiger, lion, garuda and dragon on it and was yellowish in color came first.   

**Q:**  What about the ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> currency note which was blue with a dragon design?   

**A:**  That was later.   

**Q:**  It was not so late.   

**A:**  I remember that the hundred <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> currency note had already appeared.   

**Q:**  Must be.   

**A:**  When I was a kid there were five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> currency notes, ten trangga currency notes and twenty-five trangga currency notes also. Similarly, there were fifteen trangga currency notes, twenty five trangga notes and there the fifty trangga currency note was the highest.   

**Q:**  What did the 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> note look like? I've never seen them.   

**A:**  It has been a long time and I don't remember exactly, but I think it was kind of bluish green.   

**Q:**  Was this the currency which had appeared before the present denominations of currencies?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How can you say that the seven and half <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> currency note was known as ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> note? How can you say there were separate ones?   

**A:**  No, how can that be. The seven and a half <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> note was a seven and a half sang note. Ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> was ten trangga. Those were separate. The seven and half sang note was called the 50 trangga note [Tib. ལྔ་བཅུ་ལོར]. Moreover, when I was a child, I heard that the old currencies were printed by xylographic wood blocks, like the way we printed books. However, the new ones were printed by metal, which is what they said, although I don't know since I was a child then. I cannot differentiate whether it was printed by the wood-block method or pressed metal print, however it looks like it was wood -block print because the letters are bigger. Then after Kujar was in-charge of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, he produced the new one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a> coin. I remember buying bread with the new coin. Then, the 50 trangga note with the tiger, lion, garuda and dragon was printed to replace the previous notes. All the old currency notes were collected and people were given new ones. I was probably 8 years old. After Kujar had his downfall, a three sang silver coin was made.   

**Q:**  Wasn't the ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> coin produced before that?   

**A:**  No, the three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> coin came first. There were two different kinds of three sang notes, an old one and a new one. At first, three sang silver coins had been introduced that had the design of a longevity vase [Tib. ཚེ་བུམ]. Then came the ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏམ་ཀ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system that was equal to 4 sang. Also a silver coin.">trangga</a> silver coins. Both were pure silver. Later the three sang coin which was the same size as the one before but had a slightly different design with a snow mountain and lion, etc. It was probably during the Reting period. About this time, say about two or three years later, a hundred sang currency note came. People were a bit shocked at seeing the hundred note denomination for currency. As the poor people would never have been able to keep such a note, because the value of money was very high. People were shocked and talked to each other, saying now there is a hundred sang note and so forth. A little later, the ten sang currency note came out.   

**Q:**  It was after the Kujar's downfall?   

**A:**  Yes. Then the five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> denomination currency note was issued, it was a small yellow-red note. Thereafter, the ten sang coin came out with a lot of copper mixed in.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a> coin before that?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a> copper coin and before that, a three sho copper coin came out. When the three sho copper coin was made, they said that the government was the loser. That the government was losing money on it so it's value was increased to make its value five sho. Then in the Iron Tiger year they had to do a lot of trading because of the increasing military expenditures. To meet these military expenses, they had to do more work. So they introduced the ten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> coin again, it was made by the office dealing with economy known as Dungö [Tib. འདུ་འགོད]. On it was written, "The happy flourishing of the economy." [Tib. འདུ་འགོད་བདེ་སྐྱིད་འདོད་རྒུ་འཁྱིལ]. It was inherited by Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> and the work was carried on by Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] and myself. By that time, they had submitted the plan and it was approved. These had a lot of copper mixed in the coin, a ratio of about three sho of silver to one sho of copper. The weight of the coin was 4 sho and five karma. Before that I remember a twenty-five sang currency note was issued.   

**Q:**  What happened to Tsarong? When he became a kalön, he was Commander-in-Chief of the Tibetan Army [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་དམག་སྒར་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཆེ་བ] and had become very powerful and important. Then suddenly he was disgraced or rather dismissed. How did that happen? Why was he terminated?   

**A:**  I heard that the order they issued had said that Tsarong had kept guards in his house. He might have kept five to ten soldiers there to act as a guard for the commander-in-chief. This was the external excuse, but actually they had suspicions that all these military officers might make a military coup though , they didn't say that they were going to do a military coup. Many military officers were expelled. [(Gelek Rimpoche: added during the translation; not on the tape) The famous Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] told my father, "I took the responsibility for killing the Drönyerchemmo Ara Garpo [Tib. ཨ་ར་དཀར་པོ]. One day, when I went to the work site of the Drönyerchemmo to shoot him, I found that he was not there. They had kept his gown sitting upright though. Then I asked the servant, 'Where did Drönyerchemmo go?' He said that Drönyerchemmo went to the Dalai Lama's room. Then I thought that the secret had been revealed and I went towards the south gate. I asked the guards, 'Who came here this morning?' They said that at dawn Salungwa [Tib. ས་ལུང་བ] came. Then I thought that Salungwa definitely had revealed the secret, I thought of getting rid of him but my colleagues told me not to do that. So I left."] He [Tsarong] did order some capital punishment. I heard that some people's hands had been cut off, legs had been cut off, and that these had been hanging up in the market area. All these sorts of things were said by people, but I had never been there to see them myself. I was four or five years old at that time. The Dalai Lama made inquiries through the Drönyerchemmo to check on the talk that capital punishment, cutting off legs, etc., had happened. He asked how had this thing happened and who had done it. He made inquiries through the office of the Drönyerchemmo. Tsarong replied to the Drönyerchemmo's inquiry that he had made this decision and done that. He said that these were necessary punishments and had to be done because of the crimes committed. "I (Tsarong) did not ask the Dalai Lama because the Dalai Lama is a monk and has taken the bikshu monk's vows, so being a bikshu he cannot approve of capital punishment or the cutting off of legs and hands, etc. Therefore I did not ask the Dalai Lama. I took the responsibility myself. I have done these things". That is what he replied to this inquiry.   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  At that time Tsarong was not there. He had gone to India.   

**Q:**  What was the purpose of Tsarong's visit to India? Did the Dalai Lama ask him to go or did he go for pilgrimage?   

**A:**  Wasn't he going there to get some guns? When he was returning from India and reached Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར], he received the order that he was demoted from the rank of Commander-in-Chief.   

**Q:**  It is true that he received the order in Chushul, but what was the reason for him going to India?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea, but he probably went to get guns or for a pilgrimage. At the time when they tried to get rid of Drönyerchemmo, Tsarong was not there. However, Tsarong was there when they did the preliminary arrangements. For instance, all the military officers, rather the educated young officers, were saying that this 'white moustache' [Tib. ཨ་ར་དཀར་པོ] [note: this was the nickname of the Drönyerchemmo] hates us so we must get rid of him. When they said, "get rid of him" they may not necessarily have meant that he should be killed. It could have been that they wanted to do something to get him out of the post of Drönyerchemmo or make him powerless. When Tsarong was in India, they might have taken that step. [Dr Goldstein: added during the translation; not on the tape] Tsarong was known to be a friend of the late 13th Dalai Lama. If he was a friend and if he had a lot of problems from Drönyerchemmo, Ara Garpo, then he could have told the Dalai Lama and they could have discussed the matter. It is now known for a fact that Tsarong did not explain anything to the Dalai Lama about the interruptions and disturbances to his activities by the 'White Moustache.' It seems that either that a misunderstanding had already developed between the Thirteenth Dalai Lama and Tsarong or there was doubt that Tsarong's explanation might not be fully accepted or welcomed by the Dalai Lama or there may even have been an indication that Tsarong's suggestions may not be taken as a genuine suggestions. Unless there was such an indication already, knowing the character of Tsarong quite well, he could have openly told the Dalai Lama, "This is the problem." Since this was not done, it seems that some trouble had already developed between the Dalai Lama and Tsarong by that time. What do you think about this? Actually, this happened during the time when Tsarong was away.   

**Q:**  They had a tense situation so they didn't have time to wait for Tsarong, right?   

**A:**  Probably the military officers had been holding meetings and it was said that somebody is doing this and that and that was the time when they started the fire. Later when the fire became quite large, Tsarong wasn't there. Tsarong was probably not involved in attacking Ara Garpo. Drumpa [Tib. bhrum pa] was the acting Commander-In-Chief.   

**Q:**  In their organization, Drumpa was not the only person, right?   

**A:**  He was not really in the organization. Probably Drumpa just had the title of the commander-in-chief, but he was an opium addict so he was not among the people doing the actual work. Drumpa was not regarded as a person to pass responsibility on to. Probably, [all] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> might have been holding meetings on a equal power base. Before Tsarong left for India, they probably didn't have any talk of attacking Ara Garpo. When Tsarong arrived in Chushul, he received the order telling him not to come to the Kashag and the Military Headquarter for the time being. Tsarong might have been involved in the beginning, but he was not there when the fire became large. Before that, there had been some kind of trouble and there was a big fight between the regiments and it was said that some of the soldiers had their hands cut off and their hands were hung in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང] 1. A major open market in Lhasa in the traditional era that was near the Jokhang and traditionally sold miscellaneous foodstuffs and new and old goods. 2. The location of the of the Police Regiment, which was also sometimes called the Tromsikang Regiment.">Tromsikang</a> [Tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང]. But I didn't go to look at it. I was about 4-5 years old at that time. Even when I was young, as a kid, people used to say that Tsarong said, "The Squad Leader should be hanged on the canon and the rest of the soldiers should be executed by a firing squad." [Tib. བཅུ་དཔོན་མེ་སྒྱོགས་རྩེ་ལ་བཀོན། དེ་འཕོས་དམག་མེ་དགུ་ཤོག་བརྒྱབས་ནས་སོད]" This was the talk of the town. People still used to say this when I was a child. Tsarong had been a commander-in chief. He had made some rather drastic decisions. He might have even ordered capital punishment for a few people, and for one or two people he might have even cut off their hands and legs. It was later examined by Ara Garpo, the Drönyerchemmo, and the verdict was issued through the Drönyerchemmo. Therefore, he [the Dalai Lama] asked the Drönyerchemmo who had ordered the punishments of cutting off and hands and legs since it was not allowed from the before. So Tsarong said, "Those people should have been executed and had their legs cut off. I didn't report it to the Dalai Lama because he had taken the bikshu vow so it was impossible for him to execute people and cut their hands off. There was no choice but to cut the legs and hands off. I thought that the Dalai Lama would never approve it." So Tsarong might have thought that Ara Garpo hated him.   

**Q:**  So Tsarong didn't report to the Dalai Lama that Ara Garpo hated him, right?   

**A:**  Probably. Tsarong had a close relationship with the Dalai Lama, so he might have thought I enjoy a very, very close relation with the Dalai Lama, but it seems that the Drönyerchemmo enjoyed a far better relationship with the Dalai Lama. So Tsarong might have thought that this man, the Drönyerchemmo, had been bad and was hurting all of us, not only me but my party and the people who I raised too. Therefore, he didn't dare to report to the Dalai Lama that Ara Garpo hates him. That must have been the feeling of Tsarong.   

**Q:**  What about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>? Did he have anything to do with this?   

**A:**  He was definitely important here. That is definite because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> used to write a letter, a sort of inner report [Tib. ནང་ཞུ] to the Dalai Lama informing him that their [Tsarong's] activities don't seem to be so good and favorable and that they are spying and it is dangerous. He also gave warnings. My late father suffered a little bit from actions by Lungshar's men when Lungshar investigated and levied new taxes on the newly opened fields [Tib. འབབ་ཞིབ]. We lost nine officials who used be under <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>. Therefore, Lungshar was also suspicious about what Sambo might do to him. My late father used to tell me, "There are people watching me where ever I go and Lungshar was putting soldiers under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Samba [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་ཟམ་པ] bridge that was located between Tsarong house and town and he used to have soldiers sleeping under the bridge to see if someone goes over it to go see Tsarong. If I went through there they were ordered to shoot me. I didn't have to go. Why should I go to Tsarong at night? So I didn't go. But I did not know that the soldiers were put there to watch him and this sort of thing until later." This is what my late father used to tell his children.   

**Q:**  What about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> at that time? Was he active in politics? Was he involved or was he there at all?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> definitely was there as the [Dalai Lama's] favorite, although I never heard that he was involved in those matters.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> might not have risen up?   

**A:**  He had risen up at that time, but he was not meddling into politics in the manner that he was in the later years. He was there though he didn't seem to be active in politics at that time at all. You see my mother used to make certain hair decorations especially to be presented to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a>. Künphel had a different name before he became a monk, but it was not given to him. I don't know the reasons why, maybe she didn't have the opportunity to give it to him or something. Anyway, the things were still lying in our house. It could also be that later he had become a monk and when he became a monk there was no question of ever giving this to him as that would not be right. Whatever the reason this might be, definitely Künphel was there but there was no evidence that he was ever involved in political affairs at that time.   

**Q:**  Actually, what did the military officers want? Did they try to launch a coup?   

**A:**  It didn't seem that they tried to make a coup and get political power. They just started to get rid of Ara Garpo.   

**Q:**  [Dr. Goldstein: not on the tape] There was no personal reason for getting rid of Drönyerchemmo Ara Garpo. The young military officers wanted to build a strong military, get better arms, better ammunition, better salary, better economy and to make everything sort of better. That was what they wanted to build. But, nobody said that. They wanted to have the military officers get more prestige in the Assembly. So some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> saw this as a real threat because they thought that if the military was built up strongly, then they would loose the power of the monasteries. The power of the monasteries would go down, so they were basically against this military buildup. To me it seems that this was the major cause of conflict between these two, but what do you think?   

**A:**  Yes it probably was like that. The military became powerful, and then not only the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> but all the monks would have this doubt and especially since Tibet did not have military (power) and the government was supported by a large number of people in the monasteries. Whenever they needed something the monastery came out and supported the government. That was how it was functioning before. However, sometimes the monastery also revolted against the government. We have a saying that the monks have exploded [Tib. ལུག], when we said that the monks have exploded, it means that the monks came down to the government buildings to disagree with certain verdicts and demand they be withdrawn or they would not go back. The abbots of the monasteries would run before the monks and try to stop them on the road. They would say, "Please don't go, don't go," but they had made up their minds to go. These things happened very often, especially when there were no soldiers.   

**Q:**  (Dr Goldstein) When was the military established in Tibet?   

**A:**  Probably in the nineteen twenties, before that there were no soldiers at all, no military regiments, no military establishment at all. The only thing like the military was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་བ] The name of the oldest Tibetan military unit that was established during the reign of the 7th Dalai Lama in the 18th century.">Simchungnga</a> [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་བ]. The Simchungnga were the old people who went around during the Mönlam Prayer Festival making the noise "woo" and firing Tibetan guns. They made a funny noise. This was supposed to be the only army unit they had. When they needed to send something like bodyguards, the government would send about 50-60-80-90 young monks.   

**Q:**  If there were no soldiers then how was this system of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> and military <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> [Tib. དམག་རྐང] started? In other words, how did it function, how were you going to calculate it?   

**A:**  Before the 13th [Dalai Lama] there were no soldiers at all. The question of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> was just established by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> when he levied new taxes on the monasteries and the aristocrats [Tib. ཞིབ་འཕར] and made the land enumeration in the Iron Tiger year [Tib. ལྕགས་སྟག་ཞིབ་གཞུང]. It was only at that time that it was established, not before this.   

**Q:**  Before that, how did you divide the land if there were no '<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> units?   

**A:**  Before that there were the estates and the individual <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> who were under the estates. Whatever taxes were done for the estate was done by the people who were under that particular estate. This system of units of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> was only established in the Iron Tiger year by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and not before.   

**Q:**  (Dr Goldstein) If that is true, then where did the soldiers come from when you had this Nepal-Tibet War in the eighteen eighties? Where did the soldiers come from?   

**A:**  During the trouble with Nepal they recruited soldiers from the Tö [Tib. སྟོད] area only. When we say "recruited soldiers" it means we collected young people from the various families living in the Tö area and made a regiment there. Wherever you needed some people you collected them from near that area, for example, when you had trouble with the Bhutanese, you collected people from southern Tibet.   

**Q:**  (Dr Goldstein) If that is so, then where did these people get guns or did they have to bring their own guns? How did that work?   

**A:**  Those soldiers carried swords, spears, and bows and arrows. There were no guns. Guns were not available at all at that time in Tibet.   

**Q:**  What about the fighting with the Chinese in the Kham area?   

**A:**  In 1912, trouble started in the Kham area. It was called the "Water-Bird Year War against Chinese" [Tib. ཆུ་བྱི་རྒྱ་དམག]. At the end of that, the Chinese soldiers were driven out from Tibet. By 1914 the Amban of China left [Lhasa] via the sea route [India] to China. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Champa Tendar [Tib. བཀའ་བློན་བླ་མ་བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར] was the Commander-in-Chief and also the Governor of Kham in charge of both military and civil administration there. He was called, "Head of the Military and Civil Affairs in Kham" [Tib. མདོ་ཁམས་ཞི་དྲག་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་སྤྱི་འདོམས] As we said earlier, by 1916, 1917, and 1918 we were able to clear all the Chinese from Eastern Tibet. We had guns because in 1913 and 1914 the Prime Minister, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Lönchen [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་བློན་ཆེན]. Had gone to Simla and the British presented him with about 500 guns. On top of that, they also bought a lot of additional guns. The 500 were given free, but Lönchen Shatra did not keep them for his personal use. He presented them to the government. We started to collect the guns we got from India and sent them together with whatever we had in Lhasa to the Eastern Tibet, Kham area. This was how we were able to drive all the Chinese out of Eastern Tibet.   

**Q:**  Were the soldiers who were in Eastern Tibet locally collected people or were they from Central Tibet. In other words, were they Khambas or Phöba [Tib. བོད་པ]?   

**A:**  The soldiers available in Eastern Tibet were from the 3,000 Chinese-trained soldiers [Tib. གྱཇོང]. The 3,000 solders from the Gyajong were arranged as follows: 1,000 from Central Tibet [Tib. Ü] with 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> called the ünda [Tib. དབུས་མདའ]. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> there were four depön and two thousand soldiers. The ünda was regarded as more important. All of these had a tax-basis [Tib. རྟེན] which meant they had a land basis [for sending a soldier]. But those soldiers do not have any good weapons at that time, and they only carried locally made weapons like Tibetan guns, swords, and spears. When we had this war with the Nepalese and we lost very badly.   

**Q:**  What regiments did they add in the 1920's?   

**A:**  The 3,000 soldiers we had, carried shields and swords and such things and didn't have modern guns. They also had drills to perform.   

**Q:**  Was that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་བ] The name of the oldest Tibetan military unit that was established during the reign of the 7th Dalai Lama in the 18th century.">Simchungnga</a> ?   

**A:**  No. This regiment was set up during the time of the 7th Dalai Lama, Kelsang Gyatso [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱ་མཚོ], in 1770-80. Actually, this regiment was set up at the time of Wang Gyurme Namgye [Tib. ཝང་འགྱུར་མེད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. In the war with the Nepalese, the Nepalese made us suffer a severe loss. So we reported to the Chinese saying that the Nepalese were making us to suffer a severe loss and the [Qing] emperor sent 20,000 soldiers. I don't know which emperor that was. It was in 1780.   

**Q:**  Was there a Bodyguard [Gusung] Regiment?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't.   

**Q:**  In 1920, which regiment was set up before the Gusung Regiment?   

**A:**  The Gusung was called Nyina [because one soldier had to be sent from each two existing military gang] The second Nepalese war was in the eighteenth century. There was one very special and powerful Nepalese general called something like Bahdur. We lost three districts in the Tö area, namely Nyalam [Tib. གཉའ་ནང], Dzonga [Tib. རྫོང་དགའ] and Kyirong [Tib. སྐྱིད་དྲོང]. These three districts were taken by the Nepalese. We had no military power at all. Later we requested that they leave these areas and go back. They said, "No, we will not go back unless you pay 400 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> [Tib. རྡོ་ཚད] of silver coins annually for each one of those districts. The Tibetan government replied that it would be almost impossible for us to give you 400 dotse annually in silver coins per district, but we can give you 1,400 dotse once and for all. Then they said whoever will go to negotiate this has to be a very important person. The government of Tibet gave them a lot of names of different persons of the rank of Khenche and Khenjung, but these names were not approved by the Nepalese. Then we asked who they wanted and they asked for some kalön who had the power to decide [himself] like Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] and Doring kalön. When Yuthok went alone they said that was also not good, and said they wanted Pandit Doring [Tib. རྡོ་རིང] to be sent along with him. So both Doring and Yuthok were sent. When they went there, instead of negotiating wit them, they [the Nepalese] arrested the two Shapes. One night, they invited them to Nyalam and when they reached Nyalam <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> the Nepalese said that there was some sort of festival for them that night and they would like to show some show, so these Shapes went to watch the show. Those who are taking part in the show were all soldiers and about midnight they killed and wounded quite a number of the servants and aides accompanying the two Shapes. The two Shapes were arrested and taken to Nepal and they were probably kept prisoner there for about a year, maybe over a year. They had to stay in the jail in Nepal.   

