# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.25 : Tape 25  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses in detail how the People's Liberation Army behaved well when they first arrived in Tibet even when they were spat on by Tibetans, and how General Fan Ming was stoned and injured while driving in his jeep. He discusses the Legjö office and discusses the loan reforms it made. Sambo talks about how the Chinese wanted the Tibetan Government to issue edicts telling the people to send their children to school in China, and how Mao Zedong told the tour delegation he was part of to tell Alo Chöndze not to cause trouble. He discusses Chushigandru and the tension between Chinese and Tibetans in 1958-59. He describes how his father was stoned on March 10th and how people sang songs about this incident and how the Chinese held a military meeting and asked his father his opinion of these songs.   

---  
### Tape 25  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_25/H_0205_25.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1954 the Chinese came. When the Chinese first came they were very kind. They opened up new schools, hospitals, offices, and so on. Gradually, they started constructing roads. Our government also started the Legjö Reform Office. Now can you tell us how the Chinese became more powerful and started exerting their influence?   

**A:**  In 1951, after the 17-Point Agreement was signed, in the middle of the 10th month when the Chinese first arrived, they were nice. There were many instances where Tibetan citizens spit on their faces and sometimes caught the soldiers and beat them up, but in the beginning the Chinese soldiers would never retaliate. They would try to run away or they just bore these abuses silently.   

**Q:**  I remember the Tibetans also killed a Chinese man.   

**A:**  I have never heard of this killing. Then later, by the end of 1952 or early 1953, the Chinese military commander Fan [Ming] [Ch. fan si ling] was coming in a jeep. One person threw stones at him and the commander was injured and probably was bleeding. They caught the person who threw the stones and he was brought to the Chinese camp and there he was scolded and told not to repeat such acts. While he was scolded, the injured commander said, "Probably this person is hungry so give him some food." There was one such case in my own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> regiment. A Trapchi soldier had insulted a Chinese so they arrested him and kept him for one night at their camp. On the next day, they handed him over to the Tibetan authorities.   

**Q:**  Before that, the Chinese were not arresting people, right?   

**A:**  Then they started arresting people, but just for 1-2 days and then called the Depön and handed over the soldier. The People's Liberation Army had rules not to beat and scold people and I thought that they were really putting those rules into practice. That was in 1953. At the end of 1952 there was trouble with the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> because they objected to whatever new policy the Chinese wanted to introduce. Due to Chinese pressure, the 2 sitsab were eventually made to resign in the second month of 1953. After that, the situation seemed to return to normal. By the 8th month, the reform office was introduced. It was headed by Ngabö as a kalön and under him there were 2 people in charge [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ], the Drunyichemmo Chömpel Thubden and Tsipön Namseling. I was one of the representatives. There were about 30 to 40 people in the office, all representing different departments and institutions. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> was representing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེ་ཇི] A third rank position in the Tibetan government.">theiji</a> ranks. Mentöpa [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད་པ] and I represented the rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> and Horkhang was one of the people who represented the rank of senampa. I don't recollect all the names now.   

**Q:**  Among the monastic representatives, the Duwa Khembo [Tib. འདུལ་བ་མཁན་པོ] from Drepung and so on were there. The Duwa Khembo was also known as Shasur Chöndze. There were quite a number of such representatives.   

**A:**  Dumra was one of the representatives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> level officials. After the hragdu assembly meeting, this office decreed that lenders can no longer give out loans at high interest rates and they also made some exemptions for interest owed on loans. It was further decreed that some of the very old loans would not have to be repaid, while some had to be repaid with only one third of the interest and so on. This calculation was based on how long the loan had been in existence. The older the loans, the less one had to pay back. This lifted a great burden from the shoulders of the common people. The highest interest one could charge on new loans was set at 14%. This applied to everyone, whether it be the government, monasteries, private estates or individuals. Anyone charging more than this was illegal and punishable by law. Against this new reform, it was the monks who put up the greatest protest, especially Ganden Monastery. Their protest was that during their autumn retreat whose expenditures were met by giving out loans with high rates of interest. The new decree made it very difficult for them to host this autumn religious festival so they gave a lot of trouble to the office as a whole and to private members as well, especially to Ngabö. They kept the pressure on, but we carried on the work until 1954 when it was time for the Dalai Lama to go to China. As already mentioned earlier, there was a lot of objection to his going to China and finally they agreed to decide the issue by rolling the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery. The senriy decided that the Dalai Lama should leave. The Assembly was greatly concerned about his safety and demanded that the Dalai Lama should return within a year. The Kashag promised that the Dalai Lama would return after a year. Not only that, the Assembly sent a representative to the Chinese office and talked to them and the Chinese also pronounced that the Dalai Lama would return within a year. In 1954, the Dalai Lama went to China and there were no changes in politics and there were no problems during that year. In 1955, the Dalai Lama came back and the Chinese started collecting students for school and the Kashag started sending edicts to various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> saying that they must send students to school. They needed several thousand students. The Kashag could not get so many students so the Kashag wrote to all the dzong and the dzongpön instructing them to make it compulsory for every family under their dzong to send their children to China for education. A large number of the families didn't want to send their children to China saying it is bad to send them to China because in the future the children will not recognize their parents and both the parents and the children will have a hard time, so they hired other people's children and substituted them as their own children and sent them to China for education. In 1955, we went to China at their invitation to do a tour [Ch. can guan]. This was the time when the People's Association headed by Alo Chöndze was set up. We met Mao there and he personally asked us, "Did you hear the news from Lhasa?" and we said, "No." So he told us, "There was big news from Lhasa concerning Alo Chöndze and he is causing trouble. So you should tell him that he should not do like this. If he does like this, it will waste many people's [lives] [Tib. འཕྲོ་བརླགས]." By the time we returned to Lhasa, Alo Chöndze had already been arrested, so I could not deliver Mao's message to him. Then in 1956, while we were returning, the Chinese started land reforms among the farmers on the eastern side of Yangtze River.   

**Q:**  How did they implement the land reforms? Tell us in detail.   

**A:**  They were preparing to divide the land among the farmers.   

**Q:**  They didn't open new fields and they just robbed the land from the people who had land and divided it among the people who didn't have land, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The land was owned by the landlords, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Instead of creating new land by cultivating the abundant virgin land that were available, the Chinese divided the land already under cultivation giving it to the poor people. So there was a lot of problems. When I reached Lhasa, I heard that people were beginning to meet at Andru Gombo Tashi's [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] house. Andru might be the main person. This information was very confidential. Then in 1957, during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] Prayer Festival period in the second Tibetan month, the Kashag called the military officers and told us that the Khambas are meeting at Andru Gombo Tashi's house and ordered us not to join, get involved with or have anything to do with them under any circumstances. This applied to both the officers as well as the common soldiers [in his regiment]. At about the same time, there were quite a number of ordinary Chinese there who not connected with the liberation Army. They were ordinary Chinese who had come to Lhasa and opened up shops and restaurants, selling liquor, repairing shoes, and so on. There were about 200 to 300 of them and they were referred to as the "blue Chinese" by the local people since most of them preferred to wear blue colored clothing.   

**Q:**  This was when all of a sudden the Chinese sent a truck and picked up those Chinese without giving them a chance to pack up or take their belongings with them. They didn't commit any crimes, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were just plucked away from their shops, houses, or wherever they happened to be, packed into trucks and taken away. This caused a lot of worry among the Khambas, especially those from the east side of the Yangtze River area [Sichuan]. They feared that a similar thing might happen to them and that one fateful day they too would be herded out of Lhasa without warning. So that summer, Andru Gombo Tashi led the Khambas to Drigu [Tib. གྲི་གུ], near Yarlung, in the southern part of Tibet. In 1957, one of the stable boys [Tib. ཆིབྱོག] [the ones who look after the Dalai Lama's personal horses] was crossing the Kuru [Tib. ཀུ་རུ] bridge over the Kyichu [Tib. སྐྱིད་ཆུ] River and was killed. Normally there was a rule that when a traveler from one side crosses the bridge, the other side has to wait his turn. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆིབས་གཡོག] Stable boys in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s stables. In addition to looking after the animals, during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s time they also delivered personal messages for the Dalai Lama.">chibyog</a> normally had the right of way since he was going to transport stones for the Dalai Lama's palace. The other party normally yielded the way to him in deference to the Dalai Lama. So he went ahead and the [Chinese] guard shot him dead.   

**A:**  [Gelek:] There was a language problem. The guard being Chinese and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆིབས་གཡོག] Stable boys in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s stables. In addition to looking after the animals, during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s time they also delivered personal messages for the Dalai Lama.">chibyog</a> being a Tibetan. This was not an ordinary death, because he was the Dalai Lama's chibyog. This was a gross breech of Tibetan custom. Being the Dalai Lama's chibyog, he was highly respected, especially since the 13th Dalai Lama used them as his personal messengers. It was a big shock to the Tibetan people when they heard that a chibyog had been shot down by the Chinese.   

**A:**  Liushar demanded that in accordance with custom, the Chinese should apologize to the Dalai Lama for shooting his chibyog. The Chinese refused. Instead, the Chinese brought some sort of rule book and told Liushar, "If you want us to apologize then burn this book." Since then, the Chinese started acting more arrogantly and dictating the rules. They had finally showed their true colors. At the end of 1957, the talks began between the Chinese and the Tibetan Government on the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s. In the 4th or 5th Tibetan month of 1958, a meeting on mollifying Zhongyang and ending the Khamba's disturbances occurred. At that time, the Chinese told the Tibetan government to end the Khamba's disturbances. The Kashag replied, "We can't do it. How shall we do it?" The Chinese said, "We can handle it, but first you have to try it because you are the local government and you have soldiers so first you have to do it. Later if you can't handle it, then we will take care of it."   

**Q:**  How did this talk take place? Did the Chinese come to the Kashag? How did it go?   

**A:**  No. The Chinese never come to the Kashag. They had to go to the Chinese and talk.   

**Q:**  How come <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> attended the Kashag with the Chinese officers?   

**A:**  These were the junior officers like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and the stewards. The senior officers would never attend the Kashag. Whenever they had to talk to any [Tibetan government] office, they would send a notice and we would have to go their office. Then finally we had a meeting at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> in the Shabden Lhagang room. Normally the kalön never came there, but this time Ngabö came personally and explained that the Chinese had been asking the Kashag questions. The most important question was what was the Tibetan stand on this issue? So we told them that the Tibetan government stood on the Chinese side. Ngabö said this at the Tsondu too. The Chinese had very strong doubts about the Tibetan government. On the other hand, the Tibetan government could not take any strong action against the Khambas because they were our own people and we don't want any confrontation with them. Since they had already made a statement saying that we stood by the Chinese, the Tibetan Government had to be careful not to offend [Tib. བཟོ་པོ] the Chinese. Now about this time, every Tibetan was suspicious of the Chinese and vice versa. The Chinese were very suspicious of the Tibetans and the Tibetans were really scared of the Chinese. There were cases when villagers went to the [Chinese] vegetable garden to pick a few pieces of radish and the Chinese shot them dead! Several such cases took place. Another case took place in 1957 when four soldiers from my regiment went to collect cow dung for fuel. The Chinese shot them. Three were killed near the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Linga and 1 escaped unharmed. The Chinese were on their way to their camp and the soldiers of our regiment were near the Trapchi camp collecting cow dung for fuel. The Chinese shot at them and 3 were killed on the spot. The soldier who managed to escape told us that they had done nothing to provoke the Chinese. They were going about collecting cow dung for fuel when the Chinese opened fire on them.   

**Q:**  Why did they kill them?   

**A:**  The Chinese, on the other hand, claimed that the soldiers had chased and tried to tease a Chinese woman.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was 1957. The soldier who escaped was only about 16 or 17 years old and he said that we didn't do anything, but the Chinese shot 3 soldiers dead.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese shoot them while there were collecting cow dung?   

**A:**  Yes, probably. The younger soldier said that they were shot when they were collecting cow dung. After hearing the story, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers wanted to go and fight the Chinese, but eventually the officers were able to stop them. By that time, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and the estates, the Chinese had become very suspicious and distrusted every Tibetan, like travelers, and some of them were shot and some might be dead and some were wounded and some were arrested. Among them, one of the sons of the lay officials called Gabde [Tib. དགའ་བདེ], was also arrested and detained at the bridge near Dechen [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  Why did they arrest him?   

**A:**  I don't remember the reason, but the Chinese were suspicious of him and kept him in jail for one night. I did not know about this at that time. I came to know about it later when I was in jail. The situation was such that both the Chinese and the Tibetans were suspicious of each other. Then in 1959, they said that the Dalai Lama was going to be invited to attend the National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན] and they would take him there whether he wants to go there or not. We heard this and everybody became very suspicious and doubtful. So the Dalai Lama was invited by the Chinese who said that they were going to present a show for him. On the day before [the show], they called the Gusung Depön and told him that he could not bring any soldiers with him and even if he brought them, he had to leave them outside the Chinese camp. He was further instructed that he himself should come unarmed. The people came to know about this and the news spread like wild fire. All the people were very worried. The population started gathering in front of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to stop the Chinese from taking away the Dalai Lama. It was on the first day of the second month in the Tibetan calendar, or it was on the 10th March. So when Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] Khenjung came in a car, the mob stoned him to death. Then next my father came in a car. The mob started pelting stones at the car. The car stopped and my father got out. He had a Chinese bodyguard who went for his gun but my father stopped him. When he got out he looked at the people. If the people had stoned him, he would have been finished. He was hit with one stone on his head but then some people told them to stop and they stopped.   

**Q:**  Who told them to stop?   

**A:**  Among the mob of people there were some lay officials and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> like Wöser Bumther [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་འབུམ་ཐེར] and Shagjang Surpa [Tib. ཤག་བྱང་ཟུར་པ] who recognized him and shouted out for the people to stop throwing stones.   

**Q:**  Your father was the commander-in-chief, right?   

**A:**  My father was the commander of the Tibetan army as well as the Deputy Commander in the Chinese army. The Chinese then complained that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> of the local government and the ordinary people were in league. The people stopped throwing stones when the kudrak told them not to, and they started up if the kudrak told them to start stoning. In other words, the Chinese were accusing us saying that the so-called people's movement was nothing but something engineered by the local government officials. The Lhasa people <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> a song saying, "Don't say that there is no precious stone in Lhasa, the city of precious stones. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Sambo got hit with the precious stone on his head." [Tib. ལྷ་ས་ནོར་བུའི་གླིང་ལ། ནོར་བུ་མི་འདུག་མ་གསུང། ས་དབང་བསམ་ཕོའི་དབུ་ལ། ནོར་བུའི་རྡོ་གཅིག་ཕོག་བཞག]. After the revolt, the Chinese held a meeting in the Military Headquarter and asked my father about his thoughts on this song. My father said, "It can be considered two ways. It can be considered as the "mistaken stone," [Tib. ནོར་རྡོ] that I was stoned mistakenly because I was hit with only one stone. Otherwise, there were so many people and if each hit me with stones, I would have died. Or if it is taken as meaning a precious stone, it is because quite a number of people were injured, but I was not injured by getting hit with that stone, so it can be considered as a precious stone." After that, the 1959 trouble started and then there is nothing good to say.   

**Q:**  The first question I would like to ask is how many offices of Tibetans and Chinese were there?   

**A:**  There were no joint offices.   

**Q:**  What about the Preparatory Committee for Tibet Autonomous Region?   

**A:**  Yes. That was established in 1956.   

**Q:**  How many offices were put under that?   

**A:**  Since I wasn't in any of those, I don't know about it.   

**Q:**  Was there any joint military set-up with the Chinese?   

**A:**  The Chinese never came to the Tibetan military regiments except for 10-15 soldiers of the Gusung Regiment who were sent to the Chinese camp for training. Otherwise I don't think there were any connections.   

**Q:**  When did the Tibetan soldiers start wearing Chinese military uniform?   

**A:**  The Tibetan soldiers did not wear Chinese uniform. It was only the Tibetan officers who were made to wear Chinese uniforms. That was in 1956, most probably in the 3rd Tibetan month. The Chinese official named Chen Yi came to Tibet to set up the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. That was the time when I had just arrived from China. Normally these ranks are given to the officers by the marshal of the Chinese army himself. However, that year, Marshal Peng Dehuai sent a telegram to the Dalai Lama saying that he should be present to give ranks to the officers, but he was unable to. Therefore, he asked the Dalai Lama to distribute the ranks to the officers on his behalf. The Dalai Lama accepted and we had the ceremony at the Gusung Regiment. The Dalai Lama was sitting on a chair and he distributed the uniforms to the officers. Ngabö was the secretary of the function. Before the ceremony we were wearing the British uniforms but after that the Chinese uniforms were distributed and we changed into it them. Ngabö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> were the highest Tibetan officers, but they had been given the Chinese uniform and started wearing them since 1952. The next highest officer was Künsangtse who was given the rank of Shaojiang with one star and 4 golden base without a stripe. Next was the Magji Loke La [Tib. བློ་སྐལ་ལགས]. He was given the Daxiao rank with 4 stars and 2 colored stripes. A similar rank was also given to Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས]. Next came the Gusung Depön, Phüntso Tashi Takla [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྟག་ལྷ] who was given 3 stars and 2 colored stripes. Then all of us <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> were given 2 stars with 2 stripes. There was one bodyguard commander of the Panchen Lama who was given one star with 2 stripes. His name was Tempa La [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ལགས]. Then, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> were given 4 stars and one stripe. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> were given 3 stars and one stripe. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> were given one star and one stripe.   

**Q:**  When they held this ceremony, did all the soldiers attend?   

**A:**  Probably not. Anyway all the military officers were there.   

**Q:**  Was Chen Yi there?   

**A:**  This was just before he came and we had to show this to him. That night, the Chinese gave a dinner party and we attended it. From then onwards, whenever we went to any Chinese functions or meetings, we would wear their uniform. Otherwise, we didn't use them.   

**Q:**  Do you remember the month of this ceremony?   

**A:**  Probably it was in the 3rd Tibetan month in 1956. The ordinary soldiers never wore the Chinese uniforms.   

**Q:**  Whenever the Chinese had to tell us something, they spoke to the Kashag, who in turn, would tell us and then we would follow it. They would never transmit a direct order. After giving us the uniforms, the Chinese said that they would give us a salary. However, we declined saying that we were already drawing our salary from the Tibetan government. The Chinese said that we should stop taking salary from the Tibetan government and should accept the Chinese salary.   

**Q:**  Did the shengo take the Chinese salary?   

**A:**  None of us officers took it.   

**Q:**  What about Ngabö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>?   

**A:**  I don't know about Ngabö and Ragashag. Most probably they also did not accept salary from the Chinese.   

