# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.17 : Tape 17  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he talks about the Tibetan generals fighting against the Chinese in Chamdo in 1950 and the surrender of Ngabö. He also discusses his own appointment to go to Chamdo to assist Ngabö to negotiate with the Chinese.   

---  
### Tape 17  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_17/H_0205_17.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I met Muja in Chamdo. When I met him, he was saying that he had been fighting and had been killing the Chinese. He said that bullets didn't go through him, but I had no faith in this story.   

**Q:**  Was this because he had a protective talisman [Tib. མཚོན་སྲུང]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did Muja say anything about his capture?   

**A:**  Wait a minute, first I will tell you this. Ngabö told Muja that he had sent somebody to check whether the Chinese had come or not. If they were not there he said we will go, if they are there, it has no use for us to go. After some time, the messenger came back and told us that the Chinese had already reached Lagong Ngamda [Tib. ལ་གོང་ལྔ་མདོ] and that probably there were 2,000 of them. Then they said that it is no use for us to go because we have only a few people. It was not wise to go against 2,000 people and they stayed there. Ngabö wrote a letter to Lhalu in Lhodzong stating that the government back in Lhasa should be informed that he had been caught and was under Chinese control, but because of this fact there should not be any compromise and any excessive kind of commitments [Tib. ཚིག་གི་ཐལ་ཆ] for his sake. That letter was written and sent. They waited and, while waiting, they wondered what to do next and finally they decided to surrender before the Chinese came up to Drugugön. So they sent two officers, one of them was the late Möndrong Simpön Khembo [Tib. སྨོན་གྲོང་གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] who died in Dharamsala. The other officer was Laya Jarigpa. The two of them were sent. Laya Jarigpa had a sword with him to be given to the Chinese officer as a symbol of surrender. Before he entered the Chinese officer's residence it was taken away by a Chinese soldier. Probably, he felt kind of angry and tried to tell the Chinese soldier this by using broken Chinese mixed with Tibetan saying, "I have this sword to be handed over to the officer." Finally the Chinese officer came to accept the surrender and told him that he did not have to run away like this because we are not here to harm you but to serve and help you and we won't take a single needle and a thread from the people and all this type of normal talk he made. So they surrendered to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  When they surrendered, Muja was also there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was there and Ngabö and all of his staff were there. After the surrender was accepted at Drugugön, the Chinese offered them a meal in which there were no vegetables but only fried and boiled meat -- different preparations of meat. They said, "You guys had a very difficult time. Actually, we came to serve the people. Because of the propaganda given by the foreign imperialist countries it caused so much trouble for you. You need not run in the night and have all this difficulties which have been created for you. We are very sorry about that." etc. The normal Chinese talk was given.   

**Q:**  How could it be that there were only so few soldiers when they were captured? When Muja Depön came, he had brought his full regiment and there were also soldiers in Chamdo. In addition to that, there were the troops led by Karchungwa. All the troops which were there and then the ones who came down; there must have been hundreds and hundreds of soldiers.   

**A:**  There was no talk about Karchungwa and Shagjang Depön being with them there in Drugugön. Muja had fought a little bit all the way, so a lot of his soldiers were wounded and some were killed, and some were left behind when they got separated. So when he finally caught up with Ngabö, there were very few soldiers left, only about 30 soldiers.   

**Q:**  What about the soldiers in Chamdo led by the Nyadang Depön Laya Jarigpa?   

**A:**  Most of Laya Jarigpa's soldiers were at Chamdo.   

**Q:**  He didn't bring them with him, right?   

**A:**  Maybe he didn't bring them with him. Maybe the soldiers did not want to follow him! Previously he had been ordered to go to various important strategic areas but probably he was very afraid of war and he would make a lot of complaints and excuses and would not go. Later, he was at Drugugön with only one servant. At that time, there were only the soldiers brought by Muja.   

**Q:**  Why didn't they bring the soldiers from Chamdo?   

**A:**  In Chamdo, the bodyguard is normally only about 100 soldiers.   

**Q:**  The soldiers under Laya Jarigpa was there, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, but when you are running away, it is better to run separately with a small group rather than taking all the soldiers. When you take them all, you have to make big arrangements for corvée horses, so it is more complicated and more difficult.   

**Q:**  How come that there were so few soldiers at that time? Actually there should have been about 3,000 soldiers in Kham at that time.   

**A:**  At that time the late Phulungwa [Tib. ཕུ་ལུང་བ] was the depön of the Jadang Regiment and was in the Khyungpo area. And there was also Tsögo Depön in Riwoche. He was the kind of stupid one, not the famous Tsögo. Padang Depön Kharna, the Depön of Drongdrag Regiment, was in Lharigo. There was the Shotarlhosum's militia somewhere else. It was headed by the Tsidrung Drumpala.   

**Q:**  Where were they stationed?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers do you think were posted in Kham?   

**A:**  Under the jurisdiction of the Doji at that time there should be about ten thousand soldiers.   

**Q:**  Were there many in the Chamdo and Riwoche areas?   

**A:**  Under the jurisdiction of the Doji there were about ten thousand troops and the Doji was also the magji. In the north, there were also some militia called the soldiers of the four areas of the north [Tib. བྱང་རིགས་སྡེ་བཞི]. I am not sure about the number of those militia.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were a lot of Khambas fighting for the Chinese.   

**A:**  I never heard that before. In the Kham area, the Chinese propaganda was amazing. Probably they liked the Chinese better than the Tibetans. They developed that much feeling in the people. The Chinese not only made a lot of propaganda but also they gave a lot of dayan in a very lavish way.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese say that they were there to help the people?   

**A:**  Yes, they said they were there to help the people and not to harm them, so they not only said that but they gave a lot of money also. Just before the liberation, the Khambas even started singing a song with the words, "The Chinese rifle Zhong Taring (with the long barrel) is the top of the 303 English Carbine. The silver dayan is the top of all the money. The Communist Chinese is the leader of the leaders." [Tib. ཀྲུང་ཏ་རིང་ཁ་ཐུང་དཔོན་པོ་རེད། དངུལ་རྡ་ཡང་དངུལ་གྱི་དཔོན་པོ་རེད། རྒྱ་གུང་ཕྲན་དཔོན་གྱི་དཔོན་པོ་རེད]. Due to such strong propaganda the simple people began to think that the Chinese might be the real savior of the poor and downtrodden people. At that time the songs came.   

**Q:**  In he Kham area, the poor people didn't count. It was only the chiefs, the pön who counted. If the pön decided to fight or change sides, his people would follow him. If the pön didn't want to fight, the people would also follow him.   

**A:**  Yes, that was true.   

**Q:**  What about Jagtsang? Didn't he fight?   

**A:**  Jagtsang did not fight because in the late thirties when Chiang Kaishek drove the communists away, they had to flee and Mao and Zhu De had to divide their forces. The two groups had arrived in the area where there was the bridge called Luding Qiao [Ch. lu ding qiao] located just beyond Dartsedo. This was the place where Jagö Tomden's house called Hari pöntsang was. At that time, it was said that there were 18 heroes in Luding Qiao who ran away in two separate groups. Hari pöntsang was a big house. I have been there. It is a five or six story building and at it's back is a rocky mountain. It is a very strong and huge house. Zhu De and his people came there at this time, and probably the soldiers did not rob the local people at all. When they ran out of food they had to eat rats and pikas, all those little animals. The Chinese had to kill them and live on them. At that time, Zhu De met Jagö Tomden and said that we are fighting to serve the people, not to become the lord of the people. Jagö Tomden was impressed and he gave them 5,000 khe of barley and 200 or 300 yaks to be eaten. Zhu De appreciated very much the gesture of Jag Tomden and told him to give him a piece of paper. When he got this piece of paper he bit his finger and wrote in his blood, "Your kindness will never be forgotten." He wrote that in his own blood and gave it to Jagö Tomden, saying, "This time we have nothing else to give you or do for you, but if you keep this, it will definitely help you later and moreover we will meet again." Since then a relationship was established between Jagö Tomden and the Communist Chinese. Later, when I went to Jagö Tomden's place, I saw that he had about 2,000 soldiers with their own uniform that were blue in color. Likewise, there must have been a lot of other Khamba chiefs, for example, Geda Trülku [Tib. དགེ་རྟགས་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ], who probably were very close to and trusted by the Chinese communists. He was the one who later was sent to Chamdo and died there, being poisoned by Ford. Similarly, the other Khamba chiefs might also have had close ties with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Where was Geda Trülku from?   

**A:**  Probably, he was from the Ganzi area.   

**Q:**  According to what I heard, Panda Topgye went to Chamdo and asked the Tibetan government what they would give him in return if he put his soldiers and his support at the disposal of the Tibetan government. Abo Ragala went to China to find out what the Chinese were going to give. What is your opinion?   

**A:**  This is the first time I heard this.   

**Q:**  Ford told me this.   

**A:**  I don't know whether it is true or not. Perhaps, it may be true. According to my observations, Panda Togyal was close to the communists. On the other hand, Panda Raga was close to the Guomindang. It seems that he was not that close to the communists. Ngabö has deputed Panda Raga and Yinggön Yeshe Targye [Tib. དབྱིངས་མགོན་ཡེ་ཤེས་དར་རྒྱས] to negotiate and open up talks with the communists. He sent them to China. Later, in 1951 I met him in Dartsedo.   

**Q:**  Did he say anything?   

**A:**  He was with Ngabö. He was sent there to negotiate, to try to prevent a battle. They were not sent there to surrender or anything like that. I don't know if they were instructed, but I know for sure that they had the thought of getting independence in the Kham area--both from the Chinese and from the Tibetans.   

**Q:**  Do you mean a kind of autonomy or having the judicial rights over their own territory [Tib. ཁྲིམས་འགོ་རང་བཙན]?   

**A:**  Anyway, they used to differentiate Kham [from Central Tibet?] a lot.   

**Q:**  How did Lhalu come back from Chamdo or what happened to him? Was he supposed to come back or stay there?   

**A:**  Lhalu was to go back because his term was over and Ngabö was to replace him. However, he could not leave until Ngabö came. When Ngabö arrived, they probably met in the office about 2-3 times. Then Lhalu left and stayed at Lho Dzong for a time as he was supposed to be supporting Ngabö. When the situation became tense and Chamdo was lost, Lhalu left Lho Dzong and came to Pembar. He could not stay at Pembar so he came up to Lharigo.   

**Q:**  Since the situation was so critical, was Lhalu told to stay with Ngabö?   

**A:**  I have never heard that. It could have been that there was an internal order or arrangement telling Lhalu, "Wouldn't it be better for you to stay back." Because Lhalu was close to Taktra, there was no public order for Lhalu to stay back and help Ngabö.   

**Q:**  What could Lhalu do? Did he have any soldiers with him?   

**A:**  I heard that Lhalu was requested to stay at Lharigo and they were dispatching Sermag [Tib. སེར་དམག] (monk soldiers) along with people who know how to operate Bren-guns. Such instructions were received by him by means of a telegram. This is what I heard.   

**Q:**  Where is Lho Dzong located?   

**A:**  It is in the west. Giamda is in Kongpo and quite near Lhasa.   

**Q:**  So Lhalu was not told to stay in Chamdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did he want to come back?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Are you sure?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did Lhalu request to come back?   

**A:**  Probably, he did. Normally, the Shape would stay in Kham as a Doji only for three years and since they had the power, they would tell the government to send a replacement.   

**Q:**  I find it very strange that if a war was about to break out and they were in danger, that they would sent down a new Doji and pull him [Lhalu] out. Why would they do that? The old Doji (Lhalu) was familiar with the layout of the land. He must have been acquainted with a lot of influential people and he would be well informed about the situation, so why did the government want to transfer him?   

**A:**  Yes, it sounds strange, but according to the custom, a Shape served as a Doji for only three years. When his term was over they sent another person down.   

**Q:**  I understand that, but they didn't have to change. For example, Langchungwa was made to serve as a Doji for more than three years. Therefore, if the Kashag wanted to they could have made Lhalu serve as a Doji for some more time. The situation was grave and such an action would be justifiable.   

**A:**  Langchungwa stayed three years and then he requested they send a replacement, but they didn't find a Shape to go there and they sent Yuthok.   

**Q:**  No. Langchungwa left before the replacement was sent.   

**A:**  Is that so?   

**Q:**  Yes, then he was demoted.   

**A:**  Oh, yes.   

**Q:**  So if they didn't send the replacement, they could do that and tell Lhalu that since there is the trouble, you have to stay there for 10 months and he would have had to stay there, right? Or they might have said that we are sending Ngabö and you should stay there for 3 months, but they didn't do that.   

**A:**  Lhalu wanted to return because the situation was tense. On top of that, Taktra was trying his best to cover or help Lhalu as much as possible. Then they appointed Ngabö probably in the 1st month and in the 4th month, he held the ceremony and sought the audience for getting appointed. Then he left for Kham in the 6th month. When Ngabö arrived, Lhalu tried to hand over the Doji as soon as possible.   

**Q:**  Why should Taktra help Lhalu?   

**A:**  Taktra and Lhalu were quite close so he would help Lhalu. On the other hand, Ngabö is a person who does not shirk from his duty, and once he was given a responsibility he would accept it and try to see it through. Lhalu wanted to hand over the responsibility to Ngabö as soon as he reached there. Taktra and Lhalu were close and they had this activity in the case of killing Reting.   

**Q:**  When Lhalu left, what about this song, "Ngabö went aggressively; Lhalu is staying in Lhodzong, brother Ragashag has built a strong dam." [Tib. ང་ཕོད་ངར་ནེ་ཐད་སོང། ལྷ་ཀླུ་ལྷོ་ལ་བཞུགས་བཞག། ཇོ་ལགས་ར་ཁ་ཤག་གིས། རག་ཁ་བརྟན་པོ་བསྐྱོན་བཞག] At that time where was Lhalu?   

**A:**  At that time, he was in Chamdo. Ngabö went down from Lhasa to Kham. He was not that aggressive. Normally when a Shape goes down to Kham as a Doji, about 200-300 people will go with him and there were about 30-40 staff members with their servants besides the escorting soldiers. Ngabö took only two people: Tsögo as his gadrung and Samling as his gandrön. Altogether, there were about 30-40 people with him. Comparatively, Ngabö left for Kham with a very small retinue so people said that he left in a hurry and probably it seemed like going aggressively.   

**Q:**  What was the second line of defense? Suppose the Chinese broke through Kham then where did they plan to make their second line of defense?   

**A:**  Lhalu was supposed to make the second defense line. The Sermag [monk soldiers] and Bren-guns were sent as reinforcements.   

**Q:**  Did they send any more troops?   

**A:**  Lhalu had about 100 solders with him.   

**Q:**  No, I am talking about how to defend the whole country when Chamdo fell to the Chinese.   

**A:**  No, there were no more additional troops. Only the Sermag were sent.   

**Q:**  How many Sermag were there?   

**A:**  Probably there were just 200-300.   

**Q:**  Why didn't they send more monk soldiers? In Sera, Drepung and Ganden, there were about 20,000 monks, so why didn't they sent about 1,000-2,000 monk soldiers?   

**A:**  I don't know. I think that if they had sent more monk soldiers, there would be trouble for the miser to provide the corvée horse and pack animals for them. Probably it was because of that. And probably the monk soldiers caught up with Lhalu somewhere in Lharigo. After Ngabö and his men surrendered at Drugugön, they were taken to Chamdo to Sidogthang which is on the other side of the river where there was a bridge. At that time, they [Tibetans] thought that it was a kind of house arrest while the Chinese were saying that they were protecting them since otherwise the miser of Chamdo would rise up and kill them. Anyway, they were not allowed to go out. At Sidogthang, the Chinese leader Wang Qimei, who was one of the famous communists, welcomed Ngabö with a khata scarf and told him, "The People's Liberation Army had no desire other than to render service to the people. However, due the negative propaganda of foreign reactionary forces, you have mistaken us and run away from us thus inflicting unnecessary hardship upon yourself. So we are very sad about this." After delivering this speech he actually wept! Ngabö himself told me this. After this, the Chinese officer kept Ngabö and his men for a couple of days without work in Sidogthang. In the meantime, they came to know each other better. Ngabö thought that it was not easy to shed tears without any reason so he thought the Chinese officer must be quite sincere. In any case, Ngabö decided that whatever the situation might be, whether the Chinese were speaking the truth or not, it was better to talk and to try to settle the matter through peaceful negotiations. That was Ngabö's idea. On top of that, no news about Chamdo reached Lhasa since all the communication lines, like telegrams, were cut off. At the same time, somehow Ngabö heard that the Nechung Deity had gave a prophecy through the oracle that the young Dalai Lama should assume power and rule the country. The Regent, the old Taktra who was about to die, resigned since the events were proving to be terrible for him and there was nothing to hang on to. He quickly handed over the power to the young Dalai Lama. A brief enthronement celebration was organized, and the young Dalai Lama assumed both temporal and spiritual power. He was very young, about 16 years old. Around that time, I heard that Ngabö sent two of his staff members, Samling and Gyentsen Phüntso, with a report to the Kashag. In it, he had written that the Chinese were seeking peaceful negotiations and he requested the government to send representatives to negotiate with the Chinese. Then in the beginning of the 11th Tibetan month, we heard that Taktse Rimpoche was arriving. When he arrived, I am sure he had a long and frank discussion with his brother, the Dalai Lama. Then we heard that the Dalai Lama was leaving. On the 8th of the 11th Tibetan month the Dalai Lama left at midnight.   

**Q:**  When did these two Tibetans arrive from Kham?   

**A:**  They arrived on the 24th or 25th of the 10th Tibetan month. Then, either on the 9th or the 10th, the Kashag summoned me and Thubden Lengmön. When we arrived there, the Kashag told us that we should go to China to negotiate. They further told us that Ngabö would be the chief and we were to assist him and obey whatever he says.   

**Q:**  They didn't give any other instructions?   

**A:**  No, they told us to leave immediately. So we made preparations for the journey which took about two or three days.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama left who were the Shape who accompanied him?   

**A:**  Surkhang and Ramba.   

**Q:**  What about Ragashag?   

**A:**  He was then in the northern area.   

**Q:**  Why did he go there?   

**A:**  To do something for military defense like arranging guns and so on. So Surkhang and Ramba left with the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  When these two left, was there no Kashag left in Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, the Kashag was there. Shasur and Thubden Lengmön [sic. Thubden Ramyang] [as acting Shape]. They got their new audience probably in the 10th month and were appointed before the Dalai Lama left.   

**Q:**  All this happened after Chamdo was lost, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you think when you were told to leave for Chamdo?   

**A:**  I didn't think much about it. Life in Lhasa was very uncertain and tense and unhappy. We would hear different rumors every now and then and it was apprehensive and dreadful. I expected that if I would go down [to Chamdo], the Chinese would not kill us right away since we were coming as a delegation. It was better to be doing something than staying with apprehension.   

**Q:**  Had your family and relatives or friends' families already sent their property and wealth to India? Or were they going to right after the Dalai Lama left?   

**A:**  As far as my family was concerned, my late father, his wife and my brothers Jigme la [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས], Samdru Norbu [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ནོར་བུ] and Tsewang Sampel [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་བསམ་འཕེལ] had already left for India. I also heard that the Surkhang family had also sent everything to India. I didn't hear that from Surkhang Sawangchemmo. I heard that they even had sent their copies of Life Magazine.   

**Q:**  When did they leave?   

**A:**  They left in the 7th month of the Tibetan calendar in 1950. My father was Theiji then. The Surkhangs, the Tsarongs, Panda and all the better [wealthier] families had already made arrangements and sent their wealth to India.   

**Q:**  What did the people feel when Chamdo fell? Did they feel that the Chinese were going to come and we can't stop them?   

**A:**  Yes. They had that kind of thought.   

**Q:**  Did they think that they had to go to India for a long time?   

**A:**  No. People thought that it would be for a short period. They never thought it would be such a long time.   

**Q:**  What did people think the Chinese would do? Did they think that the Chinese would make changes? On the radio there were saying that they will liberate Tibet and so on.   

**A:**  At that time, the people didn't think much. Most of the people thought that the Chinese would rob them of their belongings. Although my father had left for India along with every precious property we had, I collected the rest of the things like golden-ware and silverware and sent them to the countryside [for safekeeping]. To come back to the main story, the Dalai Lama left on the night of the 8th of 11th month. Before leaving on that night, he appointed two sitsab; Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi. We left on the 22nd or 23rd of the 11th month. We had been summoned on the 18th or 19th by the Kashag. The Kashag gave us a note containing 5 points.   

**Q:**  Was it sealed or unsealed?   

**A:**  It was not a sealed note. It was a rolled one so we could read it. With this they instructed us that this is what should be negotiated and you should follow and serve Ngabö according to his ideas. They gave us a certain amount of money which we should give to the staff members in Chamdo as compensation. They also gave us the lamyig travel document. They told us that normally this lamyig would work right up to Chamdo, but since Chamdo had already fallen to the Chinese, it might work only up to Lharigo. As money for expenses, they gave us about 600 dotse each. We took the money and the lamyig. Then we had a look at the "List of 5 Points" wondering what it contained. [laughter] After reading it, I realized that according to the list no peaceful negotiations were possible. I thought that maybe it was just written like that, and maybe they would give us some special instructions, so on the eve when we were going to leave the next morning, I went to see each individually to bid them goodbye hoping that they would give us some more instructions. I saw both the katsab and both the sitsab but they did not say a word to us.   

**Q:**  What were the 5 points?   

**A:**  The Chinese were probably saying at that time that all the 5 different tribes [Tib. རུས་ཚོ] must be united. To this they [Kashag] had mentioned that we are Tibetans and we don't know anything about the 5 tribes. We are Tibetans and are different from the Chinese.   

**Q:**  What were the other points?   

**A:**  I have forgotten all the other points, but I remember that negotiation was impossible with them.   

**Q:**  Were all the five points like answers to the Chinese propaganda?   

**A:**  All these five points were more like answers. None of these points could be compromised.   

**Q:**  Did you carry any note to Ngabö?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did you have the authority to make a decision?   

**A:**  No. Ngabö was our chief and we had to follow him.   

**Q:**  It is strange that they did not give you any instructions.   

**A:**  Yes. I had really hoped that they would do so, and that is the reason why I went to bid them goodbye before I left. But nothing as said.   

**Q:**  Didn't they say anything like we are all depending on you and you must do well?   

**A:**  No. They just said, "Ngabö will be your chief and you must obey him and work hard." that was all. I reached Chamdo the day before the Tibetan New Year started.   

**Q:**  Before reaching Chamdo, when you reached Lharigo, did you meet Lhalu?   

**A:**  Yes. I met Lhalu at Giamda. He had run away to Giamda. We told him that we were on our way to Chamdo and he said that was very good and you should go soon. That was all we said.   

**Q:**  Did you exchange any news?   

**A:**  He sent us a message saying that we must stay for one day because he wanted to give us a lunch.   

**Q:**  Didn't you discuss anything at all like asking him what happened when Chamdo was lost?   

**A:**  No. There was no exchange at all. When Chamdo was lost, Lhalu was in Lhodzong.   

**Q:**  Maybe Lhalu told Thubden Lengmön something because they were close?   

**A:**  Probably. But he didn't tell me anything.   

**Q:**  Was it a custom not to exchange news? Was it regarded as a bad custom?   

**A:**  Yes it was. Normally, unless the superior official asks us for any explanation or news, we cannot give our opinion because it would be like insulting him. So we would keep quite. Lhalu didn't say anything and I also didn't tell him anything.   

**Q:**  Didn't his staff members ask for any news?   

**A:**  Yes. I met Gyentsen Phüntso, Shölkang Jedrung la and so on. They were not on good terms with the monk soldiers. I think the Sera monks did not like Lungshar's son. They believed that Lungshar was a demon who had a short tail. [Laughter] People still believed such things. When I was in prison, people would ask me if Lungshar really had a tail, and was the tail hairy like a dog's tail, and so on.   

**Q:**  Did they say anything else? Didn't you ask them about how the Chinese were and where they were?   

**A:**  No. They haven't met the Chinese. When I reached Lharigo, people were saying they were the "regiment scared by the flag" (Tib. Thardrog Magar [དར་འདྲོག་དམག་སྒར]). When I asked for clarification, they said, "The Padang Drongdrag Regiment was at Lharigo and when some local Khambas shouted, "The Chinese are coming [Tib. རྒྱ་རྩེབ་ཤེ་གདའ]." They all got scared and asked, "Where, where?" The local people pointed at the prayer flag on the mountain top and everyone ran away. Among them, there was one staff member, the son of the Doring family [Tib. རྡོ་རིང], who was supposed to be Bren-gunner. He was so scared that he started putting his knee instead of his foot in the stirrup! He was literally scared to death. [Laughter]. Then they ran for two days towards Giamda.   

**Q:**  What was the reason that Ngabö always didn't fight? Did he have instructions from the government not to fight?   

**A:**  No. Ngabö fought.   

**Q:**  He didn't fight at all, right?   

**A:**  He sent Muja and those people.   

**Q:**  Lhalu sent Muja. I heard that Lhalu had recruited a lot of militia, but after Ngabö came he (Ngabö) sent all of them back home.   

**Q:**  I didn't know about this. I had a talk with Ngabö. He told me that he didn't have much chance. He had a wish to make guerilla warfare, but he didn't have enough time to carry out his wish. When we came to Chamdo, all of them were talking about running away and running away and how forceful the Chinese were. That's what everybody was talking about except Muja.   

