# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.24 : Tape 24  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses the Legjö (Reform) Office's reforms on loans and debts. He describes how the Tsidrung managed their livelihood by going to a dzong as the dzongpön and why some of the sons of aristocrats became Tsidrung.   

---  
### Tape 24  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_24/H_0205_24.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:** I thought he was the one who would respect the will of the majority of the people.   

**Q:**  Did they vote?   

**A:**  Yes. Whoever got the highest vote was sent as the first candidate and got the appointment. In 1953, between the 2nd and 3rd month, the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were forced to resign. Then at the end of the summer and the beginning of autumn, the Legjö (Reform) office was started.   

**Q:**  It was headed by Surkhang and Ngabö, right?   

**A:**  Surkhang came just before the revolt, otherwise it was Ngabö.   

**Q:**  Were there only government officials or many other people?   

**A:**  There were some representatives of the three great monasteries and there were also some abbots.   

**A:**  [Gelek:] Yes, there were the abbots named Shasur Chöndze and the Ngagpa Khembo [Tib. སྔག་པ་མཁན་པོ].   

**A:**  They [the Reform Office] issued an edict known as the "printed edict" (Tib. གགྱ་པརྨ [བཀའ་རྒྱ]). It was distributed everywhere and said that many people had to pay only half the amount of the old loans they owed. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> had a lot of loans, and most these were exempt from paying the interest. All this was dependent on how long the loans were outstanding. The older loans were let off leniently whereas the more recent loans were made to be paid either in half or so on. The order, furthermore, made it clear that no new loans were to be given out at the rate of 20% [Tib. ལྔ་དྲུག་འགྲོ] and 25% [Tib. བཞི་ལྔ་འགྲོ]. For new loans, the interest should be 14% [Tib. བདུན་བརྒྱད་འདྲོ]. No interest or repayment had to be paid for loans given 15 years or earlier. Loans within 15 years were subject to repayment of half, but no interest or partial interest depending on how (long) these loans had been outstanding. And all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates were nationalized, and all the income had to go to the government. Except for the monasteries, people welcomed this new move. The monastic estates, however, raised very strong objections--especially Ganden monastery. Ganden had given endowment loans for the autumn retreat that was known as Tönchö [Tib. སྟོན་མཆོད] at 25% interest. They said that if they have to reduce it to 14%,it would be very difficult to manage because the endowments had to be handed over and accounted for to the next people coming into the office, so it was only with the interest that they could manage to meet the expenditures of this prayer meeting. It was like the proverb, "Handing over the root and the giving the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཏོང་སྒོ] A monastic obligation to provide the food and other necessary items served at a monastic prayer assembly meeting or some other rite; this was often a required obligation for monastic officials at the end of their term of office.">tonggo</a> with the leaves." [Tib. རྩ་བའི་རྩིས་སྤྲོད། ལོ་མས་གཏོང་སྒོ]. They gave a lot of trouble for a long time. Similarly, the travel document, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལམ་ཡིག] A government document (permit) that authorized the holder to receive corvée transportation and riding animals when traveling.">lamyig</a>, was strictly controlled and it was the beginning of a little happiness for the ordinary miser. The Dalai Lama also advised <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> [Tib. སེར་བྱེས་བློ་གསལ་གླིང] Tratsang to be more kind to their miser. The Dalai Lama also told his own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] Tratsang that, "Wherever I go I find that your miser are the poorest and most ill-treated. So you should take care of your miser." Those things used to cheer me up and I used to think that gradually things will improve, but at about that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> trouble started. After that came 1959.   

**Q:**  In the old system, under the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent, how were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> able to make a living? The aristocratic officials had their own estates, but how did the tsidrung make a living?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> had no estates so whenever they went to a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> [as governors] they would try to amass as much wealth as possible from the miser. That was their source of income. After 1953, the dzong were nationalized so the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་རྒྱུགས་པ] A type of bound peasant/miser/serf whose lord was the government rather than an aristocrat or monastery/lama. They usually had sizable land holdings and were primarily responsible for providing the corvée transport and riding animal tax for the Tibetan government&#x27;s transportation system. Often translated as, &quot;Government taxpayer serfs.&quot;">shungyuba</a> were tremendously relieved because no extra burden was being placed on them by the dzong.   

**Q:**  Still, a lot of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> did not hold jobs in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> all the time, so how did they make an income when they were not in the dzong?   

**A:**  Their terms of office in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> were about three years so during this time they would try to do their best to accumulate as much wealth as possible. Maybe their earnings during the 3 year tenure would last them for about 7-8 years.   

**Q:**  Did they engage in trade?   

**A:**  Some of them would invest these earnings in business, but most of them didn't.   

**Q:**  Besides this, didn't they get any wages or salary?   

**A:**  After 1953, everyone got a salary.   

**Q:**  What about a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> position such as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and so on?   

**A:**  There was no question about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> [who had a very good income from taking bribes]. The tsendrön and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> were normally selected from the better off families because they had to wear very good clothes.   

**Q:**  What would be the best position in Lhasa if a person wanted to make a lot of money?   

**A:**  If there was a Regent, then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> made the most money. If there was no Regent, the Drönyerchemmo. There was no question about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> posts [equally profitable]   

**Q:**  What about the tsipön?   

**A:**  The tsipön doesn't get any salary, but being a lay official they had estates of their own. So they were okay.   

**Q:**  They could also get bribes because there were many law cases they decided, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. Attending the Tsikhang was their main job, but besides this they had many additional responsibilities in various offices like the Shimbar. So they got enough.   

**Q:**  What about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a>?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> used to borrow things from their own offices. They would make a note on a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སམ་ཁྲ] The traditional rectangular wooden writing/message board. The message was written on the polished, blackened surface of the wood that was covered with a white chalk. A stylus was used to clear away the chalk leaving the shape of the letters, which appeared black. It was usually about 12-14 inches long and 2 inches wide. There was a lower board on which the messages were written and a top board which served as the cover. In many cases there were several additional writing boards between these two.">samtra</a> and when the board was filled, they would rub it off [laughter]. All the clerks were there and whatever you requested, they would bring you.   

**Q:**  What did you borrow, cash or things in-kind?   

**A:**  Anything.   

**Q:**  Did they borrow things with the idea of doing businesses and making some profit?   

**A:**  If they borrowed money from the endowment [Tib. ཐེབ་སྦྱར], they had to pay interest and repay the loan on time, so to borrow money was quite difficult because all the money of this office went towards the expenditures of the Mönlam Festival. If the money was given out as loans and not returned on time, the monks would really raise hell.   

**Q:**  They definitely had to pay the interest to the Endowment Office yearly on time, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Probably, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> didn't have money, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Normally they could borrow goods like butter, grain, woolen yarns and so on. So you borrowed money it was only in cases of emergency and then just for a short period.   

**Q:**  What about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a>?   

**A:**  It was the same thing. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> was the main office. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> was also called Trede which means easy to collect things quickly [Tib. འཕྲལ་དུ་ལེན་བདེ་བ]. It was a branch of the Laja. They created the Tseja near the Dalai Lama's palace so that they didn't have to go all the way to the Laja office to get something.   

**A:**  [Gelek:] This was mainly created to provide supplies for the Dalai Lama's kitchen.   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> had all the items that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> had, although not as much quantity.   

**Q:**  Why did some aristocrats make their sons <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, e.g., Phala Drönyerchemmo, Surkhang Khenjung, Shölkang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a>?   

**A:**  Normally, it depended on the individual. Sometimes the sons didn't get the chance to go as a groom or a chance to get a bride according to their social status, so they enrolled them into the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> ranks. Most probably these were the reasons.   

**A:**  [Gelek:] The elder sons of Phala and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> were tsidrung.   

**Q:**  If a person became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, would he get any share of the family estate?   

**A:**  If they lived together, that's it. Later, if they got separated, they would get a share.   

**Q:**  For example, what about Chemmo [Phala]? In the case of the Phala family, Chemmo was the most senior son and he was also a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, so his younger brother must listen to him. Supposing if they didn't get along well, then the younger ones like Phogpön would have to leave the family, right?   

**A:**  Phogpön would not leave.   

**Q:**  In case they fought, the younger might have to leave, right?   

**A:**  Yes. On the other hand, in the Surkhang family, Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> was the most senior son. Then came Surkhang Depön and finally Surkhang Khenjung, so the Shape would let his younger brother do whatever he wishes to do except bringing home a wife. In the Phala family, the two younger brothers would do whatever their eldest monk brother advised.   

