# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.11 : Tape 11  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses in detail the training of new lay aristocratic officials in the Tsikhang Office and the events that occur when one first joins the government as an official.   

---  
### Tape 11  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_11/H_0205_11.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  When I became a lay official, I was 17 years old. At that time, I didn't have any kind of special feeling.   

**Q:**  When you became a lay official, who decided this? Was it your father's idea or what?   

**A:**  Yes, my late father told me that now you should become a lay official and he made the plan for that. At that time, we had to submit a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarf (shabdö nyendar [Tib. ཞབས་སྡོད་སྙན་དར]) to seek admission to become a lay official.   

**Q:**  Where did you have to submit the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to?   

**A:**  We had to submit it to the Tsikhang.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go in person to submit it?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was it okay for you to go alone? Or did you have to have an older official take you there?   

**A:**  It was okay to report it through the Secretary of the Tsikhang, the Tsipa.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go to the home of the Tsipa?   

**A:**  The Tsipa was in the Tsikhang and I could go there and submit the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> for admission and tell him, "Please report that I am seeking permission to become a lay official at the Gyetor Festival on the 8th of the 3rd month.   

**Q:**  You had to tell them at which festival you wanted to become a lay official, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many festivals were there where you could become a lay official?   

**A:**  There was the New Year, the Gyetor and on the 25th of the 10th month (the Death Anniversary of Tsongkapa) [Tib. ngamjö].   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was invited to the prayer assembly at the Mönlam Festival (Tib. ཚོགཕེབ [ཚོགས་ཕེབས]), there was an additional lay official, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After we submitted the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> through the Tsipa, if the tsipön approved it, the Tsipa would inform us that it was approved.   

**Q:**  Normally, would they approve it right way?   

**A:**  The Tsipa would report it in 2-3 days and then we would have to wait for the approval. The Tsipa wouldn't report it when the tsipön were busy. He would report it when they were not that busy. After the tsipön approved it, the Tsipa would inform us saying, "It is approved, so you should submit the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> seeking permission to become a lay official to the Kashag." So we also had to submit a khata seeking permission to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go in person to the Kashag to submit it?   

**A:**  Yes. As far as the monk officials were concerned, this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> was regarded as very important, but we, the lay officials, didn't have that. But we had to submit a kind of antique khata called ashe [Tib. ཨ་ཤེ] to the Kashag and we should submit an antique khata called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མཛོད] A special high quality Khata scarf">nangdzö</a> to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མཛོད] A special high quality Khata scarf">nangdzö</a> was for the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  It was supposed to be for the Dalai Lama, but we didn't know what they actually did with it. Anyway, we had to get that prepared and we had to submit it through the Tsipa.   

**Q:**  They didn't approve it right away, right?   

**A:**  It would be approved after 1-2 days. It was quick.   

**Q:**  When you first went to the Tsikhang to report, did you go with your father or with the servants?   

**A:**  I was already there as a trainee for becoming a lay official [Tib. ཙིཏྲུགཔ] in the Tsikhang, which also was the lay official training center.   

**Q:**  What do <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་ཕྲུག་པ] A trainee studying for admission as a full government official in the lay aristocratic segment of the Tibetan government.">tsitrugpa</a> do?   

**A:**  It was supposed be to learn how to do arithmetic [Tib. རྩིས]. At the beginning, when we became Tsitrugpa, we had to report and seek the permission to become a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་ཕྲུག་པ] A trainee studying for admission as a full government official in the lay aristocratic segment of the Tibetan government.">tsitrugpa</a> to the Tsikhang through the Tsipa.   

**Q:**  When did you become a Tsitrugpa?   

**A:**  I became a Tsitrugpa 1-2 years before I became a lay official.   

**Q:**  You became a Tsitrugpa when you were about 15 years old, right?   

**A:**  Yes, something like that.   

**Q:**  When you wanted to become a Tsitrugpa, did you have to go to the Tsikhang in person?   

**A:**  No, they sent a servant with a khata.   

**Q:**  What kind of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> was that?   

**A:**  Probably, it was a Ashe Khata, I don't know for sure.   

**Q:**  Usually, would they say it is okay right away?   

**A:**  Yes they would, because we were hereditary lay officials and there wouldn't be any obstruction. When I became a Tsitrugpa, I had to wear a pen case [Tib. སྨྱུག་སྒྲོག] with an auspicious knot sign [Tib. དཔལ་བེ] and a maroon [Tib. རྒྱ་དམར] color brocade uniform. I had to prepare a round cushion for myself to be used in the Tsikhang. There was a difference in the cushions. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་ཕྲུག་པ] A trainee studying for admission as a full government official in the lay aristocratic segment of the Tibetan government.">tsitrugpa</a> who were going to become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> would use a cushion made from woolen material [Tib. སྣམ་བུ] with dots on it (Tib. ཐིགམ [ཐིག་མ]), but the Tsitrugpa who were going to become ordinary lay officials probably didn't need to have their cushion made from thigma. Their cushion was made from white woolen material.   

**Q:**  What color was your cushion as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a>?   

**A:**  It was white with blue and red dots on it. Two and three days before joining the Tsikhang, we would have to prepare some butter lamps and the offering of wheat and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> mixed with butter [Tib. དྲོསོ་ཆེམར] in the Tsikhang. As for the tsamba for this offering, the sweepers would compress it when they put the tsamba in the measuring box (Tib. བོ [འབོ]) and make the tsamba very high.   

**Q:**  Would they take the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> in leather pouches?   

**A:**  No. They would bring the bo and put the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> in it at home. I heard that they would put about 5 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of tsamba in it. I was wondering how could they compress so much tsamba into one bo. It would become so high that I used to worry the tsamba might fall down on the way when they carried it to the Tsikhang. They would also stick pieces of butter on it.   

**Q:**  Did they have only one bo?   

**A:**  No. They had two. One was for the wheat and the other was for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> mixed with butter. Probably the sweepers would take these materials from our home and make the wooden slab with butter decorations to be put on the Droso Chemar (Tib. ཙེདྲོ [རྩེ་སྒྲོ]). Then the sweepers would take my cushion to the Tsikhang.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have to take any test?   

**A:**  Yes, I had to. In the early morning of the day when I had to take the test, a kind of ceremony would take place at home. At the celebration, all of the family members would sit in line.   

**Q:**  Would they offer you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a>?   

**A:**  I would stand up and offer a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to the shrine and to my late father. At that time, I didn't have my mother.   

**Q:**  If she was there, you had to offer her a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a>, right?   

**A:**  Probably yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, hadn't your father got remarried?   

**A:**  Yes, I was just a child.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have your stepmother then?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have to offer a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to your stepmother?   

**A:**  Probably I did. I don't remember clearly. And the smaller children like [my younger brother] Jigme la [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས] gave me <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> followed by the manager, the stewards and all the people above the sweepers who received salary from family.   

**Q:**  Didn't the smaller children have to offer a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to your father?   

**A:**  No. Then they probably displayed some gold bricks and silver bricks and some other things as the gift from our family and they would write them in the list of the gifts, the bültho [Tib. འབུལ་ཐོ].   

**Q:**  Would they hand the bültho over to you?   

**A:**  No, they wouldn't. They were just making notes in a list when people came from outside to celebrate and offer gifts. The gifts were supposed to be for me, but I myself didn't get any thing to use. They would collect them. After they gave the gifts, it was still early and the sun hadn't rise. Then we went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> for pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  Right after the pilgrimage, you went to the Tsikhang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was a bit early, and we had to wait in the work hostel of the Chief Caretaker of chapels (Tib. gönyerpön [དཀོན་མཉེར་དཔོན]) of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> for a short time. Then the Tsikhang was open and I went in and the tsipön had already arrived. Usually, it was not the time for the Tsikhang to open, so probably they might have come earlier.   

**Q:**  Is the Tsikhang located in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. The Tsikhang is located on the top floor of the back door of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, the Sera Tago [Tib. སེ་ར་ལྟག་སྒོ]). When I first entered the door of the Tsikhang, I was told to step in with my right or left leg, but I forget which. I was brought into the Tsikhang and I had to offer a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to the main statue in the Tsikhang.   

**Q:**  What statue was that?   

**A:**  I don't remember. Then I had to take off my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> and salute to the tsipön and offer khatas.   

**Q:**  W<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> kind of hat were you wearing?   

**A:**  I was wearing the yellow <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> (Tib. བོགདོ [འབོག་ཐོ]).   

**Q:**  At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and some others were with you, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And my brother Tsögo was also with me, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> were also there.   

**Q:**  Did your father come with you?   

**A:**  No, he didn't.   

**Q:**  What was your father's position then?   

**A:**  He was a third rank <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེ་ཇི] A third rank position in the Tibetan government.">theiji</a> [Tib. ཐཻ་ཇི]. Then I sat on the round cushion. Before that, I had to practice for the test of the tradition Tibetan arithmetic calculation. I didn't have any problem with the test because we prepared the test sheet (Tib. deltra [རྡེལ་ཁྲ]). I had to practice a kind of melody when doing the arithmetic calculations. It was kind of the calculation where I would chant loudly the numbers that I was calculating using a special kind of tune called delke [Tib. རྡེལ་སྐད].   

**Q:**  How would you chant the delke?   

**A:**  They [Tsipa] would read the test sheet. On the test sheet they would write some auspicious words like, "From the Samdru Yangtze [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཡངས་རྩེ] Estate the yield of 565 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> was received and from others such and such an amount was received, so what was the total amount?" I would have to calculate it while chanting it with a tune and say that this was the total.   

**Q:**  Would you chant the delke now?   

**A:**  I forgot the delke. If the Tsipa reads the test sheet and says, put 13,565 [Tib. ༡༣,༥༦༥་བཏང་ལགས] then I would say, "I am going to put 13,565 and first I am going to put 10,000 [Tib. ཆིག་ཁྲི་སུམ་སྟོང་ལྔ་བགྱ་དྲུག་ཅུ་རེ་ང་རང་ལ་ཡིན་ཆིག་ཁྲི་ཐམས་པ་ཡིན་ན་སོང] and I would put a piece of broken porcelain as 10,000. Then I would put 3 pieces of stone called phüldo [Tib. འཕུལ་རྡོ] and say this is for 3,000 [Tib. སུམ་སྟོང་ཐམས་པ་རང་ལ་ཡིན་སུམ་སྟོང་ཐམས་པ་ཡིན་ན་སོང་ལ]. Then I would put 3 beans and then 2 beans for 500 and chant the same and 3 pieces of twigs for ten [Tib. བཅུ་ཤིང] and 5 pebbles for 5 and chant in the same way. Since the test sheet was prepared by myself, it was alright. The writing test was also already written and I had it in my pouch. However, I had to go through the motions of writing one line in front of the tsipön and then hand over the writing that I had prepared beforehand. The tsipön would look at the handwriting and they would write the label [Tib. ཁ་ཡིག] on it; "The handwriting test of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Sey Tendzin Thöndrub." [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་སྲས་བསྟན་འཛིན་ཐོན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཡིག་ཚད་སྤྱན་ཞུ]. Probably, they would have to submit it to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  The handwriting test was written by yourself, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but I heard that when some of the Tsitrugpa's handwriting is not good, they would bring handwriting from home [written by someone else] and just go through the motions of writing one or two lines and put it in the pouch and hand over the one which was already written. But I didn't need to do that because I could write a kind of mediocre [Tib. ཐབས་ཆག] handwriting. When I was showing my writing test, the sweepers had put my cushion where I should sit normally and then I sat there for a while. On that day, I had to offer <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མ་འབྲས་སིལ] A special dish consisting of sweetened rice, melted butter and wild sweet potatoes (gro ma).">droma dresi</a> and tea to all the members of Tsikhang. Then I bent down my head and asked for leave for the day and the tsipön showed an appearance of granting the leave and then I went home.   

**Q:**  Did you have to take off your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> to salute?   

**A:**  Yes. After that I was seated on a throne at home and the relatives came to offer <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> for the celebration. Since that time I had to go to Tsikhang every day at around 9:30-10 a.m and do the traditional Tibetan calculation, diutang [Tib. རྡེའུ་བཏང].   

**Q:**  Did the Tsipön make you to do the arithmetic calculation?   

**A:**  No. Usually, the Tsipön would make us copy documents. When the Tsipa called us, they would make us do the calculation and they would make corrections if we calculated wrongly. If it was okay, they would say it was right. They would leave us like this for a couple of days. After 1-2 months, they would make us do all the arithmetic calculations like barley, butter and many items and sometimes and I had to display those things all around me. When the calculation was not right, they would make us calculate again and again and make the corrections. When there was no work, the Tsipa would give us exams on the arithmetic difference in size between <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྲེ] A unit of traditional volume measurement [a container] in Tibet, 20 of which typically equaled one khe or bo [also a container], although in some areas there were only 16 dre in one khe.">dre</a> [Tib. བྲེ་ཁྱད] and phü ['phul khyad] and teach us if we didn't know. I probably stayed in the Tsikhang for a year. I became a lay official on the 8th of the 3rd month, the Gyetor [Tib. bryad gtor] Festival. [interview repeats talking about submitting the khata for becoming a lay official"]   

**Q:**  If there was a Regent, did you have to submit a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> for seeking permission to the Regent also?   

**A:**  Yes. If there was a Regent present, I also had to submit the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to the Regent as well as the Kashag. Anyway, it was not so strict for us lay officials in comparison to the monk officials when they submitted a khata to seek the permission to become an official.   

**Q:**  What did they say concerning the monk officials?   

**A:**  I heard they would probably say that the design of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> was not right and it was too old and dirty and so on. As for the test for the arithmetic calculation to become a lay official, we had to practice very carefully because we didn't know what kind of test sheet they were going to read. The Tsipön would discuss and chose it from among 5-6-7-8 different test sheets. This was very troublesome. If we couldn't pass the test, we would be very embarrassed because there were many lay officials coming to watch and listen to the test.   

**Q:**  You had to take the test in front of the Tsipön, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The Tsipa would sit here and I had to sit here.   

**Q:**  There were about 4 Tsipa, right?   

**A:**  There were 3 of them.   

**Q:**  Would all of them give the test?   

**A:**  No. One of them would give the test and he would read whatever test sheet the Tsipön had chosen. If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་ཕྲུག་པ] A trainee studying for admission as a full government official in the lay aristocratic segment of the Tibetan government.">tsitrugpa</a> was not that good in doing calculations, he would have a hard time and he would be dripping with sweat. [laughter]. This was the real test on the arithmetic calculation and there wasn't any chance to do something tricky. At the Gyetor Festival, there were two lay officials. My partner was Nangkar [Tib. སྣང་དཀར]. He was also called Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར]. I took the test at first because I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> and my test was okay. When Nangkar took the test, he had some extra number when he did the calculation, but he didn't count them and just pulled them down and said that the number was balanced and correct. The Tsipa didn't check in detail and he didn't tell him that he had extra numbers, so he was able to get through it. After that, they reported to the Kashag and after the Kashag had approved, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> gaa would send a notice and call us to the Shöl gaa after two days. Then we had to go there with two servants. In the Shöl gaa, the Nendrön would pass down the order approving me as a lay official. He said, "You are approved to become a lay officials on the Gyetor festival and you are granted the junior fourth rank, senampa." [Tib. ཁྱོད་རང་བརྒྱད་གཏོར་ཐོག་ཞབས་སྡོད་ཞུ་འཐུས་དང་མི་དྲག་སྲས་རྣམ་པའི་གདན་ཐོབ་བསྩལ་བ་ཡིན]. The next step was to get the hair knot [Tib. pajok]. This also should be done through checking for an auspicious day. I had my hair knot in the morning of the Gyetor because it was an auspicious day. About 2-3 days before the auspicious day, they would have the hair knot. On that day, I got up at dawn and got the hair knot. At that time, I felt kind of relieved when all my hair was tied on the top of my head because the weather was quite hot then. I also felt slightly uneasy when I first had the hair knot with the golden pendant on my head. After that, the family ceremony was held and my late father told them to make a separate throne for me. At that time, my father made brand new mattresses with red felt carpets and brocade cushions [Tib. གོས་ཁ] and a canopy that was decorated with silk and brocade [Tib. བླ་བྲེ] for my throne. He said, "Today, I am not going to use old things. I am using all brand new things for the celebration."   

**Q:**  The ordinary lay officials didn't have that, right?   

**A:**  Probably only the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</a> and above had that. Actually, I think it is not certain because people wouldn't say anything about what you were doing at home.   

**Q:**  Then you had to be seated in a line, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Your stepmother was also seated, right?   

**A:**  Yes. She had a slightly lower cushion. Probably my cushion was higher. I was not that attentive. At first, I offered a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to the main statue in the shrine and then I offered a khata to my late father and to my stepmother.   

**Q:**  Then the younger children offered the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and stewards and all the servants gave me khata.   

**Q:**  Your family also had to offer you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> gave me a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> on behalf of the family and they also displayed some loads of rice and butter packed in leather bags as a ceremonial gift [Tib. ལྟང་ཚན]. I forgot to tell you something. After I had the hair knot, a hired person born in an auspicious year [Tib. ལོ་བཟང] and chosen according to astrological calculations would dress me for the first time. At first, they would make me wear a white shirt. Then they dressed me with pants and the chupa. On that day, I had to wear the official ceremonial dress called gyaluche [Tib. རྒྱ་ལུ་ཆས].   

