# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehra Dun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he talks in detail about his trip from Lhasa to Chamdo and then from Chamdo to Beijing as one of the five Tibetan delegates to the 17-Point Agreement talks in 1951.   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_08/H_0205_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell me in detail about signing the 17-Point Agreement.   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama was in Yadong, Khenjung Thubten Lengmön and I received a notice calling us to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was in Yadong, there were the two katsab in the Kashag, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was Thubten Ramyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བར་དབྱངས] and Shenkha [Tib. ཤན་ཁ].   

**Q:**  This was the time when people sang the song with the words, "If you want some more silly people, there are the beard and fatty." [Tib. བྱབས་ཆུང་སྣོན་པན་དགོས་ན་རྒྱའུ་རྒྱགས་པ་ཡོད་རེད], right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  When did you know that Dekhara [Tib. བདེ་མཁར་བ] [Lukhangwa] was appointed as the sitsab?   

**A:**  I knew right then.   

**Q:**  But when did you know that he was appointed as the sitsab?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama left on the 8th, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I heard that on the 9th.   

**Q:**  Did they make an announcement or what?   

**A:**  It was said that they were appointed and then they held the ceremony for getting appointed to the position that involved an audience with the Dalai Lama [Tib. གསར་མཇལ].   

**Q:**  Where did they hold the ceremony? The Dalai Lama had already left.   

**A:**  They held a ceremony anyway. I was also there.   

**Q:**  You mean he held the ceremony at the front of the throne.   

**A:**  I don't know, but we went to his home to offer the khata. Like this, the two sitsab were appointed.   

**Q:**  All the people liked the two of them, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  All people thought that this was an appropriate appointment, especially, the lay officials, right?   

**A:**  Dekhara [also called Lukhangwa] was kind of famous among all the government officials. He was especially very honest and fair [Tib. དྲང་ཚུགས་ཆེན་པོ] and had a strong loyalty to the government [Tib. གཞུང་ཞེན་དག་པོ]. Before he became the sitsab, he was the person of whom all people were afraid.   

**Q:**  Was it like this since he was a Tsipön, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How was he when he was the Tsipa [Tib. རྩིས་པ]?   

**A:**  He was not a tsipa. He was a gadrung. When he was working as the gadrung, probably people thought that he was working very strictly.   

**Q:**  Was he regarded as a person with a great memory? I heard that the gadrung and the gandrön should be persons with great memories because they had to report many matters at the same times [to the shape]. That was not an easy job.   

**A:**  It was just practice or training, and when many years passed, though they wouldn't remember the exact words, they would know what the issue was about. However, if the person didn't work energetically, there was a danger of getting mixed up. Dekhara was unanimously regarded as a trustworthy person. When he became a Tsipön, he became the one of the heads of the 175 lay officials. So the lay officials were saying to each other that he might scold us and they did not act recklessly. He was respected in this way and he had been a Tsipön for many years. Among lay officials, everyone regarded him as incomparable concerning his honesty and energetic work. Among the monk officials, though, they were not familiar with him and were kind of overwhelmed by his reputation. So when they held the meetings of the drungtsigye and Dekhara said something, the others would not say no. He would always say something that people thought was correct. The Dalai Lama had to leave [in 1950] and the lay officials liked him. Probably, the monk officials also agreed with that because of his fame. Similarly, Kungö Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was also there [as Acting Prime Minister--Sitsab].   

**Q:**  Comparing two of them, Lukhangwa was more well-known, right?   

**A:**  Yes, He was more famous.   

**Q:**  And he must have been more powerful, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Lukhangwa must be older also, right?   

**A:**  Probably the two of them were kind of the same age. Lobsang Tashi was also a Khenche and was not an immoral [Tib. མ་རབས] person.   

**Q:**  So he was also regarded as an honest and fair person, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was one of the better ones among the monk officials. So both of them were liked by all. Just 1-2 days after the Dalai Lama left, we received a notice saying that Khenjung Thubten Lengmön and Rimshi Sambo sey [Tib. རིམ་བཞི་བསམ་ཕོ་སྲས] should come to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  This was after the Dalai Lama left for Yadong, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did they appoint the two katsab?   

**A:**  It was just before that.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama was planning to leave, right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably, it was in the 10th lunar month.   

**Q:**  There were the katshab and also all the drunyichemmo were also acting drunyichemmo [Tib. དྲུང་ཚབ], right?   

**A:**  It probably was like that.   

**Q:**  Were there acting Tsipön [Tib. རྩིས་ཚབ] at that time?   

**A:**  Ngabö and Shakabpa were not there. There probably were some acting Tsipön. I am not quite sure about this.   

**Q:**  Shakabpa had already left for India, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང] was there and Lukhangwa had already become sitsab.   

**A:**  Namseling was probably there. I don't know who the colleagues of Namseling were. When the two of us went to the Kashag, we received the order, "The two of you should go as delegates for the peace talks. Mainly, Sawang Ngabö is there and the two of you should go to assist and serve him. You should leave as soon as possible." We didn't have any choice but to say yes. It was not that easy to travel because we had to ride horses and we had to prepare the food on the way. It was a long and rough trip to China. We couldn't just leave on the next day like traveling by car and plane. Probably, on the 22nd or the 23rd of the 11th month, we departed from Lhasa.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama left on the 8th of the 11 month, right?   

**A:**  Yes, before that the Kashag gave us a note [Tib. ཚིག་ཐོ] with 5 points and the travel document [Tib. ལམ་ཡིག] (to secure corvée assistance and things along the route).   

**Q:**  What were those 5 points?   

**A:**  I don't remember the points. They were just kind of casual [Tib. ད་ག་སེ]. By that time, the Dalai Lama had already left and there wasn't any talk that we could reach an agreement.   

**Q:**  It was just a note, right?   

**A:**  The Kashag gave us the note. It probably was made by the assembly. The Kashag told us, "We have this 5-point note and the head [of the delegation] will be Ngabö. The two of you should go to assist and serve him [Tib. ཕྱག་རོགས་ཞབས་ཞུ]. Sawang Ngabö had already suffered defeat and there were money gifts like 100, 70, 60, 50 dotse from the government to Ngabö and even for the ordinary officials as a condolence [Tib. ཡིད་གསོའི་མཐུན་རྐྱེན]. They gave us a list of the money that should be paid to them. We were told that probably no people will accepting the travel document beyond the area where Kham starts. We might be able to use it until we reached the Kham area. We were also given some money, about 500-600 dotse, to be paid as transportation fees if people would not accept the travel document [for corvée services]. Before we reached Kham, we got the horses through corvée and nobody said anything. After we arrived in the Kham area, the Khambas also sent the horse as corvée right away. They didn't say anything like that they wouldn't accept the travel document. So we traveled to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  The Chinese were already there, right?   

**A:**  When we went down and crossed the Shargongla [Tib. shsr gong la] mountain pass and reached Gyaltanda [Tib. ?], on the next day we arrived at Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར]. We heard that there were Chinese in Pembar and there were indeed Chinese there.   

**Q:**  Did you go to contact the Chinese or did they come to see you?   

**A:**  We just stayed in the house that was arranged for our accommodation [Tib. སྒྲིག་ཁང]. We saw that there were 2-3 Chinese sitting on the stone steps.   

**Q:**  What did they do to you?   

**A:**  They didn't do anything. They were kind of ordinary. In Pembar, there was a Chinese Chief of Staff called Wang [Ch. wang cai mou zhang]. He was the highest leader. When he learned that we had arrived, he told us that it is good that you have come. [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Did he come to see you?   

**A:**  Yes. He came to see us and said, "We will send a telegram down there [to Chamdo] and tell them that the delegates for the peace talks have come and they will go on to the various local places. Please come for a banquet tomorrow morning."   

**Q:**  Were the two of you scared wondering whether you should go or not?   

**A:**  We were not scared.   

**Q:**  You just went there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We were sure that it was just something usual [Tib. འཆར་ཅན] and went to the banquet which was not so elaborate. They just made some dishes with pork, chicken, beef and mutton and they also served liquor. We drank a little liquor. We didn't drink much because we had to leave. When they told us that they will send a telegram, we said okay. Then we departed and stayed overnight in the places called Barinang [Tib. བ་རི་ནང] and Dzido [Tib. རྫི་རྡོ]. In those places there weren't accommodation arrangements and the Chinese also didn't come to see us. In Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ] we stayed overnight.   

**Q:**  Shopando was one of the bigger places, right?   

**A:**  It was bigger than Dzido and those places, and there were many soldiers.   

**Q:**  Did they receive you when the two of you came?   

**A:**  They didn't receive us, but many of them were looking at us from the windows. When we told them that we are going to leave tomorrow, they said that would be good.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese come to you?   

**A:**  Yes. He also called us for a banquet in the morning. After that, we arrived at Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང] which was also one of the bigger places. In that place, they [Chinese] had prepared a lot. Probably there were about 2,000 soldiers who performed a drill. We dismounted our horses and went through the soldiers who were doing the drill. They had prepared very elaborately and there were soldiers beating small drums and they had a lot of things to do. That night, we were given a banquet followed by an opera show. After that, we reached Lagong Ngamda [Tib. ལ་གོང་ལྔ་མདའ].   

**Q:**  This was beyond Chamdo, right?   

**A:**  No. We were about to approach Chamdo. On the next day, we were to arrive at Chamdo. When we departed from Lamda, there was a place called Thangkar Ding [Tib. ཐང་དཀར་ལྡིང] which was about 5-6 miles from Chamdo. The Tibetan Government Officials [from Chamdo] below the Fourth Rank [Tib. མཁན་རིམ] came to receive us.   

**Q:**  All of the depön were there, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they appear to look sad?   

**A:**  They didn't have their hair knots [Tib. pajok] and those things. All of them had their hair braided in the Kongpo style [Tib. ཀོང་སྐྲ] of two braids wrapped on the head.   

**Q:**  You mean their wives, right? How about the lords [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ]   

**A:**  The lords also couldn't manage to have their hair knots because it was on the way and they couldn't find people to make the hair knot. I also had my hair braided Kongpo style. My partner the tsidrung, who was the nendrön, was bald. So he didn't have to do anything to his hair.   

**Q:**  Did you wear the chupa called Tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ] with opening on the both sides?   

**A:**  No, I wore the ordinary chupa called chubchen [Tib. ཕྱུ་ཆེན]. Thubden Lengmön was also wearing a chubchen.   

**Q:**  What were the officials from Chamdo wearing?   

**A:**  They also wore chubchen.   

**Q:**  Why? That was strange.   

**A:**  Because it was finished and Tsechuma and those things were also kind of out of date and Chamdo had already been liberated around the 9th month. When two of us got there, probably, it was the 29th of the 12th Tibetan month.   

**Q:**  Did they appear kind of sad looking?   

**A:**  All of them looked like kind of down [Tib. ཉམ་དམའ་པོ]. Thubden Lengmön also felt kind of sad and burst into tears a little bit and he told me, "Now, our officials have become like this." Then they served us droma dresi and the government officials offered us khata scarves. Then we rode our horses and left. Just before we reached the Chamdo Monastery, the Vice Directors [Ch. fu zhu ren] were there. The main leader of Chamdo was Commander Wang [Ch. siling]. Ngabö Sawangchemmo was then the Vice Director. Probably, Phüntso Wangyal was also Vice Director and there were several Chinese officers. They shook hands with us.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have to salute Ngabö by taking off your hat [Tib. ཕྱག་འབུལ]?   

**A:**  Yes, I saluted that way to Ngabö. Then Ngabö gave us a khata which was called "introducing khata" [Tib. སྣེ་སྤྲོད་མཇལ་དར]. On that day when we reached Chamdo there were many Chinese beating drums and gongs to receive us. In Chamdo, they had arranged a place for me to stay and Thubden Lengmön also. We stayed there. Ngabö was also staying near the place where I was staying.   

**Q:**  At that time, they were not staying in the work hostel of the Governor of Kham (the Doji), right?   

**A:**  Yes. Ngabö was staying in Sidogthang [Tib. སྲི་ཟློག་ཐང] where the Chinese made him stay. It had been quite a long time since he came to that place and he was staying quite near where I was staying. It was the Tibetan New Year when the 30th day of the 12th month was missing [in the calendar]. On the next day, the Chinese invited us to a party in Sidogthang. We accepted the invitation and attended the party.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have to celebrate the first day of the Tibetan New Year?   

**A:**  We couldn't manage to hold the ceremony.   

**Q:**  Did you offer the tsamba mixed with butter and wheat [Tib. གྲོ་སོ་ཕྱེ་མར]?   

**A:**  Probably, we might have got that. They had arranged it.   

**Q:**  Didn't you have to go to offer khata scarves to Ngabö on New Year's day?   

**A:**  Yes, we went to Sawangchemmo. He had made a hot pot meal [Tib. རྒྱ་ཁོག] [laughter]. Actually, it was difficult to make a hot pot. Thubden Lengmön and I were invited.   

**Q:**  There was nobody else, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He couldn't manage to invite others because it had been 2-3 months since Chamdo was liberated. We also went to Sidogthang to attend the Chinese party and Ngabö was also there and I think Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས] was also there.   

**Q:**  All the Chamdo officials were not there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were some Chinese. Altogether there were about 40 people attending the party. On the first day of the New Year, Sawangchemmo served us a hot pot in the evening.   

**Q:**  Where was Ngabö's wife then?   

**A:**  She had not come to Chamdo then. She was in Kongpo. It was not certain where we should go. It was not decided whether the peace talks would be held in Chamdo or we would have to go to Lhasa or Beijing. Before that, he [Ngabö] had received a telegram [from Beijing], but the Chinese characters were very unclear, so the place was not confirmed. Ngabö said, "I have sent a telegram again. Now, it is uncertain where we should go." Then we stayed for a couple of days in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Did you talk about the Dalai Lama leaving for Yadong and those things?   

**A:**  Yes. The two of us had to make a report to Ngabö and we told him that we have a note.   

**Q:**  Did you report about the appointment of the sitsab?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  Probably, he knew about it, right?   

**A:**  Probably he didn't know about it because they had been creating a disturbance [Tib. ཟིང་བཀོལ]. [meaning unclear]   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  He just said. "Oh! I see." He had to send a report about the Dalai Lama taking the political and religious power and about the appointment of the sitsab.   

**Q:**  Was it a letter to congratulate them?   

**A:**  Yes. Later he sent a report about that. Then Sawangchemmo told us, "Now it is not decided [where we should go]. The two of you have brought this note. Do you have any internal instructions?" We told him, "We thought that there might be some internal instructions and we went for a leave-taking visit [Tib. ཕྱག་འབུལ] to the Sitsab Dekhara and Lobsang Tashi and to Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] before leaving. We told them that we are leaving the day after tomorrow and came for the leave-taking visit. But they didn't say anything about internal instructions." Then Ngabö said, "It won't work out if we talk about this note to the Chinese. It is not satisfactory." As far as Ngabö was concerned, it has been 2-3 months since he stayed there and he gotten experience talking with the Chinese and he could estimate the situation.   

**A:**  The 1st Tibetan month passed in that way and then it was at the beginning of 2nd month and we didn't have any work to do. We were just staying there going hither and thither. On the 16th of the 2nd month, we received a telegram saying that the dzasa and the drunyichemmo were being sent through India.   

**Q:**  Who sent the telegram?   

**A:**  I didn't know who sent that telegram. It was written in the telegram that they had sent the dzasa and the drunyichemmo from India via Hong Kong and Sawang Ngabö and the two of you should go to China from Chamdo as it was decided to hold the talks in Beijing. So it was decided that we should go to Beijing. On the 21st or the 22nd we departed for Beijing.. On the way in all the bigger places, there were Chinese and regiments who received us elaborately with drills and had prepared for our accommodations. We arrived at Ganzi on the 3rd or the 4th of the 3rd month and our accommodations were arranged in the Ganzi Monastery. There were a lot of soldiers although the motor road was yet to be built. From Derge Dzogchen [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་རྫོགས་ཆེན], we crossed a mountain pass and then we reached the motorable road. We were invited to the house of Jagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་སྟོབས་ལྡན] one evening. He sent a messenger when we were staying in Derge Dzogchen to invite us. After crossing the mountain pass, we went to Jagö Tomden's house in vehicles and stayed there over night. He gave us an elaborate banquet in the evening and also the next morning.   

**Q:**  They didn't have vegetables, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the foods were mostly meat, but we would call it quite elaborate.   

**Q:**  He gave the banquet in his house, right?   

**A:**  He was the Vice Chairman [Ch. fu zhuxi] of Dartsedo [Tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ], but we were invited to his home and he gave us a banquet and we stayed overnight. On the next day, he also served a meal. Then we reached the Ganzi Monastery and they had made elaborate accommodations. In the beginning, we were supposed to stay three days in Ganzi, but on the next day, we were told that the dzasa and drunyichemmo had already left for China so if we stayed for three days, we would fall behind. Therefore, it would be better if you leave. We left the next day. After that, we stayed in a place and on the next day, we reached Tau [Tib. རྟའུ] and stopped there for a meal. Then we stayed overnight in Minyag Lhakang [Tib. མི་ཉག་ལྷ་ཁང] Monastery.   

**Q:**  You were traveling in vehicles, right?   

**A:**  Yes. From Ganzi, they sent the Director Alo Buzhang [Ch. a lo bu zhang] and Director Phünwang as our liaison guides [Tib. སྣེ་ཤན].   

**Q:**  Director Phünwang was with you from Chamdo. Right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the liaison from Chamdo. Alo Buzhang and Phünwang were appointed as the joint guides and the two of them were the main liaison officers. On that evening, they were planning to arrange our accommodations in front of the main gate of the Lhakang Monastery [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར], but Ngabö said, "Let's go up there. We heard the sound of a bell and we stayed in the servants ward. Inside the room the lama was staying there. Probably the Lama's servant asked us who are we. Then we told him, "We want to have an audience with the Lama. So please report to the lama." The servant went in and then Thubden Lengmön came and the two of us were called in and we went in. The lama asked us, "Where are you honorable people going?" We told him, "We are going down [to Beijing] for the peace talks." The Lama said, "Oh! I see, you are the delegates for the peace talks, right? Yes, we said. The lama asked Ngabö, "Who are you mister?" "I am called Doji Ngabö." he replied. He said, "Oh! I see." The lama was not that attentive. Then Ngabö told the lama, "He, Thubden Lengmön, was the nendrön of the Regent." He was little bit more attentive to him and said, Oh! I see. Then Ngabö said, "He [me] is called Sambo Sey. Then the Lama said, "He couldn't be Sambo Sey. Please tell me the truth." Ngabö said, "Of course, I have to tell you the truth. He is Sambo Sey." Then the Lama asked me, "Are you the son of the Kungö Theiji or his brother? I said I am his son. Then he said, "If you are the son of the Theiji, you might know Gonjo Lachung [Tib. གོ་འཇོ་བླ་ཆུང]." When I asked who is Gonjo Lachung? He said, "His name is Sherab Gyatso" Then I came to know that he was my late father's fellow disciple [Tib. ཆོས་གྲོགས] and he was called Sherab Gyatso [Tib. ཤེས་བར་རྒྱ་མཚོ]. Then he asked me, "Is he in Lhasa now." I said yes. He asked me, "What is he doing?" I said, "He said that he had some wool and he is going to India to sell it." After that, they served tea for us. Sherab Gyatso used to be my late father's fellow disciple and the lama knew him. Then we told the lama, "Please help us to get lodging for tonight." The lama accepted and helped us to find lodging. Ngabö told me to go to have a look and the lodging was quite okay. I told the inn-keeper to boil some more water because we have many people. There weren't any cushion in there and then we asked for some cushions for Sawangchemmo.   

**Q:**  The Chinese hadn't made any arrangements for the accommodations, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was because we reached Minyag and stayed in the monastery. Lhakang was a small monastery and the village also was a small one and with small houses. Then Ngabö requested the lama to lend some cushions and the lama gave us two cushions called Kyongden [Tib. རྐྱོང་གདན]. Then I carried the cushions on my shoulder and then we had enough cushions. By that time, Thubden Lengmön was looking very sad conveying that we had a poor condition, but I didn't pay much attention to him. One of us had to remain behind and stop the vehicle in which Ngabö's wife and servants were coming and go with them and one of us could go with Ngabö. So I asked my partner whether he would like to remain behind and stop the vehicle or go with Ngabö. He said, "I can't stop the vehicle. I want to call Ngabö and go with him." After that, the vehicle arrived and I stopped the vehicle and invited Ngabö's wife and children to the inn. The inn-keeper had boiled water so it was ready for us make the sweet tea or Tibetan butter tea. Then Ngabö came along and the three of us and the servants stayed at the lodging inn. We bought milk from the inn-keeper and made sweet tea and also butter tea and we had our dinner and stayed there overnight. On the next day, we reached Dartsedo.   

**Q:**  The lama didn't take care of you more than that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Because of this, Thubden Lengmön felt very sad. The lama said that he had stayed about 5 years in Drepung. so Thubden Lengmön said, "He stayed in Drepung for 5 years, but he didn't do anything for the Doji." And he was crying. I heard that he was crying in front of the servants, so I didn't go there. [laughter] When we arrived at Dartsedo, the army had prepared an elaborate reception and there were many people gathered. We were brought to a guest-house and served good food. We stayed in Darstedo for 3 days. The chairman there was Sangye Yeshe [Tib. སངས་སྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས].   

**Q:**  He was also called Tian Bao, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did he come to receive you?   

**A:**  Probably, he had. I don't remember clearly. He just came to see us for a short time. Tian Bao said, "It is good that you came as the delegates for the peace talks. In the story of Three Countries [Ch. san guo], there was a military officer called Dengchao who shot an arrow and said that wherever the arrow would land would be the Sino-Tibetan border. The arrow got stuck on the mountain near the bridge called Ludingchao [Ch. lu ding qiao]. So beyond this place was the Chinese territory and above this place was the Tibetan territory." This was what we called Gyayü Jagsamkha [Tib. རྒྱ་ཡུལ་ལྕགས་ཟམ་ཁ]. We just listened to him and stayed there. In Darstedo, Commander Zhang [Guohua] [Ch. zhang siling] was there so we went to meet him. Then we departed from Dartsedo and stopped for a meal at the Ludingchao Bridge. This was a chain bridge on which planks were placed. It was shaking a lot when people passed on it. It had good handles on both sides, so I didn't feel afraid when crossing it.   

**Q:**  Did you have to pass over that bridge or did you go there purposely?   

**A:**  We crossed that bridge purposely because people going to China had to pass over that bridge. We also had heard the name Gyayü Jagsamkha. So I thought of passing that bridge. On that night we stayed in a countryside village overnight. This was a poor village and there weren't any arrangements like the army [coming to receive us]. We felt hungry and thirsty when we crossed the Arlang Mountain pass, but when we reached the village, we were able to boil some water and we went to an inferior restaurant and ate some noodles. Then we reached Yazhou and we were arranged to stay in a house known to be the summer cottage of Chairman Liu [Tib. ལིཨུ་ཞུ྾ཨི]. It was well arranged. Then we reached Chengdu. The offices of the Military-Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] were there. At that time, the main leader was Deng Xiaoping. That was the highest office and we met Deng Xiaoping. After that, we went to Sungji and we flew to Chongqing. In Sungji, we went to meet Geshe Sherabla [Tib. དགེ་བཤེས་ཤེས་བར་ལགས].   

**Q:**  Geshe Sherabla was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He came to see us and they [Chinese] gave a party for us that evening.   

**Q:**  Geshe Sherabla might be the teacher of Ngabö Sawangchemmo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. That night he spoke Chinese and told Ngabö that you are my pupil. He had a white beard and he was wearing a Tsechuma and a vest [Ch. jia jia] and he had about 3-4 servants and he was carrying a walking stick. After that, we flew from Chongqing to Xi'an.   

**Q:**  In Chongqing they might have arranged the accommodations very well, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was in inland China. From Xi'an, we traveled by train for about one night and then arrived in Beijing. When we arrived, Zhou Enlai came to receive us at the railway station. When we got off the train, Zhou shook hands with us. At that time, we were new and there were many other Chinese and we didn't know who they were, but I recognized Zhou Enlai. Then it was arranged for us to stay in the Beijing Hotel [Ch. beijing fandian].   

**Q:**  The hotel was where the foreign guests would stay, right?   

**A:**  Nowadays there are hotels better than that, but at that time the Beijing Hotel was the best. There were Ngabö, Thubden Lengmön and me. Probably it was on the 22nd of April and we stayed 2-3 days there. Then we heard that the dzasa and drunyichemmo were going to arrive soon. They were going to arrive On the morning of the 26th of April at around 11 a.m. and Ngabö, Thubden Lengmön and I went to receive them at the railway station. When they arrived, according to our customs, we had to offer an introducing khata scarf, but Ngabö said, "The two of them will offer the introducing khata, but tell them that we don't need to offer the khata."   

**Q:**  What were they wearing?   

**A:**  They were wearing the Tsechuma dress.   

**Q:**  What were you guys wearing?   

**A:**  We were also wearing Tsechuma. The Chinese had arranged an elaborated reception. There were many Chinese, but I didn't know them. The main one was Zhu De. Then all of the five delegates got together on the 26th of April in the Beijing Hotel and we talked in detail to each other about what happened.   

**Q:**  Did you have great hopes regarding India?   

**A:**  We didn't have that much hope towards India because the situation had reached that point. On the 28th or 29th of April, we met together with the Chinese delegates led by Li Weihan and there was Zhang Jingwu. Zhang Guohua didn't come and there was a Chinese called Song Zhiyuan.   

**Q:**  What was his title?   

**A:**  I don't know his title. The talk started on the 28th of April and at the beginning, they just asked us about how we had come. Then the Chinese said, "We have to hold the peace talks so do you have a plan for that? We told them that we didn't have any plan. What would be better? Then the Chinese said, "We shouldn't do like this. First we suggest that we should to make a plan. Then we can start the talks." We told them, "That is okay. Please have Zhongyang (China/Central Committee) make a plan." On that day we didn't hold any talks.   

