# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.22 : Tape 22  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses the conflict between the Chinese and the two sitsab. He describes how the Chinese built a hall in the Yuthok House where they showed movies and how people feared that the Military-Administrative Committee would be implemented. Sambo discusses how the Chinese set up schools, hospitals with free medical treatment, banks that exchanged money and about the road building project that was concluded in 1954. He talks about the Tsondu hragdu meetings to decide whether the Dalai Lama should go to China in 1954.   

---  
### Tape 22  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_22/H_0205_22.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:** By that time there was a lot of confrontation going on between the Tibetans and the Chinese. The Chinese would go very frequently to the Shö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a> to consult with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>. They met at the Nangsi [Tib. སྣང་སྲིད] Hall in the Tsuglagang. They had very late night sessions. I don't know what conversations took place. There was a popular street song in Lhasa then: "Having the yellow mushrooms on the pasture, we don't want to pluck white mushrooms. Having the Dalai Lama, we don't want to get liberated." [Tib. སྤང་ལ་སེར་ཤ་བཞག་ནས། དཀར་ཤ་བཀོག་ལོང་མི་དུག། ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ་བཞག་ནས་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་ཞུ་ལོང་མི་འདུག]. Then there was one Chinese military commander known as Fan Siling, who told the two sitsab that they had to resign according to his command. The two sitsab replied that they had been appointed by the Dalai Lama and only he can command them to resign. Among the government officials there were discussions and they decided that maybe it was better to let the 2 sitsab resign in order to prevent any harm or pressure coming to the Dalai Lama and the government. So the Dalai Lama had to make his two loyal sitsab resign.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1952 or 1953?   

**A:**  Most probably it was in 1953 [it was actually 1952]. The Chinese asked them to resign in the 11th month of the Tibetan calendar. Then the next year it probably was in April-May that they resigned.   

**Q:**  What was the atmosphere like in Lhasa? Had they already opened the new school?   

**A:**  They had already established the new Seshin [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ] School. The Chinese were staying in Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] and they had set up the school there.   

**Q:**  How soon after the Chinese came did they set up the school?   

**A:**  Most probably the Seshin School was opened after a year.   

**Q:**  What else did the Chinese do?   

**A:**  They opened a hospital, and then a bank was opened in the 10th or 11th month in 1951. The bank was mainly used for currency-exchange: Indian rupees into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> {Chinese silver coins]. One dayan was equal to 3 Indian rupees. The Chinese used to pay out dayan at the bank counter. The hospital was for ordinary citizens.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese paid money, did the people have to go to get it from the bank with a receipt?   

**A:**  No. The offices would get the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> from the bank and pay them to the people directly.   

**Q:**  [Gelek:] Medical treatment was free I think?   

**A:**  Yes, it is free even now.   

**Q:**  [Gelek:] Later people had to pay for medical treatment.   

**A:**  Even now it is free except that cadres would first pay it themselves and then get reimbursed from their office.   

**Q:**  Were there any cinema halls?   

**A:**  Yes. They used to show films in the hall at Yuthok House. They very quickly built a hall in Yuthok House. I thought they were going to use this as the headquarters of the Military-Administrative Committee. The Chinese didn't say anything about it, but in general the people felt that this was going to be the new Military- Administrative Committee.   

**Q:**  Were they talking about setting up the Military-Administrative Committee?   

**A:**  It was written in the 17-Point agreement that the Military Administrative Committee shall be set up, although the Chinese didn't pursue [Tib. རྗེས་འདེད] this matter. But people were thinking it would be set up.   

**Q:**  What about the cost of food?   

**A:**  It was very expensive. A <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley had gone up to 90-100 sang.   

**Q:**  What did it cost in 1950?   

**A:**  In 1950, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley did not cost more than 15-20 sang.   

**A:**  [Gelek:] I remember a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley was 7 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> and 5 sho.   

**A:**  Then there was a lot of hoarding and prices were shooting up day after day. The Chinese were buying and that was why there was more demand than supply, so the prices shot up sky-high.   

**Q:**  Did the price go up because the Chinese bought the commodities?   

**A:**  Yes. The road had yet to be built, but they were starting to build the road.   

**Q:**  When did they start building the road?   

**A:**  The Chinese asked the Tibetan government to send people to work on road construction with the wages being paid for by the Chinese. By 1954, the road was more or less completed and trucks started arriving on the 26th or 27th of December [1954].   

**Q:**  When did they start building the road? Did they start it in 1950?   

**A:**  Until 1951, the Chinese hadn't come to Tibet. Probably, it started in 1952 and was completed in 1954. When the Dalai Lama was in China, the vehicles came to Lhasa, probably on the 26-27 of December.   

**Q:**  Until the trouble of the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, were the people happy or upset, or did they think that the Chinese didn't seem to be so bad, ?   

**A:**  No. The Tibetans did not like the Chinese at all.   

**Q:**  No, I know that. What I mean is, did the people say that the Chinese were not so bad?   

**A:**  Yes. There were some village people who said that the Chinese were not too bad and they paid good money. This was while the road construction was going on. After the resignation of the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, things quieted down. In the 5th book of the Selected Works of Mao it was written that he advised not to insist on setting up a Military-Administrative Committee. So this was dropped by the Chinese and things became quieter and less tense. Then, in 1954, most probably at the end of April, when the summer heat had just started in Lhasa, there was talk about the Dalai Lama going to Beijing to attend the National Peoples' Congress. I was among the members who discussed whether the Dalai Lama should go to China or not in the Tsondu hragdü. In the meeting there was a big discussion with different opinions. One group felt that the Dalai Lama should go while the other group felt that the Dalai Lama should not attend the Chinese meeting in Beijing. Gyatso Tashi Thubden Changchub [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཐུབ་བསྟན་བྱང་འཆུབ], who later became <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, and Temajog Lobsang Nyendra [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོག་བློ་བཟང་སྙན་གྲགས] who died during the revolt, were the leaders of the group that felt strongly that the Dalai Lama shouldn't go. Most of the monastic abbots felt the same way. I was among the ones who said he should go.   

**Q:**  Were there monastery abbots in both groups?   

**A:**  Probably the abbots were among the people who said that he should not go, but the one who openly spoke was he [unclear?]. For about 3-4 days the discussion went on without coming to a conclusion. The meeting broke up for a few days and then met again. Still the result was the same, there was no decision. The Kashag called the Tsondu and hinted that the Dalai Lama should go to Beijing. Again there were arguments. Finally it was agreed that it should be decided by a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery. The Dalai Lama himself was invited and rolled the senriy. The senriy said that the Dalai Lama should go. The Dalai Lama himself read the result. So it was settled that the Dalai Lama should go to China.   

**Q:**  Were all the tutors of the Dalai Lama also there when they rolled the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a>?   

**A:**  Probably not, but all the kalön and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> were there. We couldn't get into the room, but we listened from the window and we heard the result was that the Dalai Lama should go. The Dalai Lama himself read the result.   

