# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.15 : Tape 15  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehra Dun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he continues his discussion of the Guomindang National Meeting in China and the African-Asian Conference in India that were attended by Tibetan government representatives. He also talks about how the Guomindang officials in Lhasa were expelled.   

---  
### Tape 15  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_15/H_0205_15.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Who did they ask whether they should sign their names or not?   

**A:**  They sent a telegram to the Kashag informing them about what was going on and asking for instructions. In the message they sent to the Kashag, they mentioned that in this meeting they were mainly talking about Chinese national problems and whenever they would start to talk about Tibetan affairs it would become kind of different or separate [Tib. ལོགས་བགར]. As mentioned before, they asked for instructions about whether they should sign the conclusion document or not when the meeting ended. They received a reply from the Kashag saying, "If this is so, discontinue attending the meeting and do not sign any documents whatsoever."   

**Q:**  Did they ever talk about Tibet at the meeting? What do you mean when you say that when we talked about Tibet it became kind of different?   

**A:**  They were talking, implying that Tibet was an independent country.   

**Q:**  Did they say that at the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. They were talking about that. At that time, the main person in charge was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> [Künsangtse]. I didn't hear this from him. I heard this from the Tsipön, who was one of the staff officers of the magji. He said that they talked about independence. Probably they said at the meeting that we are different and we are independent. They cited the case of 1911, the Water-Hare year, and said that in that year they made all the Chinese in Tibet leave Tibet. In general, they talked about similar cases in that meeting. At that time, he [the Tsipön] had the rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a>. This was his first government mission as a rimshi after he had been kicked out of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Office by Reting.   

**Q:**  Did they really speak out at the meeting telling about the events of 1911 when they made the Chinese leave Tibet? If so, who was the person who spoke out? Was it Künsangtse or was it the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a>?   

**A:**  They gave a speech at that meeting and probably it was the Tsipön who gave the speech. However, I didn't ask him what they had said.   

**Q:**  For how many days did they attend this meeting?   

**A:**  I don't know exactly.   

**Q:**  When I look back, I feel that they must have asked the government before they attended this meeting whether they should attend this meeting or not, right?   

**A:**  Probably. They must have asked the government. Before the meeting the Chinese government might have sent a letter saying that they were going to have a meeting and the Tibetans must come and attend it. However, I am not very certain. I just feel that the Chinese government might have asked the Tibetan government to participate in this meeting. I think the Kashag instructed them as follows: "You should send back the information regarding the situation and their conduct [Tib. ཆོ་སྤྱོད་གནས་ཚུལ]." It was the type of instruction which was often given by the Kashag. I feel that the Kashag might have given instructions in this way. [laughter]   

**Q:**  After the meeting, when Künsangtse returned, were there any people who told him that he had acted wrongly. Was he given any punishment?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Were there any persons who told him that he had made a mistake by standing up and speaking out?   

**A:**  When Künsangtse returned, he submitted a report about the meeting and said that they didn't sign their names. At about the same time, the British representative in Lhasa, Richardson, informed the Kashag that they were going to have a big Asian Conference in India since India was getting her independence. Richardson further suggested that if Tibet could send her representative to this conference, it would be a good chance for Tibet to establish and let it be known that Tibet is an independent country. The Tibetan government agreed to this and decided to send representatives. At first, the Tibetans were allowed four seats, so they appointed my father and Khenjung Lobsang Wangyal. Along with them, they decided to send two interpreters: Kyibu [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྦུག] and Kapshö Sey. My father added two more staff members: me and Tsidrung Küngala [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་ལགས]. At that time, there must have been a mistake in translation because they thought the meeting had something to do with religion so they sent two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>. One geshe was from Ganden monastery and the other one was Rinzin Tempa [Tib. རིགས་འཛིན་བསྟན་པ]. In reality, there were only four seats [delegates], but we had eight people. The two real representatives, two officials, two interpreters and two geshe. We left for India just after we finished the Tibetan New Year's celebration. When we reached <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, the government had dispatched an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་དྲུང] Official government messengers who carried government letters, edicts, etc. traveling from relay-station to relay-station using corvée animals and people.">adrung</a> with a brand new Tibetan flag with instruction saying: "You need to hoist a flag at the Asian Conference." This adrung caught up with us at Yadong. When we reached the Indian border we expected some sort of welcome committee or a reception committee to look after us, but there was none. Even when we reached Calcutta there was no one to receive us or take care of us. In the meantime, my father had heard certain news that the Chinese delegation had come and had said that there was no need for the Tibetan delegation to attend because there were no matters the Chinese delegation could not decide for Tibet. After hearing this uncertain news, my father decided to dispatch a few of his servants to New Delhi to find out if there were any arrangements made for us because he felt that if the news he had heard was correct and if we had to come back, the situation would be embarrassing for us as well as for the Tibetan government. So my father was kind of smart and he sent his servants to New Delhi to find out if any arrangements had been made for us. If this was the case, the servants were supposed to send us a telegram. I think that they sent us a telegram when they reached Delhi because we left Calcutta for New Delhi. At the New Delhi airport, there was a reception committee to receive us. They took us with them and put us up in some place known as Constitution House. I don't know where it is. While we were being taken to this Constitution House, my father decided that we should pay a visit to Nehru on the way, so we called at his residence, but Nehru was not there at that time. He had gone out somewhere.   

**Q:**  Where did you hear this news that the Chinese delegation was going to represent you? Did you hear this in Calcutta?   

**A:**  Yes, we heard that in Calcutta.   

**Q:**  From which source did you hear this news?   

**A:**  Probably some Tibetan might have told my late father, because he didn't have any Newspapers. I don't know exactly from where my father heard this news.   

**Q:**  Who did you meet in Calcutta?   

**A:**  In Calcutta we met Künsangtse and the other delegation members who had gone to China. They came to see and receive us at the railway station. They had come to Calcutta or they were in Calcutta before us.   

**Q:**  Were there any Chinese with them?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  What did they say about the meeting in China? Did they say that the meeting went well or that the meeting didn't go well or what? What did they say?   

**A:**  As it is the Tibetan character, we did not talk about the real subject. Instead they inquired about our health, we inquired about their health and then they narrated their experiences in Beijing.   

**Q:**  You must have talked about whether Calcutta is better or China is better?   

**A:**  About what they bought like some porcelain cups and we talked about brocades and so on, just formal things. We did not talk about the subject of their visit. They told us about the progress the Chinese had made economically and their industrialization, all personal things.   

**Q:**  Were they comparing China with India?   

**A:**  They said that China had many vehicles and the waiters in the hotel would change their dress when they would go out and you couldn't recognize them.   

**Q:**  Did they say that China was better than India?   

**A:**  No, they did not say that in a straightforward manner. But from their attitude you could make the inference that they found that China was more developed than India at that time.   

**Q:**  Did you talk about how they were received when they were attending the meeting in China.   

**A:**  They said that they were received very well. They were looked after and taken care of properly.   

**Q:**  When you were in Calcutta, did you contact the Chinese Consulate?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese try to contact you?   

**A:**  No. Coming back to what we were talking about, the next day while we were having our breakfast at Constitution House, Nehru came to see us. He apologized saying, "Yesterday when you came to see me I was out, so today I have come to pay you a visit." My father told him, "We wanted to come to you before, but you have come here today, we are very sorry." Nehru said, "You did come there, but I was not there."   

**Q:**  Did Nehru come to the place where you were staying? Where did he come to see you?   

**A:**  He came while we were having our breakfast, so it was in the dining hall.   

**Q:**  Were any special instructions given by the Tibetan Government on politics to be discussed with Nehru?   

**A:**  There was a letter from the Dalai Lama for Nehru along with some gifts [Tib. རྟེན་ཆས]. My father gave them to Nehru. Besides that, there were a lot of other letters to various Indian leaders. Later, we went to see Nehru and we told him that we had heard that in this conference they were going to make a lot of big decisions. In case the discussion is about the border issue, we have brought all the relevant documents with us and we would like to discuss it with you. To this Nehru replied that no big decisions were going to be made at this conference. He said that after a long time, India has gotten her independence from the British and the main purpose of this conference was to meet and know all the neighboring countries. Therefore, he said, "There will not be any talks concerning the border areas. To this my father replied that if this is the case it is all right, but if there is any talk about the border issues, we have all the relevant materials with us."   

**Q:**  What instructions or advice did your father get from the Tibetan Government?   

**A:**  The government sent my father to attend the meeting, but there weren't any instructions other than telling him to send information regarding the situation.   

**Q:**  The Kashag might have given instructions regarding the border, that you should do this because you had the documents with you?   

**A:**  Yes. We had about 10-15 trunks of documents. This was supposed to be shown and we were told that in case there would be a talk about the borders, here are the documents.   

**Q:**  Among the documents, there might be documents about the border between India and China and also places like Litang in Kham, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did the government give him the power to decide about the border issue? To make independent decisions using his own judgment? Did the government give him such an authority?   

**A:**  No. He was just told to send them the information. Otherwise, he didn't have any power.   

**Q:**  Didn't the government tell him that if he used the Simla Agreement as a base, he could make decisions? Did the government give any instructions like that?   

**A:**  No. As I already mentioned earlier, they brought a lot of documents with them. The Simla Agreement was among these and there were also the documents regarding Amdo. In the beginning, they were supposed to settle the border issues.   

**Q:**  When they sent the documents, who did the packing up of these documents and who marked down the contents?   

**A:**  It was done by the Kashag and, most probably, some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Lay officials who worked as administrative aides/secretaries to the Kalön of the Kashag.">gadrung</a> must have been responsible for it.   

**Q:**  How many boxes were there?   

**A:**  I don't remember well, probably, there were about seven or eight boxes. The size of the boxes was about two feet by two or three feet, about that. The boxes were very heavy. The boxes were handed over to them with a note containing an index.   

**Q:**  Were the documents you brought with you the original ones or were they copies made from the original ones?   

**A:**  They were the original documents.   

**Q:**  After seeing Nehru, did you contact the Chinese or did the Chinese attempt to meet you?   

**A:**  Two or three days after meeting Nehru, two Chinese people came and invited us for a dinner to, probably, the Chinese Ambassador's house and we attended the dinner.   

**Q:**  When you attended the party, were there other people at the party?   

**A:**  There were many other people like Burma and so on.   

**Q:**  Did Nehru just talk with you people and didn't he talk with other people?   

**A:**  He didn't talk with other people.   

**Q:**  At that time, were they attentive of you people?   

**A:**  They just served us food and didn't do any other things. Besides meeting Nehru, we presented a letter and some gifts to Sarojini Nardu who was at that time the leader in charge of the reception committee. Besides them, we met and gave letters and presents from the Dalai Lama to Achariya Kirpalani and to Mahatma Gandhi and to several other Indian leaders. All the leaders said the same thing to us, "We are not going to discuss anything about the border in this conference."   

**Q:**  Did you accept the invitation and did you go for the dinner to the ambassador's house?   

**A:**  Yes, we went there. The Chinese ambassador told us that concerning the border issues, they were talking with the Americans, with London and also with the New Delhi people and we are doing our best. He [the Ambassador] said, "We, the Chinese, feel that it is better that you let us talk and handle these border issues. It will be more effective and more influential if we talk about the border issues rather than you talk about them. You have faced a lot of problems by coming to this conference on horseback, therefore we have been instructed by Chiang Kaishek to offer Rs. 10,000 to each of the representatives and to the remaining staff members Rs. 5.000 each as pocket money. Whenever you want, you could come to collect this money."   

**Q:**  What language did you use when you were talking with the Chinese? Did you use English, Chinese or Tibetan?   

**A:**  We used English. Then my late father replied to this offer by saying, "Thank you so much, but the Tibetan Government has given us sufficient funds, so we don't need this money. We have been told that there would not be any talk about border issues. In case there are talks about border issues, we have brought all the relevant documents with us and we would like to reply and discuss the subject of the borders by ourselves."   

**Q:**  When did you have this discussion, was it during the dinner party or did you have a separate meeting in which you discussed this?   

**A:**  This discussion was held when we were having our dinner with them.   

**Q:**  Did the Tibetan government tell you not to accept any money or gifts offered by the Chinese?   

**A:**  No, they didn't tell us anything about it. After some time, somebody from the Chinese Embassy came with the message saying that Chiang Kaishek had offered this money as a personal gift and that we should accept this gift. My father politely but firmly refused to accept the gift. This person came to the Constitution House where we were staying. When my father firmly refused to accept this gift, the Chinese said, "In that case, you must personally inform Chiang Kaishek." I think he was afraid for his own life. So my father obliged him and sent a telegram to Chiang Kaishek.   

**Q:**  While you were having dinner with the Chinese, did they say anything about the motherland and about Tibetans being of the same race, and that we have very similar cultures and so on?   

**A:**  Yes, they did say that the Chinese, Mongolians and the Muslims [Ch. han meng hui] are the same and so on.   

**Q:**  Then what did you reply to them?   

**A:**  We just didn't bother about it.   

**Q:**  Did you have any meetings with the Chinese delegation members?   

**A:**  They gave us another dinner party. They had ten seats so accordingly they had ten people, whereas we had only four seats but a lot of people. On two seats, the representatives sat and on another two seats, the interpreters sat. We could not sit. There was no special arrangement made for us.   

**Q:**  You had taken the Tibetan national flag. Was it put up with the other national flags?   

**A:**  When we went for the conference, we thought that all the national flags would be hanged on the wall, but when we looked around we did not see any national flags. However on the tables they had printed the various national flags. The Guomindang flag was there, so was the Communist Chinese, our flag was also there and so all the flags of the different nations were printed on the tables. Among the delegations there were many people who had no idea whatsoever about Tibet so there were many people who asked us where Tibet was and how Tibet is, etc. At that time, the newspapers didn't show any special interest in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Who drafted the speech that was given at that meeting?   

**A:**  Probably, the representatives drafted it, right?   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a speech drafted in Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't.   

**Q:**  When they drafted the speech, did they kind of discuss with you people or did the two of them just make it?   

**A:**  The two of them just drafted it.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> stand up and read the Tibetan version and they translated into English or what?   

**A:**  At that time, they had made an alphabetical order for the representatives to speak and we were at the middle. Then my late father stood up and gave the speech.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there many journalists?   

**A:**  There were a lot of them.   

**Q:**  Were there any people having special interest on Tibet and asking you questions?   

**A:**  There were some people asking us where Tibet is located. At that time, people didn't know about Tibet like nowadays.   

**Q:**  Were there any other representatives from Tibet at that time? Did the Foreign Office of Tibet at that time try to contact the Foreign Office of India and tell them that they would like to establish relationships and later they might have discussions about the border issue and about other general topics? Was there any such Tibetan representative in Delhi at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, the staff was going to the Foreign Ministry many times. The reason was not political and neither was it to talk about the border issues, but we met the Foreign Minister to talk about trade. At that time, there was a lot of trading going on between Tibet and India. We would import a lot of cloth and cigarettes, cotton and cotton yarn. They would take these items to the Sadam side. Let's take the example of cigarettes. At that time there was a cigarette with the brand No. 10. One carton of these cigarettes which had 50 packages would fetch a brand new gun called Pamaling in Sadam. Sadam is at present between Sichuan and Yunnan. Many of the Tibetans did business in this way. Many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> engaged in this trade.   

**Q:**  Were the monasteries also carrying out trade in the Sadam area?   

**A:**  The monks or the monasteries were not so much involved in this trade. Most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and the wealthier families were involved in this trade and people could buy as much cloth as they needed. Later, probably, in 1943-44, the government of India started controlling this and they started to issue permits to buy these goods. The permits could be obtained only from the Political Officer of Sikkim. Then the political Officer of Sikkim started to make money as he would accept bribes in order to issue the permits. He would issue the permits to only those who would give him cash presents or any other presents. While in Delhi, my father went to the Foreign Minister of India and requested him to lift this control and asked him to stop the permit system.   

**Q:**  Do you have to pay for this permit?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have to pay for this permit, but in order to obtain this permit we had to bribe the Political Officer of Sikkim.   

**Q:**  Was it the Kashag who instructed your father to go and talk to the Foreign Minister about lifting the of control over this trade?   

**A:**  Yes. The Kashag instructed my father in this way.   

**Q:**  At that time, was an agreement reached between Tibet and India concerning Tibet's status in accordance with the agreement or understanding that had existed with the British? Did India agree to accept the same status or were they likely to give another status to Tibet? Were there any discussions of this kind?   

**A:**  There was no talk whatsoever concerning such issues.   

**Q:**  From the Indian side there was no talk about Tibet's status?   

**A:**  No, there was no talk and the Indian didn't raise any of these topics.   

**Q:**  And also from the Tibetan side wasn't this subject brought up?   

**A:**  No. From the Tibetan side also this issue was not touched. However, I have read in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s book that though it was not that clear, it looks like the Kashag asked the British Government, "The British had been the witness or the third party concerning the Tibet-China border issue [means Simla], but now since the British are leaving what is going to happen to these talks?" The British answered, "The British have left written instructions in certain offices and that you should not worry about it."   

**Q:**  During the conference, you would be busy in the daytime attending the conference and getting involved in the discussions, however in the evening I am sure that you would sit together and talk among yourselves. What was the major topic you discussed among yourselves?   

**A:**  I would talk with my colleague Küngala saying that these people [in India] were quite well educated and quite well established and we are so backward, so unless we are careful, one day the people will hit our heads with a stick and there would be some sort of unrest in Tibet and there will be a lot of trouble.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the two of you to talk about that?   

**A:**  At that time, in India there was a good democracy and we knew something about democracy, but we still had the feudal system. So I had a kind of fear that one day the people would hit our heads. We had also heard some frightening news about the French revolution and we discussed that a similar uprising or revolution would also come to Tibet unless we were very careful. I think my father also had similar ideas. He would always say that if we just sit like this without doing anything constructive for Tibet, then there will be a lot of trouble. He did not specify what sort of troubles. Them when the day came for us to return to Tibet, we delayed our departure for some time because in Tibet at that time the Reting trouble was going on. Because of this Reting trouble, my father stayed for a long time in Kalimpong, like 3 months. The next year, around the first or second day of the Shödön period (June or July), they asked us and the people who had gone on the Military Victory Congratulations delegation to submit a report. This came without advanced notice, so we had quite a hectic time drafting a report. Küngala and I divided the report half and half between us. I drafted one half and Küngala drafted the other half. The next day we submitted the report. In this report, my father had mentioned that it is necessary for the Tibetan government to change their outlook, modernize the country and keep pace with the changing times. But there was no response to the suggestion from the "Old monkey". At that time, people were calling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> "Old Monkey." He was indeed an old monkey.   

**Q:**  Did the report go to the Kashag or to the Regent?   

**A:**  The report went to the Kashag, and most probably from there it went to the Regent.   

**Q:**  Why did you call him the "Old Monkey"?   

**A:**  The word "monkey" in Tibetan is Piu [Tib. སྤྲེའུ ]. It is derived from the word "pandit." So he was called, "old pandit" but the root word "pandit" was changed into "piu" which means monkey. So he was known as the "old pandit" or the "Old Monkey," (Tib. པིཨུ་པོརྟོ [སྤྲེའུ་སྤོར་ཏོ]).   

**Q:**  How did you all come back? And what happened?   

**A:**  We came back to Lhasa in the fifth month of the Tibetan calendar which would be in the third or fourth according to the western calendar [actually is was the 7th or 8th month]. We stayed for about two months in Kalimpong. After that we returned to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When you were returning to Lhasa you said there was a telegram telling you not to come back? Who sent this telegram? Was it from the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes, it was from the Kashag. It was written in the telegraph message that at this time the Reting problem was occurring in Lhasa so we were instructed to stay away and not come back.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the Kashag tell you to look and see whether there were any more plots or problems being created by the Reting faction in Kalimpong or the surroundings?   

**A:**  No. The main order was to try to get Simpönla [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་ལགས] [one of Reting's trusted servants] to go back to Tibet and to get his property back to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Then what happened? Were you successful?   

**A:**  My father was not at all keen to do this, but it was an order and if he didn't do it then he would get into trouble, because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was a member of the Kashag and his son was one of the members of the delegation. So he sent Kapshöba's son to Calcutta to contact a lawyer and find out if there was any way to get Simpön la deported to Tibet and handed over to the Tibetan government. This was done to have something to show that he had done something about this. He was further instructed not to tell all the details to the lawyer. When he discussed it with the lawyer, the lawyer naturally told him that unless you tell me all the details, I am not able to advise you or fight your case properly. Then finally he told the lawyer that they wanted to deport one Tibetan to Tibet. Probably, he didn't mention the name of Reting Labrang. The lawyer told him that according to the law, this is not normally allowed, but if you have good relations with the Indian government, the government can give this individual a notice to leave India through a certain route like Gangtok and so on. Once this person reaches Tibetan territory, he can be arrested. There is no other way than this. When Kapshöba's son returned, my father did not take any action. He reported to the Tibetan government that the case was very difficult. At the same time, Reting's servant (Simpönla) also came to know about it and he left for Nepal. So they were not there. That is all. Then around that time, in the year 1948, the Communists and the Guomindang were fighting and the Guomindang was losing and the Tibetans started expelling the Chinese from Tibet. There was a Chinese Office [Ch. ban shi chu] with 10-15 staff members, and besides them, there were other Chinese such as businessmen, traders, religious students, doctors and so on who were doing secret work. They [the Tibetan government] inquired about the names of all of them and a list of the names was discussed in the Tsondu before deporting them. At that time, the Tsondu might have said that if there would be some people guaranteeing that some of them are not [spies], they can stay. So among them, there was one Chinese monk who was guaranteed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Khembo called Chö Dorje [Tib. ཆོས་རྡོ་རྗེ], and it was requested that since he is a genuine monk, an exception should be made for him. The rest of them [about 300], were deported from Tibet.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for deporting them?   

**A:**  Later I heard that it was the time when the Guomindang was losing power in China and it was becoming clear that they could not remain in power in China. At the same time, the communists were gradually coming into power. The Tibetans didn't have a wish to establish any relations with the communists. They feared that unless these Guomindang Chinese Officials were expelled from Tibet, the Communists might employ them and leave their positions like the section leader [Ch. ke zhang] and department chairperson [Ch. qu zhang] as before and send their salary. Then the communists will send telegraph messages and make relations and they will have power and facilities as representatives of the new government. In order to avoid this, they expelled the Chinese. They thought that by cutting off any relationship completely they would gain some more time, because to establish a new relationship would take some time for the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Who suggested this and who took this decision?   

**A:**  It was Ngabö's idea.   

**Q:**  Who made the decision?   

**A:**  Later, I heard that he discussed this with his fellow tsipön and they went to the Kashag. He was a tsipön at that time. They told the Kashag that they had a very important suggestion to make. Before telling them, he made them swear by putting the turquoise Buddha icon on their heads that it should not be disclosed and it should be prevented from leaking out. He feared that if it leaked out, his life would be in danger. There were twelve of them--4 kalön, 4 tsipön and 4 drunyichemmo. He made them swear that until they finished the mission they would not disclose this to anyone. After this each of them swore by putting the Buddha on their heads. Then his idea was executed by sending spies among the spies, and all the Chinese were expelled except for this one monk. At that time, the Tibetans might have been afraid that the Guomindang may also do something recklessly like make a last-ditch struggle.   

