# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehra Dun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses in detail the ceremonies that took place when he first joined the Tibetan government service. He also describes Taktra's first year in office and how he deteriorated after that and started to take bribes. Sambo discusses the major officials at the time of Taktra.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_07/H_0205_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  So Taktra was enthroned on the first and you did not attend it. Can you tell me of anyone who attended this ceremony? There may have been some tsendrön?   

**A:**  I think Ngawang Rigdröl [Tib. ངང་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] may have been there.   

**Q:**  Was he a tsendrön?   

**A:**  I do not think he was a tsendrön at that time, but I think that he knows all about it.   

**Q:**  Who was there? It is possible that Kundeling was there. But was he a tsendrön?   

**A:**  I think he was a tsendrön.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me how they held the second ceremony on the 8th of the 3rd month [Tib. གྱེཏོར]? Then there was the enthronement at the Mönlam Festival. Let us forget about this. At the time of the Gyetor Ceremony, had you joined the government service?   

**A:**  Yes. We had made the arrangements at our home, but I am not going to mention this. However, after that, I went to the Potala and stayed in the Treasury Office (Tib. Trede Legung [འཕྲལ་བདེ་ལས་ཁུངས]), where there was a lobby near the stairs going up to the gaa [Tib. འགག] office.   

**Q:**  Do you mean at the Trede?   

**A:**  Yes. After sometime, the ceremony started. It was held at the gaa and normally the tsendrön made the arrangements of who would get an audience [Tib. མཇལ་སྒྲིག]. When we climbed the stairs there were no mattresses or cushions where we could sit, so everyone was supposed to stand in a line in readiness to get the audience. I had brought a khata scarf.   

**Q:**  Where did you keep the khata scarf?   

**A:**  That morning we got ready for this audience and I had worn a special dress known as a Gyaluche [Tib. རྒྱ་ལུ་ཆས]. It had a pouch or purse called phorshub [Tib. ཕོར་ཤུབས] attached to the pen case. We could keep these khata in there. We moved slowly forwards in a line and when we reached the Dalai Lama's chamber that was known as Simchung Nyiwö [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་ཉི་འོད], we had to make three prostrations.   

**Q:**  Did everyone have to make the prostrations?   

**A:**  Only those who were seeking the "new audience" [Tib. གསར་མཇལ] prostrated themselves.   

**Q:**  So it was only those who sought "new audiences" that offered prostrations?   

**A:**  Yes. It was only those people who offered prostrations. There were two or three tsidrung with me. I took off my white hat [a very light hat made from pasted cloth] known as Arkon [Tib. ཨར་ཀོན] and kept it on the floor and did the prostrations. We had practiced this at home. While doing these prostrations, the hat would sometimes be blown off when I prostrated while holding the big satin shawl (Tib. སེན [གཟན]) in my hand if I kept the mouth of the hat towards me. So we had to keep the mouth of the hat on the opposite side. We practiced this at home quite a lot. After doing these prostrations, I picked up my hat and put it on my head. If the hat were to be blown away, it would be quite embarrassing. After putting on the hat, I rolled up the shawl and they helped us dress properly as if we were new. We then fell back among the others and the line would move again. When we reached the Dalai Lama, we took out the special khata scarf and put it on the mandala, offering the khata and the mandala together to the Dalai Lama. We then moved on to offer the khata to the Regent Taktra, to whom we also had to offer a khata along with the Mendredensum [Tib. མན་དྲལ་རྟེན་གསུམ]. The quality of this khata had to be a little inferior to the one we offered to the Dalai Lama. The quality of the khata was not however very poor, just a bit inferior. We had to follow the same procedure of prostrations, after which the khata and Mendredensum were offered to the old Regent. We would receive the blessings and would then return to the gaa and sit in the same order and they would serve droma dresi and dry fruits and so on. After some time, the function ended. When we came out we had to follow protocol. After the fourth rank tsidrung, the khenjung came out, then first the lay official dzasa, then the theiji [Tib. ཐའི་ཇི] and then everyone had to leave in accordance with the seniority of their rank. After that, they gave us a lunch at the hall called Khamsum Silnön [Tib. ཁམས་གསུམ་ཟིལ་གནོན]. In this hall we sat down in rows following the same order as we had when we went to seek the audience. Again they would offer tea and we would sit in groups of 5 or 6 people and they would give us tsamba dough, cooked meat and sometimes, wanton and momo. We would eat whatever we could and whatever remained we had to take back with us. After the meal, we got up and on that day all the lay officials above the fourth rank would change their winter dresses into their summer dresses. Those people would take off their chupa with the lining of otter skin and change it to ones without the skin lining. They also took off the black fox fur cap called Wagir [Tib. ཝ་གིར] and changed into a hat called Jangda [Tib. ལྕགས་མདའ]. So officially, from that day onwards, everyone was supposed to wear summer dress. From there we went to the assembly hall in the Potala called Tsomchen [Tib. ཚོམས་ཆེན] and again they gave us a meal. At the Tsomchen there were certain places where we had to offer a khata to the protector deity known as Jamsing [Tib. ལྕམ་སྲིང]. We waited there and the Dalai Lama came and he also visited these places and offered a khata to the statues and after him came the Regent, Prime Minister and so on in line according to their rank. After the Prime Minister, came the Shape, then the Khenche, Khenjung and after that came the lay officials the Dzasa and Theiji and then came the fourth rank lay officials (Tib. ཪིམཤི [རིམ་བཞི]) and the Senampa [Tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] and then came the low ranking officials, clerks and so on. However, I must mention here that even though everyone went in line, it was the custom that the tsidrung led the procession, even those whose rank was lower than the lay officials. So everyone visited the Jamsing and offered the khata scarves and then everyone dispersed to their homes. Officially that was the end of the Gyetor Ceremony. From there we came down to the inner stone pillar at the front of Potala (Tib. ཌོརིང་ཎངམ [རྡོ་རིང་ནང་མ]) where the horses were waiting. Up to the Doring pillar, everyone had to walk in line but from the doring, everyone mounted their horses and went to their various homes. At home some arrangements were made where servants and family members greeted the person when he dismounted from the horse. There was a special dismounting step on which we had to get down. On that step they had placed a satin cushion on which a swastika made from wheat was placed. It was supposed to bring good luck. So, once you were at home, your friends, well-wishers, and relatives would come in with khata, wish you success and congratulate you. This would take 2-3 days. Then we had to give a party for 2-3 days inviting all our friends, family members, relatives and colleagues and so on. The invitations were sent 2-3 days before the party. The servants would go to various people's homes and invite them saying that on such and such a date we are arranging a party because we have received the "new audience." So, the servants would ask the people to come and attend the party and so on. On the day of the party, no one came before lunch even though the invitations were sent requesting them to come in the morning. But it was a custom that no one would actually come before noon for the party except a few close friends. At about 11:30 or 12 O'clock, people would start coming in, one by one, at the time of serving the noodles. The party would have so many varieties of foods and so on where people will come and take chang, play mahjong, shönpai [Ch. xuan pai], carrom, sing songs, dance and so on. Then in the evening, most of the people would go back to their respective homes, but the inner guests would stay late and they would dance, play mahjong, play music, play carrom and some of them would drink chang. These people would stay till 11-12 p.m. Some of them would also stay overnight and for them we had to make arrangements for them to sleep and so on. Then on the second day, they would be served tsamba dough (Tib. བག) and those guests who came on the first day would join the party on the second day.   

**Q:**  The servants would hold the water kettle and pour water when they wash their faces, right?   

**A:**  There were many servants. Perhaps, 50-60 of them, although all of them wouldn't hold the kettle.   

**Q:**  Were there customs?   

**A:**  Yes there were. When we sent out the invitations, we had to mention whether the party was for 2 days or 3 days and so on and there were different rooms arranged for the wives and the children of the guests to stay. On the last day, before the guests left, they would wear their office robes and sit in a line and be served cooked meat and tsamba dough with butter decorations (Tib. མརསེན [མར་ཟན]). People would just take a little bit from the marsen. Nobody would eat the meat. Then the guests would be given khata scarves and would be thanked for coming to the party.   

**Q:**  Did the shape ever attend these parties?   

**A:**  The Shape would never come to such parties.   

**Q:**  Never?   

**A:**  Yes, they never came to such parties.   

**Q:**  Even if someone was related or someone was very close to the shape, still they didn't come to these parties?   

**A:**  Yes. The Shape never attended these parties, even if they had family or had a close relationship.   

**Q:**  What about the Prime Minister?   

**A:**  The Prime Minister, Langdün Künga Wangchuk, was the brother of Demo Rimpoche, so he went to Demo Rimpoche's party because Demo Rimpoche was his brother. Otherwise, the Prime Minister never attended such parties. However, if someone was very close to a Shape, then after the formal party was over they would invite them for a dinner and the Shape would come, sit and relax. That was only if they were very close. During the party, some people would send food to the Shape's house. That was the prevalent practice. They would send lunch, dinner or whatever, to the Shape's house saying that it is for you, it is your share of the party.   

**Q:**  Did they send food for the whole family of the Shape or for the Shape only?   

**A:**  No, it was not necessary. They would send the food only to the Shape and not for his whole family because their wives and children had already been invited for the party. Then when the party was over, the host offered khata scarves to the guests on their necks and thanked them for coming.   

**Q:**  These khata were offered by the [family's] chandzö (manager)?   

**A:**  No, not the chandzö, but the person who had the "new audience." He offered khata to all the guests. However, this person offered khata scarves only to the guests of equal rank or above. Those who were below him were offered khata by the people in charge of party (Tib. ཇིགྱབ [སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]). The host accompanied them to the gate and then sent them off. Then after that, the host and his very close friends would again resume the party. They would drink chang, play music and mahjong and so on.   

**Q:**  Did the host request them to remain or did they themselves stay back?   

**A:**  If the host asked them to remain then they would stay.   

**Q:**  How did the host ask certain people to stay back and send the others off? Wasn't that quite awkward?   

**A:**  No. The host asked someone else to request certain people who were very close to him to stay back. Then they remained and enjoy themselves until 11 or 12 o'clock at night.   

**Q:**  This was on the evening of the second day?   

**A:**  Yes, they would play mahjong or cards or whatever they liked.   

**Q:**  But they had already offered [them] the khata?   

**A:**  Yes. The khata had already been offered. But even if they had been offered the khata already, if they were requested to remain they would stay back and the party would go on until 11 or 12 at night and some of them would spend the night at the host's house. Now on the next day, the third day, no outside guests would come to attend the party. His close friends would remain and again they would have breakfast, lunch, whatever it is and then on the third night some people would leave and they were again offered the khata even though they had been offered the khata on the previous day. So after some of the guests left on the third night, the party was still not over. A few of them would stay back and would continue the party. Then on the fourth day, only those who were very close to the host would stay and the party continued. On the fourth evening after dinner they would be offered khata once again, and now the party was fully and completely over. After that there were no guests and only the family members and the servants were at home. Then on the fifth day, they would give a party to the servants who were serving at the parties.   

**Q:**  When the party was given to the servants, who served them food and looked after them?   

**A:**  Among the servants there were different ranks. Some were higher and some were lower. So the higher servants were served by the lower servants.   

**Q:**  Would the servants be enjoying themselves?   

**A:**  Yes. On that day, whatever the servants did, the masters would act as if they had seen nothing. Normally, the masters would not go to the servants' party because it would make the servants uncomfortable. After the servant's party, the get-together would really be over and the mattresses, carpets and furniture would be stored away and they would start cleaning up the crockery and cutlery and store them. After the party, I became a senampa in rank.   

**Q:**  So you got your new audience on the 8th and had your new audience celebrations on the 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th. Did you have parties till the 12th?   

**A:**  On these four days, the 8th, 9th, 10th, and 11th, we spent our time receiving the khata scarves of congratulations from our friends and relatives.   

**Q:**  And also the party?   

**A:**  No, we spent these four days only in receiving the khata.   

**Q:**  The party had not yet started?   

**A:**  Yes, the party had yet to start. People did not come all at once, they came one by one and that is why it took time.   

**Q:**  Did you have to sit on a raised dais to receive the khata?   

**A:**  Yes. They had made a little dais for me to sit on, so when the guests came, I used to go to the dais to receive their khata. After that, I would just relax or sit in the house. They generally came in small groups of three or four, and again if more guests came I would go back to the dais to receive the khata.   

**Q:**  When you received the khata were you all alone or did your wife also sit with you and receive the khata?   

**A:**  I used to receive them alone.   

**Q:**  What about the other Sambo family members?   

**A:**  No. My father did not receive the khata.   

**Q:**  Did the gifts and khata you received on those days belong to you alone or were they the property of the whole family?   

**A:**  They belonged to the whole family. They did not belong to me alone.   

**Q:**  Were there some instances when the gifts belonged to you alone?   

**A:**  Such cases happened only in the case of marriages when the girl went as the bride. During the marriage, the mother would ask the daughter if she wanted some of the gifts, and the bride would chose some gifts which she liked, for otherwise the family would generally have made preparations and given her gifts to take to her new home. Coming back to the point, it would take four days for these formalities to be over. Then on the fifth day, we sent out servants on horseback to various places to invite the guests for the party. On the sixth day we would take out the mattresses and make preparations for the guests to sit. Then we would take out the furniture, etc, and other articles and be ready for the party. Then on the seventh and eighth day, the food was served and the party was on. On the ninth and tenth day, the people gradually went back to their houses. On the 11th day, the party for the servants occurred, and then on the twelfth day the party was truly over. So it took about eight days for the whole procedure to be over.   

**Q:**  After becoming Senampa, didn't you have to go to the office?   

**A:**  Even after one joined the government service there were no government office to attend.   

**Q:**  Did you not have to go to the drungja?   

**A:**  No. We did not have to go to the drungja. Only if you were a tsidrung did you have to go to the drungja.   

**Q:**  If the tsidrung were to join the service today, then the next day would he have to go to the drungja. So in this case did the people who came to offer the congratulatory khata understand that he had to go to the drungja and not come to offer the khata?   

**A:**  They came to offer the khata. In the case of very big families like Trekhang and Phala, when they become tsidrung they went to the drungja and the people who came to offer them khata waited for him to return from the drungja. In our case, since we were lay officials, we did not have to go to the drungja, and from the 10th to the 20th, we could relax and give parties and so on and receive khata.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  Now I had become a senampa so I would be sent notices asking me to come for particular ceremonies [Tib. མཛད་སྒོ]. We were informed the number of khata we had to take. This would be written on the notice.   

**Q:**  So you joined government service in the year of the Earth-Tiger?   

**A:**  No. It was in the year of the Iron-Snake.   

**Q:**  What happened in that year to Taktra?   

**A:**  In that year Taktra was appointed as the new Regent.   

**Q:**  As soon as he became the Regent didn't he issue an order that no traders from the private Labrang [Tib. སྐུ་སྒེར་བླ་བྲང] [this means the labrang of the Regent] would be sent anywhere?   

**A:**  It is possible, but I do not have any definite information about it. When Taktra became the Regent, I had then been in the government service for only two or three months. Everyone was apprehensive when he became the Regent, but they were also kind of happy or having some kind of faith. I don't know how to put it. People were quite keenly hoping for an improvement. As he was a very old lama, everyone had put their hopes on him.   

**Q:**  Was he liked by everyone?   

**A:**  Yes. As he was quite an old man, everyone had high hopes in him. It was then said, and also quite wildly known, that he did not accept any gifts or presents.   

**Q:**  Was it true that he did not accept any gifts?   

**A:**  Yes everyone said so.   

**Q:**  So it was possible that he did not really accept any gifts?   

**A:**  Yes, probably at that time he didn't accept bribes, for everyone said that Taktra did not accept any gifts or bribes.   

**Q:**  Was this very widely known?   

**A:**  Yes. This was quite sensational news, and although everyone was happy, there was quite a bit of apprehension, for they feared that if he didn't accept bribes, then he would perform his duties honestly. So if he would get offended, it would become like confronting an elephant and he would hit you with his trunk. [laughter]. So people were little bit apprehensive and they also kind of liked him. He had already issued an order that the labrang would not do any trade or business. So everyone thought that he would perform his duties honestly and sincerely. So if he would get offended, then it would be terrible because you couldn't bribe him. This continued for about a year.   

**Q:**  That was the year of the Iron-Snake. Was there any other news or incidents that year?   

**A:**  There were no other special incident. I think the old man did some research on some pecha. Besides which I did not hear of him having made any changes in the politics.   

**Q:**  Didn't he do any kind of renovations?   

**A:**  He might have moved a little bit and did some renovation construction in the monasteries and the monastic colleges because there were a lot of them. Anyway, these were very minor things.   

**Q:**  Didn't he demote some important officials?   

**A:**  No. No such things took place that year.   

**Q:**  Who were the Shapes then?   

**A:**  The Shapes then were the Kalön Lama Tempa Jamyang, Bönshö, Phünkang and Nangchungwa. Nangchungwa was the Doji and was staying in Kham.   

**Q:**  Were there then only three Shapes [in Lhasa]?   

**A:**  Yes, there were only three Shape.   

**Q:**  Were there not any extra Shape?   

**A:**  No, there were no extra ones.   

**Q:**  Who were the tsipön?   

**A:**  The tsipön then were Dekharwa [Tib. བདེ་མཁར་བ], Kapshöba, Lhalu and Driyü [Tib. འབྲི་ཡུལ].   

**Q:**  Had Lhalu already become a tsipön?   

**A:**  Yes. Lhalu was appointed tsipön at the end of the Iron-Snake year.   

**Q:**  Was he appointed by Taktra?   

**A:**  Yes. He had been appointed during Taktra's regency. I do not remember exactly whom he replaced as the tsipön at the end of the Iron-Snake year.   

**Q:**  Who were the drunyichemmo?   

**A:**  Ramba was the Ta lama [Tib. ཏ་བླ་མ]. Then there was Lengdenla [Tib. ལེགས་ལྡན་ལགས [Jawdang], Chömpel Thubden [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་ཐུབ་བསྟན] and probably Ngagpala [Tib. སྔགས་ཨུཨ་ལགས]. Yes, it was Ngagpala. He was called Kungö Lodön [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་བློ་དོན].   

**Q:**  Who was the nendrön?   

**A:**  The nendrön was Ngawang Namgye who was then nicknamed "malicious," Gyambumgang Nagpo [Tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང་གནག་པོ]   

**Q:**  You mean Ngawang Namgye?   

**A:**  Yes, Ngawang Namgye.   

**Q:**  Then everything was quiet and peaceful in the year of the Iron-Snake?   

**A:**  Yes, that is right.   

**Q:**  Was it true that Lhalu was appointed at the end of the year of the Snake?   

**A:**  Yes, Lhalu was appointed as shape at the end of the year, possibly in the twelfth month. Just before the New Year. I do not remember the day exactly, but it was just before the New Year.   

**Q:**  What about the Horse Year?   

**A:**  In the Water-Horse Year, the Dalai Lama was ordained as a monk (Tib. རབཤེ [བར་བཞེས]). It was in the year of the Water-Horse. In that year, Taktra was still supposed to be quite honest and fair, but he had probably started to accept bribes. Since every day there were so many people bribing him like the [meat] infested by insects, he didn't accept it for one day or two days, but after a year or so probably he lost his vow like losing his monk's vows and he began to gradually take bribes, but on a small scale.   

**Q:**  Were there any problems that year?   

**A:**  Wasn't Surkhang appointed as the kalön that year? Yes, in the year of the horse I think he was appointed in place of Nangchungwa.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me what happened to Nangchungwa? Why was he asked to resign?   

**A:**  There was no major reason. It was said that he came up from Kham without informing the government, which really was not a reason, merely an excuse to bully him into resigning.   

**Q:**  You mean he came up without informing the government of his departure?   

**A:**  There must have been some talk that he was coming up [from Kham]. The gadrung was Mentöpa [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད་པ]. Mentöpa said that he had been fined 25 or thirty sang of gold. So when the gadrung and gandrön asked them what the fine was for, they said that they had been fined this amount since they had failed to ask the Sawangchemmo not to go up to Lhasa. This was very unfair. For even if they had urged him not to come to Lhasa, he would not have listened since the two of them were junior in rank. They could have not persuaded their superior to stay back. It was therefore very unfair to fine and punish these two.   

**Q:**  Do you mean they were fined twenty-five sang of gold?   

**A:**  Yes. That happened after almost five months.   

**Q:**  Can you tell me the reason why they made Nangchungwa resign? Was it because they wanted to appoint a new Shape or was it because they wanted to bring Surkhang as the new shape?   

**A:**  It appears that in the beginning they wanted to appoint a new shape. Initially they probably were not planning to appoint Surkhang, but they wanted to appoint a new shape who might have been eligible.   

**Q:**  Did they appoint Surkhang in the Sheep Year?   

**A:**  Wasn't that in the Horse Year?   

**Q:**  So there was only one year that Taktra didn't take bribes, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was something like that. It was like the song, "The horn of the ox [Nangchungwa] was broken and a flag was hoisted at the corner [Surkhang][Tib. གླང་གི་རྭ་ཅོ་བཅག་ནས། ཟུར་ལ་དར་ལྕོག་བཙུགས་སོང"]. This because widespread in China and Tibet [Tib. རྒྱ་གྲགས་བོད་གྲགས]. Since then, nobody could say that Taktra would not accept bribes because by that time, Taktra kind of lost his vow [to not take bribes]. I think he started being corrupt from then onwards. After that, Surkhang was appointed as a shape. In this case it was also said that Surkhang was not among the candidates. Normally, when a shape was appointed, a list of potential candidates was put forward. They also asked for divination.   

**Q:**  I heard that they rolled the senriy lottery.   

**A:**  Probably, they didn't roll the senriy.   

**Q:**  Yes. I heard that the drunyichemmo rolled the senriy.   

**A:**  It might be. Phünkang was the only shape who had been appointed by Reting Labrang. Who else was there?   

**Q:**  He was the only one that Reting appointed. During Reting's time, there was Trendong and Trekhang. Kalön Lama Tempa Jamyang and Phünkang were the only Shapes where they didn't roll the senriy. Otherwise, all of them were appointed through the senriy.   

**A:**  I think that is correct. At first, Trimön controlled the situation. Reting respected and feared Trimön. After Trimön was made to resign, when Künga Wangchuk was appointed he would not say anything. He too was made to resign; it was like kicking him out. Then Surkhang was appointed shape.   

**Q:**  Surkhang was too young to become a Shape, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably he was 33-34-35 years old.   

**Q:**  Why did Surkhang ask for the Shape position so strongly?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea.   

**Q:**  I heard that once Surkhang asked the shape position for his father and at that time Phünkang said, "I thought that Surkhang Wangchen Gelek [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] was quite a fine fellow, but is it right for him to ask for that post for his father who was an opium smoker?" And Surkhang also heard this.   

**A:**  That was a nonsense; it was talk like the wind blowing and it was just for deceiving people. Anyway, Surkhang asked for the shape position and got it. Then in the year of the sheep, we went to India for pilgrimage. Then in the year of the bird, I think that was that year that Bönshö passed away.   

**Q:**  In the year of the sheep you went to India? For what purpose did you go?   

**A:**  We got permission to visit India.   

**Q:**  Why did you go to India?   

**A:**  For a pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  I see. Were there any problems?   

**A:**  Where?   

**Q:**  In Lhasa?   

**A:**  There were no problems. I do not think there were any problems in Lhasa. By that time the Regent Taktra was not the same straight and sincere person. He was now as corrupt as anyone else. Then Bönshö passed away and Kapshöba was appointed in his place. After that Phünkang also passed away. It was in Phünkangs's place that Lhalu was appointed the Shape. Then as I have already mentioned before, there was a lot of corruption to such extremes that bribes were being offered and taken indiscriminately. The highest bidder got the posts. There probably wasn't any consideration given to whether the person was eligible or not. They may have earlier publicized that Taktra Labrang would not do any business, his labrang however carried on business surreptitiously. There were no business organizations in his (Taktra's) name. Some persons were, however, appointed to do the business, but nothing, was officially done. They were given the capital to carry on the business on behalf of Taktra, but their names were never disclosed.   

**Q:**  This was very ugly, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Do you remember the Shakabpa who was the Governor of North Region (Tib. ཆངཇི [bynag spyi])?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I am not talking of the Shakabpa who was the tsipön. I am speaking about the Shakabpa who was the Jangji. He also did a lot of business in wool. Actually the Shakabpa's family used to do business before. In this case, I heard that they got their capital from Taktra and they owned a certain percentage of this wool business. Taktra's name however, was not linked to this business. Shakabpa himself had a lot of capital as they used to do business previously. They carried on business without much publicity. These were the few cases that we came to know about. There must have been a lot of other business activities carried on under different names.   

**Q:**  What happened in the year of the Sheep?   

**A:**  You mean about Taktra? In that year nothing extraordinary happened, nothing really worthy of mentioning.   

**Q:**  In the year of the Horse, Surkhang became a Shape. Then in the year of the Bird, Kapshöba was appointed as a Shape.   

**A:**  Kapshöba became a Shape because Bönshö had passed away.   

**Q:**  Bönshö became sick and died?   

**A:**  Yes, he became ill and died. When Bönshö passed, away Kapshöba was appointed. Then after some time, Tempa Jamyang also passed away.   

**Q:**  Kapshöba was appointed when Bönshö died. Who were the other candidates for the post of Shape?   

**A:**  It was again selected on the basis of divination.   

**Q:**  When they did the divination the names of four or five candidates are to be put forward, right??   

**A:**  The names of the Magji Künsangtse and most probably my late father's name was also on the list. and Kapshöba's and besides these there were more powerful people.   

**Q:**  Was Ragashag also there?   

**A:**  Yes, Ragashag's name was also on the list.   

