# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.18 : Tape 18  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses his trip to Chamdo to join Ngabö to start negotiations with China and about what he did in Chamdo while waiting with Ngabö for instructions from the Tibetan Government about where to hold the peace negotiations.   

---  
### Tape 18  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_18/H_0205_18.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  After reaching Chamdo, I met all the staff of the Doji. Everyone was talking about the Chinese and how fearful they were, and so on. Everybody looked like a "bird hit by a stone." Then Ngabö asked me what were the orders from the government. I gave him the scroll containing the five points. After going through it he asked me if I had any further verbal instructions from the government. I said, "They didn't give any instructions and just before I left, I thought that there must be something more, so I went to see them in their individual houses, but nobody said anything." On hearing my negative answer, he said, "This is ridiculous, how could we hold talks with this? Then I asked him, "What are we supposed to do now, should we hold the talks in Chamdo or not? He said, "It is not decided yet." I asked him what are we supposed to do now? Ngabö told me that he received a telegram before, but it wasn't clear and he had asked for further clarification, but he hadn't received the answer yet so we have to wait until the telegram comes. It was really not clear and it was very bad. [unclear recording] If we go up [to Lhasa] and then they tell us to go to Beijing, going up to Lhasa would be a loss. He further told me that he had no idea whether the peace negotiations were going to take place in Beijing, Chamdo or Lhasa. So we just waited for the telegram with the answer until the 15th-16th of the 2nd month.   

**Q:**  After you met and left Lhalu, when did you first meet the Chinese? What were the places you visited? How did the local people treat you? Were they friendly or hostile? Finally, for how far did you get free [corvée] supplies or horses, and did you have to pay for them or not?   

**A:**  From Giamda to Lharigo it took us 4-5 days and all the horses were given as corvée. It took 5 days from Lharigo to Pembar. When we came to Pembar, I first met the People's Liberation Army. The Chinese staff officer, Wang Canmou came to see us. He said that he had heard that we were the delegation members for the peaceful negotiations and that was very nice. He then invited us for a meal the next day to which we went. He further told us that he had a Chinese wireless set with him and he would send it with us.   

**Q:**  Was there a mountain pass just before you reach Pembar?   

**A:**  Yes, there was.   

**Q:**  Was it very high?   

**A:**  It is one of the highest mountain passes in that area. It is known as Shargongla [Tib. ཤར་གོང་ལ].   

**Q:**  Were there any Tibetan soldiers on this side of the pass?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Were there any Tibetan soldiers from Lharigo onwards?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Were there any Tibetan soldiers at Lharigo?   

**A:**  Yes. They ran away for two days, but later returned. It was the regiment called Thardrog Magar ("saw the flag and fled").   

**Q:**  How many Chinese were at Pembar?   

**A:**  I think there were only 7 or 8 soldiers. They were the first Chinese to come there, the very first.   

**Q:**  When you went further east from Pembar were there more Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, there were more Chinese troops when we went down (east) from Pembar. When we reached Shopando there were lots of Chinese troops-about 2,000 Chinese soldiers. From Giamda to Lharigo, it took us five days. From Lharigo we went to Tsachuka [Tib. ཚྭ་ཆུ་ཁ], to Alado [Tib. ཨ་ལ་མདོ]. to Ala Jakgong [Tib. ཨ་ལ་ལྕགས་གོང྄], to Ngo Drukha [Tib. sngo ? gru kha], and to Namgyelgön [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དགོན]. Then from Namgyelgön it was all uphill. That was the Shargong La pass. It was a very steep ascent and our mounts and mules had a lot of trouble. They were breathing very laboriously so we felt pity and thought it would be better to walk rather than ride them. We couldn't walk for more than 10-15 steps without stopping because we were panting.   

**Q:**  How far was it from Pembar to Shopando?   

**A:**  It took about 3-4 days. After that, we had to cross mountains every day. Sometimes, we had to cross 2-3 mountain passes in one day.   

**Q:**  From Shopando how far was it to Chamdo?   

**A:**  It was about a 7 to 8 day journey. From Lharigo onwards, the Kham area starts.   

**Q:**  In the past, there weren't any kind of kings like the Derge Gyalpo [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་རྒྱལ་པོ] in Shopando area, right?   

**Q:**  No. It was under the jurisdiction of Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད] and they were the miser of Kundeling.   

**Q:**  Who arranged your transportation from Pembar onwards? Did the Chinese do that?   

**A:**  We had no problems at all. We just had to show our lamyig and the people would look after us very well. They treated us with respect. It seemed that they were happy to see us.   

**Q:**  While you were on your way, did you exchange talk and news with the local village and town people? Did they ask you for news about the Chinese or anything like that?   

**A:**  No. No one asked me and we also didn't discuss anything with them. It was on the 15th or 16th of the second month that we received a telegram sent by the Kashag from Yadong saying that they were dispatching two people: Dzasa Kheme [Tib. ཛ་སག་ཁེ་སྨད] and Drunyichemmo Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར]. [It said that] From Chamdo, Ngabö and the two officials who had come recently from Lhasa, should go to Beijing to take part in the peaceful negotiations. The telegram might have gone via Delhi to Beijing to Chamdo. From Chamdo we left on horseback and at most of the stops on the way the Chinese had made food and other arrangements until we reached Ganzi.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese say anything when they brought the telegram, like you can leave the next day, etc?   

**A:**  No. The Chinese told us, "We have received a telegram for you, here it is. Whenever you decide to go please let us know and we shall make the necessary arrangements for you."   

**Q:**  In what language was the telegram?   

**A:**  It was in Chinese and they had translated it into Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Until you received the telegram, what were you doing?   

**A:**  We played cards and mahjong.   

**Q:**  Were you treated like prisoners?   

**A:**  No. We were not like prisoners. We stayed in our own allotted houses.   

**Q:**  Where were the Tibetan soldiers?   

**A:**  The soldiers had been sent back to Tibet. They were given 3 dayan and were asked by the Chinese to go back to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  You mean the Chinese gave 3 dayan to each soldier wherever they met them and then asked them to return home?   

**A:**  No, not wherever they met. The Chinese first collected all the regiments together, most probably at Chamdo, and then asked them to return to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did they take away their guns and weapons?   

**A:**  Yes, the guns had been taken away by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  What about the officers like the gyagpön, rupön and dingpön?   

**A:**  Yes, most of them were sent away.   

**Q:**  What about the depön?   

**A:**  The depön stayed back. They were [Tibetan] government officials.   

**Q:**  What about the rupön?   

**A:**  The rupön were also kind of government officials, but they too were sent back. The depön all stayed [in Chamdo]--like Karchungwa, Laya Jarigpa and Derge Sey.   

**Q:**  You mean Derge Sey was in Chamdo?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Wasn't he in Markham?   

**A:**  Yes, but he was sent to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Were his soldiers still in Markham? They had not been sent away, right?   

**A:**  Yes, his soldiers were still in Markham.   

**Q:**  When did they send back the soldiers?   

**A:**  I think it was in 1950.   

**Q:**  It was while you were in Chamdo?   

**A:**  No. They had already been sent back before I reached Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Didn't you meet some of these soldiers while you were on your way to Chamdo?   

**A:**  No. I didn't come across anyone who said that they were part of the Tibetan army.   

**Q:**  Weren't these soldiers stopped on their way by the other military regiments and made to enroll in their nits?   

**A:**  No. While on their way back home, these soldiers robbed the people. They forced their way into people's houses and forcefully took away their belongings. It had been quite a long time since the soldiers were sent back. Chamdo was liberated in the 9th month. So it had been more than 3 months.   

**Q:**  When these soldiers reached Lhasa, would they go to their own homes or did the government collect them and assign them to some other regiment?   

**A:**  They disappeared to their various homes and nobody collected them or looked for them. When I reached Chamdo, some wounded soldiers came to us saying that they had heard that we were the representatives from the Tibetan Government. They said that they had been wounded while in action and asked us to help them so we gave them some money.   

**Q:**  Why did they come?   

**A:**  To seek help from us.   

**Q:**  Did you talk to the Khambas while you were in Chamdo.   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  You didn't go to meet anyone like friends, relatives or some local chiefs?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Were there any restrictions on your movements? If you wanted to, could you have gone and met the local people?   

**A:**  There were no restrictions.   

**Q:**  While in Chamdo did you keep in contact with Lhasa?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have any facilities, no wireless set, for example.   

**Q:**  Lhalu had one, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but that was a long distance away.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Chinese say that you had to send a wire message to Lhasa or Yadong?   

**A:**  No, they knew that we didn't have a wireless set.   

**Q:**  No, no. I mean didn't the Chinese want to contact the Tibetan Government through you with their own wireless set?   

**A:**  No, they didn't ask us.   

**Q:**  Ngabö received a telegram. From where did he receive this telegram?   

**A:**  I don't know from whom (where) he received it. The telegram was not very clear whether they had to stay in Chamdo or go to Beijing or to Lhasa. So he sent a wire asking for clarification as to where he had to go, whether to Chamdo, Beijing or to Lhasa. He was waiting for a reply that never came.   

**Q:**  Who sent the former telegram to Ngabö?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  From Ganzi how did you go?   

**A:**  From Ganzi we went by motorcar.   

**Q:**  Who was with you?   

**A:**  Ngabö, Thubden Lengmön, Phüntso Wangye, Alo Buzhang, Tsendrön Gyentsen Phüntso.   

**Q:**  Was Ngabö's wife with him?   

**A:**  Yes, his wife and one child. There were about 2 or 3 jeeps.   

**Q:**  How many attendants did each of you have?   

**A:**  All the servants and our luggage traveled in two trucks. Then from Yadong, the two dzadrung came. They were accompanied by two interpreters: Sandu Rinchen [Tib. ས་འདུ་རིན་ཆེན] was the English interpreter and Phüntso Tashi Takla [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྟག་ལྷ] was the Chinese interpreter.   

**Q:**  How long did it take from Ganzi to Beijing?   

**A:**  We reached Ganzi on the 5th or 6th of the 3rd month of the Tibetan calendar.   

**Q:**  Ganzi is in Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  From Ganzi, where did you go?   

**A:**  From Ganzi we spent one night in a small village and then one night in Minyag, and then we reached Dartsedo.   

**Q:**  There was a motor road from Chamdo to Ganzi?   

**A:**  No, the motor road started only from Ganzi onwards. We stayed for two or three days at Dartsedo.   

**Q:**  Did you have any talks with the local military or civil leaders in Dartsedo?   

**A:**  Yes. We met the local leaders and we talked in general about the forthcoming negotiations.   

**Q:**  From where had the local officials came?   

**A:**  They came from the Xikang Autonomous Region (Ch. xi kang [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས]) located in Dartsedo.   

**Q:**  By this time you had been there for a while, so did you think that the Chinese were not as bad as people thought they were, or did you think they were worst than what you had imagined them to be?   

**A:**  They were doing their best and welcoming us with both the civil and the military drills, and they gave us parties and treated us well, but all the time we felt kind of uneasy and we were very apprehensive wondering what they would do next.   

**Q:**  Did you talk about this. Was Ngabö also worried like this?   

**A:**  Ngabö was also worried and had the same idea we had, although he was not a temperamental person who gets happy quickly and angry quickly [Tib. དགའ་ཆོག་སྡུག་ཆོག་ཆོག].   

**Q:**  How do you know that Ngabö was worried and apprehensive? Did he say anything?   

**A:**  Abo Raga and Yeshe Targye would come often to see Ngabö. Whenever they came to see Ngabö, Phüntso Wangye would also join them, so it was inconvenient for Ngabö to talk to them openly and it was also inconvenient for them to talk. The two of them came frequently and implied that they had something to say. Then one day Ngabö took me aside and told me, "When the two of them came to see me, they implied that they had something to say, but they were not able to do so since Phüntso Wangye would always be present. So you should find out what they wanted to say." So I took them to my room and asked them what they had to say. They had nothing special to say. They were also showing kind of an uneasy attitude. Yeshe Targye started crying a little bit saying that now such a time had come that Ngabö, our shape, had to wear such an ordinary dress. I did my best to console him and told him that it doesn't matter at all. If the system is bad, then we have to worry about it, but these things are small little things.   

**Q:**  Since when did you all change into ordinary dress?   

**A:**  I was already wearing an ordinary dress when I left Lhasa. Ngabö switched his dress from Chamdo onwards. We left Dartsedo and on the second night we reached Yazhou a place famous for its tea. There was a big house known as the summer palace of Chairman Liu Zhuxi. We stayed there and a lot of the local Chinese leaders came to see and welcome us. They gave us dinner and drinks. Two days later we reached Chengdu. From there we went by plane to Xi'an. There were a lot of people to welcome and receive us. In Xi'an we met Geshe Sherab. He came to see us at the airport. He spoke to us in Chinese referring to Ngabö as his ex-student. Geshe spoke conversationally to us during the dinner.   

**Q:**  Did he speak Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  He said that this was a very good occasion because Chairman Mao came to power in China and the Dalai Lama had come into power in Tibet; and because the old student and the teacher had met each other after so many years. It is very good. [He also said] Before that, people used to say that they had to offer 3,000 to 5,000 dotse [as bribes] to such and such people to get some work done, but now you will not do those things. However, as far as freedom of religion is concerned, nothing has changed. Everything will remain the same. He told us such things.   

**Q:**  Did he give a speech?   

**A:**  It was not a speech. He just said that while standing up.   

**Q:**  Did you believe him?   

**A:**  We just said, 'Yes, yes' to everything out of politeness. It wouldn't be right to tell him, "We don't want you to say that."   

**Q:**  Was he already a Chinese official?   

**A:**  Who knows whether he had a rank or not. I didn't know about that. He had become quite old and his beard was quite white by that time and he was moving in a difficult manner and he needed three students to help him.   

**Q:**  Was the Geshe wearing a monk's robe?   

**A:**  No. He was wearing the chupa called Tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ] with openings on both sides. Over that he was wearing a vest.   

**Q:**  Was the vest made from yellow satin with a round dragon design [Tib. མཛོད་གོས]?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't. It was just ordinary dark yellow satin.   

**Q:**  Was this tsechuma the dress worn by the lay officials?   

**A:**  Yes, but not the official uniform. It was the casual one. Even the monks would wear this.   

**Q:**  Did the monk officials also wear it?   

**A:**  I am not sure about that.   

**Q:**  What happened on the next day?   

**A:**  On the next, we flew to Chongqing.   

