# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.10 : Tape 10  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he talks in detail about the arrest and death of Reting Rimpoche.   

---  
### Tape 10  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_10/H_0205_10.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Regarding those matters [permits for cotton], he had to talk with the Political Officer in Sikkim [Tib. འབྲས་སྤྱི་བློན་ཆེན], so my late father went to Gangtok. At that time, there was a telephone line [from there] to Lhasa. When my father came back to Kalimpong, he told me, "When I went to make a call, I heard that Reting's Labrang had been sealed and they were going to seal Phünkang right now. Such things happened in Lhasa." After a few days, the soldiers of the Gyantse Regiment [Tib. རྒྱལ་རྩེ་དམག་སྒར] were called and told to come soon and we saw the soldiers depart. I was wondering what they were going to do. At that time we had finished the Asian {African Conference] meeting [in Delhi], but we still had to arrange transportation [Tib. འགྲིམ་འགྲུལ་ལས་སོག] . We were told, "You people should stay there and we will let you know later on."   

**Q:**  Who said that?   

**A:**  The Kashag said that. They sent a telegraph to my father and Khenjung Lobsang Wangyal [Tib. mkhan chung blo bzang dbang rgayl] saying, "Reting Labrang and it's followers have caused great harm to Buddhism and politics so we are going to punish them appropriately according to their deeds [Tib. བྱེད་བབ་ལ་གཞིགས་པའི་བབ་བཀོད]. So we stayed in Kalimpong waiting for an order.   

**Q:**  You didn't have any work, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We just had to wait there playing mahjong and the game "go" and going to restaurants and drinking cold drinks.   

**Q:**  At that time, did Tharchin Babu report about Reting Rimpoche being killed in his newspaper?   

**A:**  Probably he did not write that Reting was killed, but there was talk about that.   

**Q:**  Was it written in the newspaper that soldiers were sent to arrest Reting?   

**A:**  There was talk like that. I heard from someone that Reting died and when I asked him how Reting died, he said, "I heard that he was killed." . I said, probably this is not true, people need something to kill him with. He said, "No, if you squeeze the testicles, people will die. We heard that Reting had an erection [when he died]. I don't think this is true because if he had serious pain, he wouldn't have had an erection. Instead of getting an erection, it would shrivel when people have pain." At that time, Reting was young, in his thirties. I thought that this was not ordinary talk but something that should be investigated. When I came to Lhasa, my late father said that he was sent as the representative of the Assembly to check the dead body of Reting. I thought that there might be some trace [of him having been killed], but there was nothing.   

**Q:**  I heard that the when Lamas die, they have erections, so probably that was true.   

**A:**  I am not sure about this. I have never heard this.   

**Q:**  At the time when Lamas do meditation on the "great joy" [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ] and so on, they would have erections. Probably, Reting didn't have an erection. His penis might have swollen up [Tib. སྦོས]   

**A:**  Probably they didn't dare to turn him over and look at the dead body in detail. They just went through the motions of checking the body.   

**Q:**  I heard that the two prison guards, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> nicknamed "Nepalese" (Tib. ཕེཔོ [བལ་པོ]) and the other lay official with the twisted mouth, turned over Reting's dead body.   

**A:**  Anyway, it was a very strange thing because he was so young. He wouldn't die unless he had an urgent and serious pain. Unless people were indulging in pleasure [Tib. རྒྱགས་ཤ་ལངས], they won't have erections, especially, if one had serious pain, he wouldn't have gotten an erection. Instead it would shrivel. At that time I was wondering whether this was true or not so I didn't tell people that it was true. At that time all people were saying that unless Reting had an urgent illness, he wouldn't die right away. At that time, I also heard from him that the prison guards were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> Phepo and the lay official with the twisted mouth, Porkyok [Tib. སྤོར་ཀྱོག]. I was not that attentive to all this at that time.   

**Q:**  Porkyok was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> event happened during Reting's regency, but the Regent himself didn't approve [Tib. ཕྱག་རྟགས] it [the punishment]. At that time, people were talking about many troublesome things like a bomb that exploded in the house of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> [Tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] and that the bomb had been sold by the horse trader named Tsering Tobgye [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྟོབས་རྒྱས]. When I asked them how he got the bomb, he got it from the lay official who was the step-son or relative of Jingpa Depön of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment [Tib. དབུས་མདའ་བྱིང་པ]. Jingpa himself didn't have children. Actually, it was possible for Jingpa to get the bomb [hand grenade] because he was the depön. People would have had to give things according to his orders. He [depön] could take and use those things for the time being though he would have to clear the account [Tib. རྩིས་རྒྱག] [eventually]. Nobody could say that he had stolen something. Probably, Jingpa might have brought the bomb for some reason and left it in his house. Though he himself had died, his step-son, the lay official, might have found it. Probably, the bomb had a lid placed like this and as soon as you opened the lid, the bomb would explode. I think it was definitely Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས] who made the box in which the bomb was placed, because I heard he used to do handicrafts like carpentry, blacksmithing and repairing watches and so on. He had also gone to Mongolia. In the 8th Tibetan month, one evening I was with Ngabö and there were only the two of us, though there were many people coming to visit Ngabö like relatives and friends. I used to call him maternal uncle [ashang]. At that time, Ngabö was one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས་བརྒྱད] The four drunyichemmo (trunyichemmo) and the four tsipön. These eight officials were often called to meet with the Kashag to discuss important issues. They also presided over the Tibetan government&#x27;s various assemblies.">drungtsigye</a> during the Reting event. He told me, "A bomb exploded in the house of Gyambumgang Jigyab Khembo." I asked him, "How did that happen?" He said, "There was a person, a sort of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>, who said, "This is a petition from Yuthok, the Doji. He told me to deliver it to the Regent. Please keep this here for a bit." They said, "Alright." They kept the box but the Khamba didn't come back for it so one day they opened the box and the bomb exploded. We were called there." Probably, they called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> to see the place where the bomb exploded. That night there were only the two of us so I told Ngabö, "Some kind of secret must have been leaked out [Tib. བྱ་ཤོར], otherwise, this is not the act that would have caused the arrest of Reting." He said, "Why?" I said, "It was revealed that the bomb [box] was made by Nyungne Lama. This is the sign that the secret of Reting Labrang had been leaked out. He said, "What was the sign?" I said, "If I tell you how the secret leaked out, when Gyambumgang opened the petition from the Yuthok, he knew that there was a bomb in it and they showed you [the drungtsi] the bomb. If they really didn't know about this, since this was to be delivered to the Regent, how could the chandzö of Gyambumgang dare to open it? In case he [the Khamba] returned to get it saying that I told you to keep the petition from Yuthok, what would they do? Could they tell him that we opened it? Is this something that people would dare to do? Leave alone the chandzö, the Jigyab Khembo himself also won't dare to open it. If it was top secret, then the Jigyab Khembo himself might know it. This was in the 8th month of the Fire-Hog year [1947--the year when Reting event occurred]. I told Ngabö, "As to how the secret leaked out, later on when they sealed Reting Labrang all of the things were checked out. It is definite that they knew that there would be this trouble, so they arrested the Regent Reting. Actually, how did they come to the decision to arrest Reting Labrang? Please tell me the truth." Then Ngabö said, "The Kashag received a telegram. When they translated the telegram, it said, "If Reting would get back the regency as before, we will offer the area beyond Chamdo [to the Guomindang]. Then two of the shape went there [to arrest Reting]." Then I said, "Is that the case?" He said, "Yes." Then I asked him about the details and we talked till dawn and then we slept. After that, they searched Reting's letters and found that in one of them it was written, "I depended [Tib. རེ་ལྟོས] on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Labrang. I know that I did the work that exclusively ruined myself [rang gis rang 'phung pa'i las ka 'ba' bzhag]." And about the son Penam being young and so on, Reting's handwriting was extremely bad so you had to think hard while reading it [to guess what the words were]. It was such a bad handwriting that you wouldn't be able to imitate it.   

**Q:**  Was it like my handwriting?   

**A:**  It was much worse than that. All of the lay officials of my age or older have seen his handwriting because he had to write on the plans/drafts that he had examined [Tib. ཞིབ་མཆན].   

**Q:**  How was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s writing?   

**A:**  It was not that ugly [Tib. སྐྱུག་བྲོ་པོ]. Reting's handwriting was like a signature.   

**Q:**  Maybe his wording [syntax] was good?   

**A:**  How could it be? Lamas didn't learn grammar. They learned only the spoken style of writing.   

**Q:**  If his wording was bad, how could he have good composition?   

**A:**  I also heard that Reting had written in his letter to Tsheyang [Tib. ཚེ་གཡང] , "Son Penam [Tib. པད་རྣམ] is young." She was his brother's wife.   

**Q:**  There was another clear one.   

**A:**  Probably.   

**Q:**  They also found a letter sent by the wife of the lay official Jogtre [Tib. ལྕོག་བཀྲས] to Reting.   

**A:**  Probably. There was talk about her. Jogtre also was saying, "I would like to offer her [to Reting] for the ritual of his longevity and to avoid the dakinis from receiving him [Tib. mka' 'gro bsu zlog brtan zhugs zhabs brtan]."   

**Q:**  How did he do that?   

**A:**  In the ritual called Khando Sundog, they need some women playing the small hand drum. He probably sent his wife <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> La [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ལགས] to do that. Once, Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> came to my late father and I was there. I told him, "How did that happen? I heard the Jogtre couple were very friendly." Then Surkhang just made it simple and said there isn't anything [to feel strange about this].   

**Q:**  He [Reting] was so stupid! [Tib. གླེན་རྟགས].   

**A:**  He enjoyed himself. It was like the ancient saying, "The close friends hand over the churn [wife] to each other." [Tib. གྲོགས་པོ་ནང་ཚག་ཡིན་ན་མདོང་མོ་ནང་ཤུག་གཏོང]. The churn is the wife and the pole is this [husband] . There was the talk that revealed about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> La [Jogtre's wife] and Tseyang La.   

**Q:**  How did she get revealed?   

**A:**  It was because Reting's letter talked about her small son, he wrote, "As for Tseyang La it would be difficult for son Penam to travel through remote places because he is young." [Tib. བུ་པད་རྣམ་ལོ་ན་ཕྲ་བས་བྱང་ཐང་སྒྲིམ་དཀའ་བ].   

**Q:**  To whom did he write this letter?   

**A:**  I am not sure, but he must have made a draft and later it was exposed. Probably, it was sent to Nyungne Lama and those people. All of these were exposed after Reting Labrang was sealed. Before that, how could they know that those things will be exposed. At that time, I was in India, but I heard that they [government] exhibited the Reting's letters in a frame with glass and let all the people read it. Anyway, regarding this matter, because Reting had lost his celibacy, he tried to avoid ordaining the Dalai Lama [Tib. བར་གཡོལ] and he resigned for three years.   

**Q:**  If he would have ordained the Dalai Lama in a careless [Tib. ཚོད་ཚོད་ལ] manner, what would the consequences be?   

**A:**  Yes. If he pretended he hadn't lost his celibacy, nobody would have known.   

**Q:**  In the past, when the translator Lama Ra lotsawa [Tib. ར་ལོ་ཙ་བ] was ordaining monks, there was a Kadampa Geshe [Tib. བཀའ་གདམས་པ་དགེ་བཤེས] who said to him, "How could you ordain these monks since you lost your own celibacy? Doing this is an insult to Buddhism. If you don't sit still [stop], you had better watch out [Tib. སྡོད་མ་ཚུགས་ན་ལྟད་མོ་ལྟོས་ཨ]."   

**A:**  Those were the religious traditions.   

**Q:**  I am saying that Reting adhered to these traditions.   

**A:**  Anyway, as far as the perspective of the common people was concerned, it seemed that Reting had a problem with his celibacy so he avoided ordaining the Dalai Lama and he had to resign. So he depended on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> because he was old and they were fellow disciples [Tib. ཆོས་གྲོགས] having received the initiation for praying the mantras of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད་བསྙེན་ཆེན] and they were also the best of friends. Three years after Reting resigned, the old man [Taktra] didn't move his buttock [Tib. སྤོ་བོས་རྐུབ་སྦག་ཙམ་མ་བྱས]. So Reting had to think about the method to get support for getting back the regency and said that he will offer the territory beyond Chamdo [to the Guomindang] as a bribe.   

**Q:**  That was stupid.   

**A:**  So the "Ra-tag Struggle" [Tib. རྭ་སྟག་འཐབ་རྩོད] was the struggle between Reting Labrang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> over the matter of the regency. We should also differentiate the Sera War from the Ra-tag Struggle.   

**Q:**  Actually, in the Ra-tag struggle, the goat [Reting] will definitely lose, right? Did the Chinese call it the Ra-tag Struggle?   

**A:**  Not the Chinese. We called it that. In the Indian newspapers it was also written that the two Regents didn't get along well on the matter of eating. [Tib. ཟ་ཡག་ལ་མ་འཆམ་པ]. It was because of the Ra-tag Struggle, otherwise, there wasn't any reason for making war against <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> [Tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས], and Sera Jey didn't have any reason to do that. Finally, Porgyo squeezed Reting's testicles.   

**Q:**  Did he really squeeze them?   

**A:**  Probably, he squeezed them. I heard after 1959, that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> Porgyo said this when they held a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a> against him in the Northern Neighborhood Committee [Tib. བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. [He said], "I had no choice but to hand over a pair of eggs to the government." [Tib. གཞུང་རྩིས་བཞེས་སྒོང་ཆ་གཅིག་མ་འབུལ་མཐུ་མེད་བྱུང]. Then they said, "This evening we are going to stop the struggle session." But they told him to wait for awhile. I heard this after I got out of prison.   

**Q:**  Was that during the time when you were released for the time being?   

**A:**  I was imprisoned in 1959 and released in 1961. I heard this when I was in the prison. After the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a> was over and the masses went back, Porgyo was told to stay behind and was called in and they asked him, "You said that you had to hand over a pair of eggs. What did you mean by that? He said, "I didn't dare to say it openly amongst the masses. So I said I had no choice but to hand over a pair of eggs." Then they told him, "That's alright. You may leave." Like this he confessed that he handed over a pair of eggs though he didn't say that he squeezed the testicles of Reting. It is clear that a pair of eggs could only have this meaning. Then they stopped the struggle session at that point. People said probably he did that. So they stopped the session.   

**Q:**  Previously didn't you have any talks with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> regarding Reting?   

**A:**  Yes, I did.   

**Q:**  Did you tell him about handing over a pair of eggs?   

**A:**  Yes, I told him that I heard that. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> swore and said, "I didn't know anything at all about this."   

**Q:**  Did they exhibit the letter that Reting sent to China?   

**A:**  I didn't hear about that.   

**Q:**  Later, did the Chinese government say that they were going to support Reting?   

**A:**  After the revolt was over, I saw that the Chinese wrote in the newspaper several times, "The patriotic Reting Trülku [Tib. རྒྱལ་གཅེས་རྭ་སྒྲེང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ] so I was thinking that the reason for calling him patriotic was because of his relations with the Guomindang. I am not sure what other people were thinking.   

**Q:**  Did you think that it was true that Reting said that he will offer the territory beyond Chamdo?   

**A:**  I think probably this was true because he himself was taking a lot of bribes and he thought that other people were also similar so he probably said that. At that time, all the followers of Reting were arrested and lashed and Nyungne Lama died. I heard that when Reting was brought [from Reting] at the front side of Sera, the monks of Sera fired shots. Probably, they might have fired some shots. I heard that when the monks fired shots, they [soldiers] also fired from down there. Anyway, he was brought in front of Sera where the monks could see him and he was imprisoned in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> in the Potala. I heard that Reting was called to the Tsondu and he was told, "Such and such seems to have happened. You better confess these." Then Regent Reting prostrated to the Tsondu and said, "I don't have anything to report to the Regent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> except to apologize [Tib. དགོངས་དག་ཐུགས་བདེན] to him. I have made mistakes, so I will accept whatever kind of punishment." After that, they had to issue a verdict. I heard that at that time Sitsab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was there and said, "Now, it is very bad [Tib. གང་མིན་ཚད]. How should we issue the verdict? Since he is a holy Lama [Tib. སྐྱེ་བུ་དམ་པ], it would be very good for him to pass away for the benefit of others [Tib. དགོངས་པ་གཞན་དོན་དུ་གཤེགས]." Anyway, Lukhangwa himself might not have known about that [killing Reting], but they did it in excess [Tib. ཐལ་ཆ་བཏང] and he died. At that time, they didn't get Nyungne Lama and they arrested Khardo Lama [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ་བླ་མ] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>. Probably, Khardo Lama kind of confessed that he was the one who shot at Lhalu. Actually, on that night, shots were fired at Lhalu. Probably, the dzasa didn't have much to confess to. Anyway, they had to suffer quite a large number of lashes. They built a new prison in the Gusung Regiment and imprisoned Khardo Lama and the dzasa there saying that they were sentenced to life imprisonment.   

**Q:**  Was it a square prison cell the size of the outstretched arms of a person [Tib. འདོམ་གང་གྲུ་བཞི]?   

**A:**  Probably, it was not that size. Later, when I went for an inspection tour [Ch. can guan] in China, the Dzasa Jambey Gyentsen [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] and I got together. The two of us were also schoolmates. When he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>, I didn't get a chance to go to him, so we didn't have any relationship. When the two of us went on the inspection tour, we talked about those things. Probably, the cell was not that small and suffocating. Anyway, they were shut in the Gusung Regiment. Probably, there were some soldiers stationed at the front of the prison door, but they could do whatever they liked inside the cell. At that time, Nyungne Lama was lost [got away] and they inquired about him, but they didn't find him. Later, the situation became much more tense and the Mayor of Lhasa City [Tib. mipön] announced that wherever Nyungne Lama is found, the property of that household will be confiscated and the person will be lashed, so it is best to report before he is caught." I heard that there was a Nepalese or a mixed Nepalese-Tibetan (a Khatsara [Nepalese. kha char which means mule]) called Kanden Yügye [Tib. སྐལ་ལྡན་གཡུལ་རྒྱལ] and that Nyungne Lama was hiding in the his toilet, but the Nepalese couldn't bear the responsibility for this so he reported this to the mayor. Then the mayor came to arrest Nyungne Lama. Then they heard a gunshot in the dark toilet and the sound "Oh!" When they went in, they found Nyungne Lama had shot himself and was dead. There were 3-4 people including Reting's personal servant [Tib. söpön] Yeshe Tsültrim [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ཚུལ] khrims], who had killed the soldiers [stationed in Reting] and then run away through the northern route. They later arrived at Xining [Tib. ཟི་ལིང] and stayed in that area. They didn't have problems about being arrested there. Later, when the People's Liberation Army came to Tibet, they came with them and nobody said anything to them. I also met one of them in the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས].   

**Q:**  What did he tell you? What did they do when they went down to Xining?   

**A:**  Probably, they didn't have anything to do in Xining. They just had to stay there and wait for the chance to return to Tibet. He didn't say anything about what they did down there. There must have been 3-4 of them. As for the many monastic estates that were newly granted to Reting Labrang during his regency, probably all of them were taken back by the government leaving Reting with just the property it had before his regency.   

**Q:**  The Chinese didn't support Reting at all, right? How many telegrams did they receive?   

**A:**  Do you mean from Chiang Kaishek?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  When he was imprisoned in the Potala, at the beginning, in the telegram sent by Chiang Kaishek   

**Q:**  Before he was imprisoned, did they receive a telegram asking why the two shapes went to [Reting]?   

**A:**  Probably not. I heard that in the telegram it was written, "There is talk that nowadays Reting Rimpoche has had a kind of misfortune. It is not right to do that. Firstly, as far as the Tibetan people are concerned, he was the one who found the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama so he had achieved a great accomplishment. Secondly, he had his title from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 中央] 1. The Central Committee of the CCP. 2. The Central Government of China. 3. Sometimes it also conveys &quot;China.&quot;">zhongyang</a> [China]." Probably, he was granted some kind of title. The Kashag probably sent a vague acknowledgment telegram [Tib. ཟ་རི་ཟི་རི]. After that, the Tibetan representatives (the Khendrönlosum) sent a telegram to Lhasa. It was written in the telegram, "Chiang Kaishek had issued the order to such and such number of regiments to go to Tibet." Then probably they finished Reting quickly. They might have thought that if they got rid of Reting, even if the soldiers came, it would become like they wouldn't have anything to do. If we don't get rid of him before the soldiers arrived, when the soldiers came, we won't be able to do that. Then they might have sent a telegram saying that Reting had died and there were no soldiers coming. I heard they [Chinese] sent telegrams twice. In the first one, it was written, as I mentioned above, and in the latter one, it was written, if you don't sit still [Tib. སྡོད་མ་ཚུགས་ན], we will send soldiers."   

**Q:**  Would people die when they squeeze their testicle? When they take out the testicles people do not die.   

**A:**  Probably the pain would be unbearable [when they squeeze it]. People won't die when their testicles were cut off, but when it was squeezed, they would have to suffer a serious torture which would be unbearable and then they would die. For example, if we were pressed under a mountain, we would die.   

**Q:**  I don't know whether people would die from having their testicles squeezed. Unless the Tibetans have a different way of squeezing them, probably people would not die from their testicles getting squeezed.   

**A:**  Oh! Rimpoche, probably people would die. Shall we try it on a dog?   

**Q:**  To whom did Reting write the letters and send the Zi [Tib. གཟི] beads from prison?   

**A:**  Probably, it was to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> that Reting wrote a letter saying, "This time I have had a misfortune. Therefore, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> please help me." He [Tsarong] was among the representatives of the assembly and when they turned over Reting's body, it was said that they saw a terrible thing. When the others told him that there was a bruise [on his butt], Tsarong said, "Of course, he must have been beaten by his teacher when he was young because his teacher was strict."   

**Q:**  I heard that it was definite that Tsarong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> said at the meeting, "When we, the assembly, interrogated Reting, we didn't even flick at him with our fingers, right? But, there was a bruise on his butt. Probably, the protective deity beat him up? Who knows!" Anyway, he [Tsarong] was very smart.   

**A:**  I heard that Reting probably told them [the prison guards] to deliver a letter to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, but they didn't deliver it to him and instead gave it to the assembly or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a>. Later, in 1949, Kapshöba had a misfortune and when the drungtsi gathered together and planned to make the verdict, all of them were saying what shall we do? At that time, Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> probably was there and said, "You, one of the younger ones, say something. What is your opinion" He meant Ngabö. Then Ngabö said, "Yes, we have to make the verdict and we were told about Reting sending a letter to Kapshöba from the prison. So it seemed that we should make the verdict according to this. Reting was a prisoner and there were the prison guards. To write a letter, in the beginning, he would need paper a pen and an ink. In the prison he won't have these conditions. So there should be a person who brought those things to him. Today, we have this duty. So if you say that we should investigate thoroughly who was involved in those matters, I will agree to this. Otherwise, if it is like some people have to be questioned and some people don't need to, then I am going to resign from the drungtsi making this verdict. I can't make this verdict." Then all of them got shrunk [Tib. འཁུམས] and they couldn't say that we should investigate whoever is responsible and they just said what would be better? If we really have to inquire about this, strange things might come out." And it was left like this.   

**Q:**  Finally, what verdict did they issue for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>?   

**A:**  Probably there wasn't any verdict for him. Probably, he was just called to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> or somewhere and they might have given an order that he would be sent to Nedong [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང]. When they brought down <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> he requested them to allow him to pray at the front of the Kelsang Phodrang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཕོ་བྲང] palace in Norbulinga. Probably, there wasn't any verdict. At that time, it was said that Kapshöba's son, the Senampa Kapshö Sey [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་སྲས], should be expelled and so on.   

