# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.12 : Tape 12  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses Künphel, Reting, the Guomindang affair, Gendün Chömpel and also the Khyungram incident.   

---  
### Tape 12  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_12/H_0205_12.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  At first, he [Künphel] was one of the young boys recruited as a tax to be trained to copy government documents (Tib. ཨིཏྲུག [ཨེ་ཕྲུག]). Probably, he was about 17-18 years old then.   

**Q:**  Do you mean when he became an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་ཕུག] Young boys conscripted by the Tibetan government as a corvée tax to become government scribes.">itrug</a>?   

**A:**  No, when he became the favorite of the Dalai Lama (Tib. ཇེནསེལ [སྤྱན་བསལ]). Probably, he was one of the smarter ones among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་ཕུག] Young boys conscripted by the Tibetan government as a corvée tax to become government scribes.">itrug</a> and he became a favorite.   

**Q:**  How did he become a favorite? He didn't have any title or promotion, right?   

**A:**  They didn't need to hold kind of ceremony for getting appointed to this position like having an audience with the Dalai Lama [Tib. སརྗེལ].   

**Q:**  They became favorites gradually when they were coming into the Dalai Lama's room, right?   

**A:**  If someone was appointed to a position, they had to do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གསར་མཇལ] 1. The required ceremony that was done when an official got a promotion. It involved going for an audience with the Dalai Lama or Regent. 2. The ceremony when a person first entered Tibetan government service.">sarjel</a>, but for the favorites, the people were just saying, "Probably, he is a favorite because he is regarded highly" [by the Dalai Lama]. Like this, probably they would become favorites.   

**Q:**  How were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་ཕུག] Young boys conscripted by the Tibetan government as a corvée tax to become government scribes.">itrug</a> recruited? Did they have a household source/basis [land] from which they were recruited [as a tax]?   

**A:**  Probably. They were trained to write scriptures.   

**Q:**  What was the source of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་ཕུག] Young boys conscripted by the Tibetan government as a corvée tax to become government scribes.">itrug</a>? Were they recruited as a tax (Tib. མིཆག [མི་འཕྱགས])?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea about that.   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་པ] Miser conscripted as a corvée tax to work for the Tibetan government as a scribe copying documents.">epa</a> [the scribes] have salaries or did they have salary estates [Tib. ཐབ་རྟེན]?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  How did they become <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་པ] Miser conscripted as a corvée tax to work for the Tibetan government as a scribe copying documents.">epa</a>?   

**A:**  Probably, it was similar to our soldiers.   

**Q:**  How did they recruit soldiers?   

**A:**  They were recruited as a tax.   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་པ] Miser conscripted as a corvée tax to work for the Tibetan government as a scribe copying documents.">epa</a> also come in the same way?   

**A:**  Probably it was something like that. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་པ] Miser conscripted as a corvée tax to work for the Tibetan government as a scribe copying documents.">epa</a> were recruited mainly from Nyemo [Tib. སྙེ་མོ].  

**Q:**  How old was he [Künphel] when he first came to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Probably he was 12-13 years old. I heard that they were writing the scriptures by hand because there wasn't a xylographic woodblock plate. The main leader of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་པ] Miser conscripted as a corvée tax to work for the Tibetan government as a scribe copying documents.">epa</a> was called the epa yöndag [Tib. ཨེ་པ་ཡོན་བདག].   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨེ་པ] Miser conscripted as a corvée tax to work for the Tibetan government as a scribe copying documents.">epa</a> were there in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>?   

**A:**  I am not sure about that.   

**Q:**  When they became favorites, did that mean they lived in the same quarters that the Dalai Lama lived or did they live separately?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this in detail, but probably they were working like servants. Like we used to call up [as corvée] 5-6-10-15 servants in the past and then we would keep the better ones as our personal servants and the leave the ones who looked not that smart in the kitchen or somewhere in the stable. Probably it was something like that. When the Dalai Lama thought that there would be some hope, they would become favorites (Jensel). When we summoned the young servants, first they would become like servants of the servants and we would have them do some room cleaning and then gradually they would become the main personal attendant. Then they will get promoted to the chandzö. Probably, it was something like that.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and the stewards would check whether the new servants would be good or not and chose from among them. Probably in the Potala, the Dalai Lama didn't have anything like a chandzö and steward, so would the Dalai Lama himself check them and keep them or what?   

**A:**  Probably, the Dalai Lama himself checked them and chose them when he went to the place where they were copying the scriptures.   

**Q:**  After he became a favorite, what kind of the powerful work did he do? There were many favorites such as Nangang [Tib. གནམ་གང ]; And there was another favorite. What was his name?   

**A:**  He was Tashi Thöndrub [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དོན་གྲུབ].   

**Q:**  Among them, the highest favorite [Tib. སྤྱན་ལ་འཇུག་ཤོས] and the who served the Dalai Lama most effectively [Tib. ཞབས་ཕྱི་སྒྲུབ་ཤོས] was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a>, right?   

**A:**  There was also Tsarong, who was then called Nangang.   

**Q:**  Were the favorites allowed to enter the Dalai Lama's room whenever they wanted to? Or did they have to seek permission?   

**A:**  Probably they were not allowed.   

**Q:**  Who else other than the favorites were allowed to enter his room?   

**A:**  Probably only the tea servers were allowed to enter. I have never been there.   

**Q:**  Usually who would serve the tea? Wouldn't the favorites serve his tea?   

**A:**  No. Probably the persons from the Dalai Lama's kitchen would come to serve the tea. The tea was made in the kitchen. I am not sure who would serve his tea.   

**Q:**  When the Drönyerchemmo, the Jigyab Khembo and the kalön who were on duty in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> [Tib. བཀའ་བོན་བཞུགས་བྱ] had to go to the Dalai Lama's room, did they have to seek permission?   

**A:**  Probably it was okay for the Drönyerchemmo to enter his room. I saw him just entering the Dalai Lama's room and he didn't need to seek permission. Although we don't know about the Dalai Lama's regular room, but during ceremonies, the officials below the Third Rank lay officials, Dzathei [Tib. ཛ་ཐའི] were sitting in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a> of the Dalai Lama. Some of the monk officials like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Dzasa were sitting outside with us. Inside the hall where the Dalai Lama was seated, there were the officials above the fourth rank (khenjung).   

**Q:**  Wasn't <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> a monk officials?   

**A:**  No, he was a lay official.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and Reting Dzasa belonged to the lay officials.   

**Q:**  Even though they were monks, they belonged to the lay official sector, right?   

**A:**  Who knows if they were monks or not. [means celibate]   

**Q:**  Yes, you are right. Who knows whether they were monks or not, but they were supposed to be monks and wore monk's robes. However, they belonged to the lay official sector, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  That is strange.   

**A:**  That's how it was.   

**Q:**  What about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Dzasa?   

**A:**  He would go inside.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  It was because in the beginning he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and not a dzasa. All the khenjung were inside. The [Fourth Rank] lay official who was the Head of the Palanquin Carriers [Tib. ཕེབས་བྱམས་འགོ་པ] and the lay official Treasurer of the Treasury in the Potala (tseja) and the shape were inside the hall. All of the other lay officials were outside in the gaa.   

**Q:**  Later, you met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> and you had a lot of conversations with him so what did he say about his feeling when the Dalai Lama was sick and when he died and when the trouble was about to start? Was he angry and afraid that he might become a victim?   

**A:**  He didn't say anything about his feelings and I didn't ask him what did he thought. Otherwise, the two of us were like this [smoking opium] and he said interesting things [Tib. སྐད་ཆ་སྙན་པོ] and I liked him very much when he talked like this and we were just chatting.   

**Q:**  He didn't tell you anything about his feelings, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Didn't he tell you anything about feeling afraid when he was called to the assembly?   

**A:**  When he was called to the Assembly meeting, probably he was not afraid. He said, "They [Assembly] didn't have anything to say. They just told me that I didn't report to the Kashag. For this crime I was sent [exiled] to Tselagang [Tib. རྩེ་ལ་སྒང]"   

**Q:**  I heard that actually he didn't report the Kashag.   

**A:**  Probably he didn't report.   

**Q:**  If he didn't report to the Kashag, how did the Kashag call the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> oracle [Tib. གནས་ཆུང] and prepare those things like the Phagtö Prayer [Tib. འཕགས་སྟོད] prayer?   

**A:**  At that time, I was young, so I didn't know what happened.   

**Q:**  Normally was the jigyab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] Abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khembo</a> responsible to report to the Kashag that the Dalai Lama was sick or was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> responsible to report it?   

**A:**  According to the system, I think probably the two of them had to do it together and the personal attendant, Kujar [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར], would have to report that he couldn't bear the responsibility.   

**Q:**  Who was the jigyab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] Abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khembo</a> then?   

**A:**  Probably the jigyab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་པོ] Abbot of a monastery or monastic college.">khembo</a> was from Göshampa [Tib. རྒོད་གཤམ་པ].   

**Q:**  What were the accomplishments of Kujar?   

**A:**  One of his accomplishments was that he set up the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**Q:**  Did Kujar set up this office? I mean it must have been set up by the Dalai Lama, but was he the person in charge of that?   

**A:**  Kujar was in charge of the construction of the office and my father also was the person in charge of the construction [Tib. ཨར་པོའི་དོ་དམ].   

**Q:**  Even when there was a person in charge from the government, Kujar was going there and acting as the person in charge and giving the orders and all people have to yield to him, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Supposing the government said that the house should be build square but if Kujar said that it should be build elongated, they would have to build it elongated, right?   

**A:**  I am not sure what would happen if he made changes to the blueprint because they had already made the blueprint.   

**Q:**  I mean the scope of Kujar's power was like changing the square shape into an elongated one, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There were so many old government officials. Leaving aside those officials, how did people know that he was the one in charge and why were they afraid of him and why did they listen to the order of a young man in his twenties? Did the Dalai Lama say that the people should listen to his orders? Why did people regard <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> so highly although there were many other favorites?   

**A:**  Probably it depended on how high the Dalai Lama regarded them [Tib. གཟིགས་པ་ཆེ་ཆུང]. There were also other favorites called Namdrol [Tib. རྣམ་གྲོལ], Kalden [Tib. སྐལ་ལྡན], Dechen Yingsel [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན་དབྱིངས་གསལ] and Tashi Thöndrubla and some others. When he [Künphel] worked energetically [Tib. ཧུར་པོ] close to him, probably, the Dalai Lama liked him and the other favorites were unable to do that. When he became the favorite, even if he was in his twenties, people would regard him highly.   

**Q:**  Kujar didn't have any title from the government, right?   

**A:**  Later I heard that he was appointed as a Ta lama [Tib. ཏ་བླ་མ].   

**Q:**  Did he hold the ceremony for getting appointed including an audience with the Dalai Lama, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གསར་མཇལ] 1. The required ceremony that was done when an official got a promotion. It involved going for an audience with the Dalai Lama or Regent. 2. The ceremony when a person first entered Tibetan government service.">sarjel</a> ritual?   

**A:**  When he was appointed as a Ta lama, he would have had to do the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གསར་མཇལ] 1. The required ceremony that was done when an official got a promotion. It involved going for an audience with the Dalai Lama or Regent. 2. The ceremony when a person first entered Tibetan government service.">sarjel</a> and go to hold the position. Probably he was a monk official Ta lama.   

**Q:**  When he came to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office, was he the head of the office or he did he just go and work there? For example, normally Kujar also would go to the Kashag, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Similarly, did he go to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office and take responsibility and work there? Or did the officials appointed to the office have the main responsibility?   

**A:**  The heads [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ] of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office were Tsarong and those people. They were called Dzata Tsisum [Tib. ཛ་ཏ་རྩིས་གསུམ]: <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཏ་བླ་མ] 1. The title of the senior-most Trunyichemmo in the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office. 2. A high title for monk officials.">ta lama</a> and tsipön. I heard from my late father that Tsarong told him it would be good to be the person in charge, but he refused.   

**Q:**  Last time we talked about the Dalai Lama giving the report to the favorite [Kujar] in which it said <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had instigated [Tib. zhu log gryab] [against Kujar]. How did Lungshar know that the Dalai Lama gave the report to Kujar?   

**A:**  I am not sure how he knew that. Anyway, he certainly knew that the report was in Kujar's hands.   

**Q:**  Did you talk about that with Kujar?   

**A:**  Yes, I had heard that Kujar said, "If this report had not been burned, they couldn't have done anything to me. But because the report was burned, it became very convenient for them." I told Kujar that I heard about this, but he didn't give me any answer. So it seemed that it was true.   

**Q:**  According to your opinion, why did they burn it?   

**A:**  After the Dalai Lama's death, I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> went to Kujar and said, "It was too bad that the Dalai Lama passed away. I feel very sad about this. You are the favorite of the Dalai Lama and the Dalai Lama also regarded me quite highly. So the two of us should have solidarity. If we become separate, it is possible that both of us will have a hard time. Therefore, you should think about having solidarity and I will have solidarity with you." After that Lungshar visited him a few times and he [Kujar] might have burned the report.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> tell him to burn the report?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether he told Kujar to burn it. Even if he didn't tell him openly to burn it, he might have thought it would be better to burn it. I am not sure about this. Anyway, the report was probably burned. When I told him, "I heard from outside about this. Was it true?" He didn't give any answer.   

**Q:**  Why would <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> feel afraid if this report was still there?   

**A:**  If this report was shown to many people they would know that it was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s handwriting and they would have disliked Lungshar thinking that he had made the report. Therefore he used this method to get the report burned. Maybe he told Kujar to burn it or he might have threatened him saying people will come to search for it. I don't know for sure.   

**Q:**  How was Prime Minister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> related to the Dalai Lama? How was he appointed as the Prime Minister?   

**A:**  Probably we should say that the Dalai Lama was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a>'s paternal uncle. Probably, they were not brothers.   

**Q:**  How was he appointed as the Prime Minister?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama's father, the Gyeyab, had the title of Gung. After he passed away, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> was appointed as the Gung. Probably, the title called Gung didn't have any power and Langdün was also called Prime Minister Gung and there was also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Gung.   

**Q:**  How did he become the Prime Minister?   

**A:**  Later the Dalai Lama appointed him.   

**Q:**  At that time was he alone or did he have a partner?   

**A:**  Probably he was alone.   

**Q:**  Why did he appoint him as the Prime Minister even though he was so young? Was it because he thought that he would be trustworthy since he was related to him?   

**A:**  Probably it was like this. Otherwise, he was not that capable and he would also talk kind of recklessly though I was not acquainted with him. At that time I was a child, but I did notice that.   

**Q:**  It seems you are right. It is really strange. After the Dalai Lama passed away for the benefit of others [Tib. དགོངས་པ་གཞན་དོན་དུ་གཤེགས], when they said that the Prime Minister needed an assistant, some people said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> would be good and some people said that we need a lama. There wasn't a single person saying, "Since we have the Prime Minister, we don't need a partner." Was there anybody saying that?   

**A:**  Probably not. He didn't seem like a smart person.   

**Q:**  All people regarded him as an incapable person, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Among the lords [Tib. ངདག] who were close to him, they nicknamed him "castrated male donkey" [Tib. བོང་བུ་ཕོ་ཆེན] because he didn't have children. Like this, he [Künphel] became the favorite and became very famous.   

**Q:**  Before that he built the Jensel Palace [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་ཕོ་བྲང], right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably he also built the walls in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and built some houses in the Jensel Palace. He also drew a wall painting in the Künsang [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང] Palace where all the corners of the walls of Norbulinga could be numerated.   

**Q:**  Did he draw it himself?   

**A:**  Probably he didn't know drawing, but he gave the order to the painters to do that.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the wall painting was in the Jensel Palace?   

**A:**  No. It was drawn in the Künsang Palace which was known as the New Palace [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསར་པ]. It was built near the Jokhang. The wall painting was in the meeting hall [Tib. ཚོམ་ཆེན] of that palace. Now it is destroyed. Before the wall painting was burned, Kujar could explain about the wall paintings on the walls in Norbulinga. The most powerful position he had was the Chief [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་པ] or the Director [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ] of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office. I saw him chauffeured in cars back and forth when he was going to Trapchi. At that time, my late father was in charge of the construction of Trapchi and one day I went to Trapchi to watch the inauguration [Tib. ཞལ་དྲོ]. My father had his work hostel in the Trapchi Monastery. My late mother was also there. The regiment performed the drill and Kujar was chauffeured in a car. At that time I was probably 8 years old. Then the Dalai Lama passed away. I heard that the main thing was that he had stored a lot of gold in the Trapchi Office. Probably, there were cabinets which reached the ceiling for keeping the gold. I heard that all of the gold was in the form of gold bricks.   

**Q:**  Where did he store them?   

**A:**  He stored them in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office. Later the office called the "gold coin" [Tib. གསེར་ཏྲམ] [office] and was merged into the Trapchi Office.   

**Q:**  Was that the office where the Tsarong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> worked?   

**A:**  Yes, my late father told me that there were very huge trunks in which the gold was kept. After 1 month, when my father went there, he saw that the sweepers of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office were sleeping in the trunks where they used to keep gold.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Probably, the gold was taken out.   

**Q:**  Who took it?   

**A:**  Probably Reting Labrang took a little bit and there was also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> and those people took away the gold saying that they were borrowing them. They signed a pledge [to repay] [Tib. གན་རྒྱ]. Anyway, the gold was taken out. I heard there were Chinese silver bricks and a lot of gold. I am saying a lot in accordance with our conditions. Compared to other [countries], it might not be a big amount. There were many people taking Chinese silver bricks as loans. At that time, I was a child.   

**Q:**  Did the government give out loans of the Chinese silver bricks?   

**A:**  Yes. I heard that the government was giving loans of Chinese silver bricks and that so and so took 20-30 of the silver bricks. Kujar also marked the I.D. numbers on the rifles and their bolts.   

**Q:**  The I.D. number was branded on them in the factory, right?   

**A:**  No. It was Tibetan numbers that were marked on the rifles and their bolts. If the numbers of the rifles and bolts didn't match, people wouldn't accept them when they were handed over. This was done because he thought that people might use fake bolts on the rifles.   

**Q:**  Was there any other work in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office for Kujar?   

**A:**  Probably he was the head of the office. At that time, people almost regarded dealing with [Tib. ཐུག] Kujar the same as dealing with the Dalai Lama and they were regarding Kujar's orders as the Dalai Lama's orders.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama himself was not going out, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably he came on the first day when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office was started.   

**Q:**  No, I mean the Dalai Lama would not give the orders, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So Kujar was the same as Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས], the General Secretary of the Private Office of the Dalai Lama at the present time, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, Kujar probably didn't need to say that it was an order from the Dalai Lama. All the people were sure that it was his order. There were many staff officials in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Office. Kujar was also kind of fast in doing work. At that time, I heard that the staff were saying, "Our left ear never get the sunshine." When people asked them what are you talking about? They said, "When we go to work in the morning from Lhasa, the left ear was on this side where there is no sunshine. When we come back, the left ear would be on the other side where there is no sunshine also in the evening. If the staff were working, then there would be no problem otherwise when Kujar would come he would make them stand up and tell them to get him this and that and they had to listen to him. At that time, Tempa Jamyang [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] who later became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama was among the staff at Trapchi. Usually, they had to put 25 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> in each leather pouch, but he was kind of resisting doing the required work [Tib. ཁྲེབ་ཏོ] and was just counting the money in the same leather pouch every day just to show that he is doing something [to avoid Kujar making him get something for him] Kujar also made the wooden frames in the Military Headquarters [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ལས་ཁུངས] that held 10 rifles in each frame. And he marked the rifles and the bolts. Otherwise, they had been keeping the guns disorderly. After that, he was banished to Kongpo and at the same time, Janglojen Gung [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་གུང] was also banished to Tselagang [Tib. རྩེ་ལ་སྒང] Dzong.   

**Q:**  Do you have any other things to tell me about other events that occurred while he was in Kongpo?   

**A:**  No. Then the two of them ran away from Mön to Bhutan.   

**Q:**  He wouldn't come to Bhutan from Mön. He had to go through Assam. They went from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> to Bhutan crossing the mountain pass.   

**A:**  Yes, then they arrived at Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  He sent a letter about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  To whom did he send the letter?   

**A:**  Probably, it was sent to the lama called Kongpo Gyalwang Rimpoche [Tib. ཀོང་པོ་རྒྱལ་དབང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] who was then one of the lamas who was a Tsenshab.   

**Q:**  So this was an internal letter, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the letter it was written, "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s son Lhalu Sey convinced the [authorities] by saying Shelkar Depön was his false father. We [just] appealed for the permission to go back to our homeland [Lhasa], but a few main authorities in charge acted bias so for the time being I had no choice but to secretly go to the capital of the large country England to watch the spectacle and at the same time to seek support for the truth regarding the crime that I was accused of." [Tib. ལྷ་སྲས་ལུང་ཕྲུག་ཕ་རྒན་ཤེལ་མདར་བརྫུས་པས་རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་གྱི་གོ་ཕུད། བདག་ཚོ་རང་ཡུལ་རྐྱང་པར་ལོག་འཐུས་ཞུས་པར་མཛད་གཙོ་བླ་དཔོན་རེ་ཟུང་བདེ་སྡུག་སྒང་གཤོངས་མི་སྙོམས་པའི་ཉེར་ལེན་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས། རེ་ཞིག་ཡངས་པའི་དབྱིན་ལན་རྒྱལ་སའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དུ་ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ་བ་དང། ནག་ཉེས་བདེན་རྒྱབ་ཞུ་བ་ཆབས་ཅིག་ཏོ་གསང་སྐྱོད་མེ་བྱ་བྱུང་སོང] After that, Tselagang Dzong searched for them and when they found that they had left, Gyalwang Rimpoche probably didn't dare to bear the responsibility of staying quiet so he reported [to the government] that he had received such a letter. Now Gyalwang Rimpoche may have died.   

**Q:**  Yes, he has died.   

**A:**  After that, Janglojen and Kujar stayed together. Reting Labrang requested Kujar to work for them and when we came to India for a pilgrimage in 1941, he was in Reting Labrang. Uncle Janglojen was staying in a house above the Palace (Tib. ཕོདྲང [ཕོ་བྲང]) [this must be the Bhutanese Tragshö [Tib. དྲག་ཤོས] Palace]. This house probably belonged to the Palace. He said that he was teaching Tibetan writing to their children [of Dragshö].   

**Q:**  At that time was he living poorly?   

**A:**  Yes, he was very poor.   

**Q:**  Were both of them poor?   

**A:**  I didn't go to visit Kujar.   

**Q:**  Did the people coming from Tibet have to go to give him some things and money for his expenses?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably he was in that kind of a condition. At that time, my late father told me that we are going for a pilgrimage in India so how about asking Janglojen to be our interpreter? If he doesn't have any work, probably he won't refuse it. My father sent my brother Tsögo and me to Janglojen. My brother told Janglojen about this. Janglojen said, "I have to teach writing to the children here. Probably I won't have the time to go with you." Then Tsögo told my father about this and he send a signal with his eyes to my father [to tell Janglojen by himself]. Then my father told Janglojen, "This time, we are going for a pilgrimage so it won't be alright if we don't have an interpreter. So please you, brother, help us by being the interpreter." Then Janglojen said, Oh! Of course I will do that for you because this is the only time you requested anything of me. So it won't be okay if I refused it." Then he came with us on the pilgrimage. At that time we stayed in India for about 6-7 months and Janglojen stayed with us. At that time, my late uncle [Janglojen] was smoking opium. Probably, he got that from Abo Raga. When I asked him how he got this habit, he told me, "At that time I didn't know anybody other than Abo Raga. When I went to him I smoked opium one after another and got addicted so I have to smoke it." At that time, Kujar was not addicted to opium, but when he would come to the places where they smoked opium and he was also smoking 1-2 times. He was staying in Reting Labrang and he also went to import copper when Reting Labrang built his summer cottage [Tib. སྤྲོ་ཁང]. The cottage had a gilded copper roof, so they need copper for that. This was at the time of 2nd World War, so they couldn't buy the copper right away and had to take some methods and try to get some backing from somebody. When we arrived in India, it was the time when they had just imported the copper.   

**Q:**  At that time, you didn't have any talk with Kujar regarding his punishment and his misfortune, right?   

**A:**  I just meet him so we didn't have any talk about that. In that year I met him in India and at that time both Janglojen and Kujar had to come to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] frequently. At that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> and Reting were the biggest wool traders.   

**Q:**  Weren't there the three of them; Reting, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> [Tib. རྭ་སྤོམ་ས་གསུམ]?   

**A:**  Probably not. The most powerful ones were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> and Reting. The next was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> [Tib. ས་འདུ] who was also quite powerful. Probably, one or two years after that, Gendün Chömpel [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] arrived in Kalimpong. He was in India before that. Probably, at that time they were setting up an association (Tib. ཚོགཔ [ཚོགས་པ]) and the founder was probably Abo Raga. Since Gendün Chömpel was a kind of scholar, probably he became their advisor. At that time, Abo Raga was talking a lot about Sun Yatsen and had a kind of faith in him as if he were a Buddha. He also gave us some books on Sun Yatsen's life in which it was written how he got the power of the republic [Tib. མིསེར་རྒྱལ་ཁབ] and how he held the power and the way of distributing things to the public and the work he did. But I didn't know whether they had a real association.   

**Q:**  Did they have a name for that association?   

**A:**  At that time I didn't know anything about that. We didn't know that they were setting up the association, but they were telling us a lot of about Sun Yatsen and the republic. Later on, probably they set up an association and the members had to sign their names indicating that they joined the association. Probably there were about 100 people in it. After that, I heard that it was decided that Gendün Chömpel should go to Tibet through Bhutan. At that time he had prepared a good map about how the British annexed Bhutan in the past and it was to be sent to Abo Raga. At that time, Abo Raga asked my father to sell about 10-15 loads of brocade for him. Probably they might have talked about that and they were asking Gendün Chömpel how to do that. At that time, normally, they couldn't send letters to Abo Raga directly. They had to send it through somebody else. However, Gendün Chömpel sent his letter directly [to Raga] and Richardson opened the letter in Gyantse and discovered the map of the Bhutan area. He sent that to the Sikkim Political Officer [Tib. འབྲས་སྤྱི་བློན་ཆེན] and told him that they are doing this. Before that, they [British] were suspicious of Abo Raga and were inquiring about what work he was doing and what they were saying, "They didn't have any work so what are they doing in India?" So at that time, they had additional suspicion and when they inquired, they learned that Abo Raga had set up an association. At that time, the late Gendün Chömpel might have written some letters to Abo Raga and he also wrote some letters to him. So they [British] probably were opening the letters. I heard that it was written in the letters, "Who is the most powerful person in Tibet? Who is holding the power? How many soldiers does the government have and how are their weapons and what kind of organization do they have?" When the British found these letters, they got suspicious and they told the Kashag, "These people are doing this kind of work so it would be easy if you put out the fire when it is small. When the fire became big, you can't put it out." This was kind of the internal conversation, right? Then they knew that Abo Raga did that with Gendün Chömpel.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  Probably, that was in 1943-44.   

**Q:**  It was before the 2nd World War, right?   

**A:**  It was during or in the latter part of the 2nd World War. Then Gendün Chömpel was arrested and they searched the house of Kujar, Janglojen and Abo Raga. Before they searched their houses, the Consulate of the Guomindang in Kolcatta sent a letter to Abo Raga saying, "The day after tomorrow your house will be searched." But I don't know how frightened he was because he just kept the letter in his pocket and it was discovered. He was kind of scared and frightened and didn't take out the letter from his pocket and they [the British] got the letter. They could have burned the agreement [Tib. གན་རྒྱ] in which there were the signatures of about 100 people. They searched the house of Kujar and Janglojen. Since all of them were staying in one place, they were able to send messages, so they burned the agreement.   

**A:**  They didn't discover other things because they burned them, but they told Abo Raga, "You are not allowed to stay in India any more than three days."   

**Q:**  Did they say that they are not allowed to stay in any Indian territories?   

**A:**  Yes, he had to leave after 3 days. They gave Kujar one week to leave and they didn't do any thing to Janglojen because the [Bhutan Dragshö] royal family was helping him a lot. Probably Ranisab did something and it was okay. So he didn't have to leave. Abo Raga and Kujar had to go to Nanjing where the Guomindang was. At that time, I heard that Kujar said, "I went to buy copper for Reting Labrang and I paid 13,000 Rs of my own for that. So now I am leaving, so please give me the money back." He gave the receipt to Reting Labrang's Simpön [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན], but he didn't give the money to Kujar. When Kujar insisted on that, the two of them had a little quarrel about this money and Simpön said, "It is the like the proverb, "How did you make the butter, if you don't have a cow." [Tib. ཁྱོད་ལ་བ་མོ་མེད་པར་མར་སྐྲོག་གང་ནས་བྱུང]. Since you don't have money, from where did you get this 13,000 Rs. Actually, this money was Reting Labrang's money." Later, I saw the receipt for the 13,000 Rs. Then Kujar used the term "gey" for scolding people and said, "Okay gey! you didn't pay me the money when I am in a desperate situation. So if I can't [ruin] Reting Labrang so that people would say that Reting Labrang used to be located in this place, don't call me Thubden <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> [his name]." And then he left and Kujar had to leave India. When Kujar and Abo Raga arrived in Nanjing, by that time Reting was trying to get his regency back and said that if they [Guomindang] would send soldiers and he got the regency back, he will hand over the territories beyond Chamdo [to the Guomindang]. Then Kujar learned about that and he told the Tibetan representatives, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a>. Kujar said, "Reting is doing this. Aren't you going to report this to the government? The Khendrönlosum asked him, "Is it true?" he said, "Yes, this is true." When they investigated about this, they learned it was true. Then they sent a telegram which was allowed to be read only by the officials above the Kashag. They sent the telegram book [Tib. ཏར་དེབ] along with the telegram and told the Kashag to translate the telegram because they had never seen that kind of letter [with that heading]. If the secret leaked out, the translator couldn't bear the responsibility. So the shape themselves translated the telegram. In that telegram it was written that, "If they send soldiers and he gets back the regency, he will hand over the territory beyond Chamdo." It had been 2-3 days since the bomb exploded at the Jigyab Khembo's house. However, before they received the telegram, they didn't inquire much about the bomb. They were just saying it is strange and who did that. After they received the telegram, I heard that Surkhang and Lhalu left for Reting at midnight and on the way, they took 100 soldiers from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment Headquarters. I heard that they reached Reting at sunrise. When the two shape arrived, they [those at Reting] were surprised. The shape prostrated to Reting and told Reting, "We have been sent to bring you [to Lhasa]." Reting told them, "It is strange. It has been a few years since I resigned from the regency. Why did they call me. Please tell me the truth" The shape said, "We don't know the reason. Probably, it is to perform a ritual for good fortune [Tib. སྐུ་ཕྱྭའི་ཞབས་བརྟན]" Right after that, the soldiers arrived there and Rupön Kelsang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང] told Reting, "Please come, and he took and held Reting's hand and brought him."   

**Q:**  Did he hold Reting's hand?   

**A:**  Yes he did, but he didn't pull him down in a rude manner. Then Reting didn't have anything to say except saying, "Yes, yes". Later, they found that Reting had a loaded pistol under his cushion ready to shoot. Then probably they served <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> dough to the shape. When they were going to saddle Reting's horse which was called the phoenix (Tib. གྱཇལ [རྒྱ་བྱ་ལགས]) or the peacock (Tib. མཡལ [རྨ་བྱ་ལགས]), Surkhang said, "The mule is much better than the horse." Probably, he thought that Reting might run away if he was riding the horse.   

**Q:**  After that, how did Kujar stay in China?   

**A:**  Then Reting Labrang was finished. At that time it was in 1947. In 1948-49, Kujar submitted a petition seeking permission to come back to Tibet.   

**Q:**  This was just before the Chinese arrival, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you went to China, Kujar had already come back, right?   

**A:**  Do you mean in 1951?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  It was 1-2 years after he had come back.   

**Q:**  When Gendün Chömpel got into trouble, what were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and people thinking about that? Did they think that he was good or bad?   

**A:**  At that time, all the people were confused. It was said that he used fake hundred <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> notes so he was arrested. When the Mipön inquired about this, they found this was just a rumor [Tib. སྐད་ཆ་འཁྱར་པོ]. There wasn't anybody who said that he said that and there wasn't any proof. But at that time the people who knew him thought that Gendün Chömpel would never make fake money and they were wondering why he was arrested. It made them feel uneasy. People knew that he was not a person who would make fake money and do illegal things, but they didn't know the point behind the matter. At the time the Mipön arrested Gendün Chömpel, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> Ragra Lama [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང་རག་ར་བླ་མ] and my brother Horkhang went to the Mipön and inquired about this. He said to them, "The Kashag told me to arrest him." Actually, they didn't know the reason for arresting him.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Tashi Bera the Mipön?   

**A:**  It was Shagjang [Tib. ཤག་བྱང], who has died.   

**Q:**  At that time Gendün Chömpel was showing a kind of revolutionary path. Supposing the government officials were made to vote for it, do you think Gendün Chömpel would win the vote?   

**A:**  He wouldn't win the vote because at that time they couldn't do publicity well. There were just several smarter people who would think he might be good. The majority were thinking the ancient traditions were great. If you reform them, things will become worse. They probably wouldn't have the feeling that there would be an advantage [if you do reforms]. Except for a few people like my late brother Tsögo, Janglojen, the late Horkhang, Ngabö, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> Sey [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང་སྲས], the majority were thinking that what they did in the early times was good. They couldn't even taste the talk about that [reforms]. Actually, people should talk about that [reforms] for many days continuously, but they didn't dare to say that and there were just a few people who were talking about that.   

**Q:**  Usually, when the government officials would sit down together at parties and so on, wouldn't they talk about doing kind of revolution?   

**A:**  When 2-3 very close friends would get together, they would have that kind of talk. When there were 5-6 people, they would have to keep quite.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> would talk about that?   

**A:**  Probably, there were 40-50 of them.   

**Q:**  Basically, there were 180 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and 180 lay officials, right?   

**A:**  This was the number in the ancient time. There were much more than this.   

**Q:**  How many were there?   

**A:**  Probably, there were 400-500 lay officials and 600 tsidrung.   

**Q:**  Altogether, there were over 1,000, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What kind of things did people want to change at that time?   

**A:**  At that time, it was rare to find people talking about complete revolution [Tib. གསར་བརྗེ] because the people who talked about that didn't have much knowledge. Furthermore, they didn't have the experience. At that time, people just had some feeling that it was good, but nobody could confirm [Tib. ཏན་ཏན་ཏིག་ཏིག] and talk about it [change]. There were just written in books which people would read.   

**Q:**  What kind of books were there?   

**A:**  There was a book from the Guomindang called, "The Three Principles of the People [Tib. མི་སེར་དོན་གསུམ་རིང་ལུགས] [Nationalism, Democracy and People's livelihood] put forward by Dr Sun Yatsen which was translated into Tibetan and there was also a version translated by Abo Raga.   

**Q:**  Did the Guomindang's book and Abo Raga's version have the same meaning?   

**A:**  Yes, only some explanations were slightly different.   

**Q:**  There weren't any other books to read, right?   

**A:**  Yes. People didn't know anything about there being different democracies and what democracy was and the differences between societies. Even the people who knew about this, also didn't know how to explain it.   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> say that the army was not good so we should improve it and we should set up English Schools and the monasteries are blocking these. Did people think in that way?   

**A:**  Yes. There were a few people talking about this. For example, probably in 1948-49, an English school was set up in Drungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] and many children were recruited. Later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ] The abbreviation used for the three great monastic seats around Lhasa: Sera, Drepung and Ganden Monasteries.">Sendregasum</a> (monasteries) had an opinion about this and they dismantled the school. Before that, a school had also been set up in Gyantse. Among the students who went there were Surkhang Depön, Phala Phogpön, Derge Sey and Gusho Yeshe [Tib. སྐུ་གཞོགས་ཡེ་ཤེས] from Tashilhunpo. Now probably none of them are still alive. Maybe Phala and Derge Sey are there. I heard that it was the same and that this school was also dismantled because the great monasteries told the government that it would not be okay if you don't dismantle it. This probably was in 1928-29.   

**Q:**  How did they dismantle it? Was that during the 13th Dalai Lama ['s time], right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably there were many other students.   

**Q:**  After that, didn't anybody say that we have to set up a school again?   

**A:**  In 1947-48, they set up a school in Lhasa, this was also dismantled.   

**Q:**  At that time, in 1948, did the abbots of the three great monasteries go to the Kashag?   

**A:**  The abbots were in the assembly.   

**Q:**  The government might have signed a contract for a period of time with the English teacher, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the government had to stop the contract. How did they do that?   

**A:**  Actually, it [the school] didn't do any harm against religion, but they were just using this as a pretext that it was harmful for religion. So even though they [government] understood that [it was not harmful], they pretended that they didn't understand it and implied that it is harmful for religion and said that it was not good.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for that?   

**A:**  At that time, all the people regarded the English as Christians and regarded all the Tibetans as Buddhists. And they were doing the things that were Buddhist like praying for the tea offering [Tib. ཇ་མཆོད] saying, "We offer this to the saviors, the Buddha, the dharma and the Sanga." [Tib. སྐྱབས་གནས་དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་ལ་མཆོད་པ་འབུལ]. Actually, there were also followers of the Bon religion among the Tibetans, but they were a small number, so they didn't pay them much attention. At that time, the Christian Missions were also publicizing Christianity and they were paying salary to the people who said they will become Christians.   

**Q:**  They were not doing that in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But the Tibetan people were hearing these things because it had been many years since the British lived in India and they were doing that there. So the people were implying that the British might poison [Buddhism]. Actually, it depends on oneself whether one would get poisoned or not. The people were following others like flags waved by wind. Anyway, the abbots were implying that the [English school] was harming the ideology of the children though they didn't have any [proof] to say that it was deteriorating. So the government had to dismantle the school. At the time, the 13th Dalai Lama had the idea of setting up the school and recruiting as many students as they could. Probably, there were about 100-200 students in Gyantse and probably there were the same number in the school set up after that. But, it lasted only a few months.   

**Q:**  Didn't it last for a year?   

**A:**  The school in Gyantse probably lasted for 3-4 years. The school in Lhasa probably didn't last for a year. This favor [sarcastic] was done [Tib. སྐྱབས་འཇུག་གནང] by the abbots of the three great monasteries Actually, the abbots themselves were like people going in the darkness. Probably they didn't purposely do spiteful things [Tib. བསམ་གནག] but they were just thinking that religion was great and it [English school] would harm that. They thought that it would be like dripping one drop of ink in a clay pot full of milk [would change the color of the milk]. Our soldiers were also not good and they behaved very badly.   

**Q:**  Why didn't they improve the military?   

**A:**  After Künsangtse became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, probably in 1947-48, he disregarded the old military rules [Tib. དམག་ཁྲིམས] and made new military rules which had 35 points. If they adhered to these rules, the soldiers were not allowed to do things like raping woman, gambling and fighting in the gambling places. The rules were quite strict for the ordinary soldiers, but it was okay for the military officers [Tib. འགོ་བྱེད].   

**Q:**  When did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> trouble occur?   

**A:**  It was during the Reting Regency.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  Probably at that time I was 14-15 years old. Probably it was in 1937-38-39.   

**Q:**  Reting resigned in 1940, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, when the Tsondu was held, there were many abbots from the three great monasteries. Among the abbots, the Töpa Khembo [Tib. སྟོད་པ་མཁན་པོ] was close to Reting and he said, "The Regent Reting had made a very great accomplishment. Therefore our government should offer him a few estates."   

**Q:**  Was this the reason for holding the Tsondu?   

**A:**  Probably this was not the reason for holding the Tsondu, but they had this talk at the meeting. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> was an old man whose teeth had fallen out. Probably he was in his 60s. He was an eloquent person and he said, "Probably, we won't need to offer estates for his accomplishment because Reting Labrang had a very large area of monastic estates [Tib. ཆོས་གཞིས]. This is like the proverb, "Not being full even after eating the mountain and not being quenched even after drinking the ocean." [Tib. རི་བོ་ཟོས་ནས་མ་འགྲངས། རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཏུངས་ནས་མ་ངོམས] Probably, he just said that. Then the Töpa Khembo said, "Ah! You are saying, not being full even after eating mountain and not being quenched even after drinking the ocean. You are saying this to Reting Labrang." Then Khyungram the old man said, "I didn't specifically say that to Reting Labrang, but you can recognize [Tib. ངོས་འཛིན] it like this if you want to." Then probably he [Reting] got angry when Töpa Khembo reported about this. Reting liked the reincarnation named Khardo Trülku very much and Khardo Lama was also very close to Khyungram. So the lama wrote a letter to Khyungram saying, "You shouldn't act this way. You should apologize Reting." But probably he didn't acknowledge his letter. There was a person called Gajang Tempa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ].   

**Q:**  Was he the one during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> event?   

**A:**  Yes, this is the same person. He was a knowledgeable person and his handwriting was good, but he was always kind of an unlucky person. When Reting Labrang hated <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>, Khyungram and Garjang Tempa made an appeal [Tib. སྙན་ཞུ] to the three great monasteries to help him. In the appeal it was written, "What I said at the Tsondu which has offended Reting, I said out of loyalty towards the government [Tib. གཞུང་ཞེན]. I didn't have any other [purpose]. So I request the three great monasteries to save my life." Khyungram probably showed the appeal to Gajang Tempa. The two of them closed the door and since Gajang Tempa's handwriting was good, he probably made some corrections on the appeal. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> Sawang was very close to Khyungram. They kept Bönshö in a inner room and Khyungram and Gajang Tempa also showed the appeal to Bönshö and the late Bönshö might also have made some corrections.   

**Q:**  Did they send the appeal to the three great monasteries?   

**A:**  They couldn't send it and the appeal was put in a box and left on the table. At this time, it became more and more dangerous. One day, Khardo Lama came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> and said, "You should never do like this. You should apologize [Reting]. I will guarantee that he will forgive you." If he had apologized, probably it was going to be okay. but I heard that Khyungram still kept verbally fighting with the lama and said, "Behave yourself! You people who lost your celibacy [Tib. སྦར་གོག] are always doing reckless things." Then the lama left. My elder sister used to be the wife of Khyungram's son, the lay official, then after her husband died, she married Tangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད]. So my sister told me that Khyungram had said that. At that time Khyungram was the Governor of the Northern Region (Tib. ཧོརྗི [ཧོར་སྤྱི]), but he asked for a leave and came up [to Lhasa] saying that the place and climate of the north is not suitable for him and he left his son the lay official as the Acting Governor. Then the situation was becoming more dangerous even for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a>. One day, Khyungram was called to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> gaa and he was told, "We received a petition from the 39 tribes [Tib. ཚོ་པ] of Hor saying that you didn't treat them fairly. So you are demoted from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧོར་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet.">Horji</a> and from the third rank theiji." And he was arrested and his property was sealed. When they searched his house, three of the appeals written to be sent to the three great monasteries were discovered. After that, when Khyungram was whipped, he had to confess that he showed the appeal to Gajang Tempa so Gajang Tempa was also arrested and he was interrogated and told, "You made corrections on Khyungram's appeal. What kind of evil discussions [Tib. ངན་གྲོས] did you have? He said, "I didn't have any evil discussions." Then they asked him, "Well then, why did you make the corrections?" He said, "I don't think I made any corrections, but if I had made a correction, please show it to me. Then I will know whether it was mine or not." They didn't show him the appeal saying, "Why should we show it to you? You know what you did. You are still acting audacious. [Tib. སྐྱག་ཁྲལ་ཚ་ཐག་ཆོད]" Actually, Gajang Tempa might have guessed whether Khyungram had really confessed it or not. If Khyungram had not confessed, it would not be okay if he confessed, and if Khyungram had confessed, it would be useless if he did not confess it. Actually, they knew that it was his handwriting, but he confessed in that way. Then Gajang Tempa was banished somewhere and Khyungram was banished to Ruthok. At that time, Bönshö was also in a very dangerous situation so he called monk bodyguards [Tib. རྒྱ་ཁག] to his house saying outwardly that they were performing rituals. Later, he kind of the apologized and nothing happened to him.   

