# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehra Dun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses the Nepalese-Tibetan war, including the Chinese military intervention. He also describes the organization and recruitment of the Tibetan military before 1912, and then he discusses the military organization under Tsarong and the other magji, as well as a bit of the history of Surkhang Dzasa.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_03/H_0205_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  They probably stayed in jail for a little more than a year. They sent letters saying that they (the two shape) had been taken by the Nepalese to prison. At that time there were some Chinese soldiers with them, however the Chinese didn't interfere with anything and said, "Please discuss this among yourselves." When the two shapes were arrested, we had to make a tremendous noise [Tib. སྐད་ངན་དྲག་པོ]. We made a very strong noise [complaint] and appealed to the Chinese. I don't remember who was emperor at that time; it probably was the Qian Long dynasty. The Chinese said that this was too much, and sent an important general named Fu Khangai with two hundred thousand soldiers. The Chinese came with two hundred thousand soldiers and the Tibetan Government also collected quite a large number of soldiers locally. This Chinese general was supposed to be very powerful and capable in war. At about that time there was one Lama called, "the Red Hat Lama," (Tib. ཤམར་ལམ [ཞྭ་དམར་བླ་མ]) in Nepal. Shamar Lama played a lot of tricks and it was mostly he who was responsible. He had persuaded the Nepalese to send an army into Tibet. He even went up to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> where the Panchen Lama's monastery was. He damaged a lot of things and removed precious jewels out of stupas where the remains of the Panchen Lamas were kept. He did quite a lot of bad things. The Tibetan government suffered a lot, and then they got the help from China through the general Fu Khangai. About that time, in Nepal, they heard that the Chinese soldiers and also the Tibetan soldiers were getting prepared. Shamar Lama had some internal problems, so he poisoned himself. The Nepalese armies then released the two shapes out of fear of attack, not only by the Tibetan soldiers but also by the Chinese. Because of that fear, they released the two shapes in a respectful manner and told them, "We are releasing you today. Now that war is coming, you should stop the war." The two shapes told them that they didn't know if they could stop the war or not, but "if we don't have to fight, it is for the best. If we can avoid fighting it is much better. Therefore we can try to persuade the Tibetan government to consider this, but we cannot take the responsibility of [making] an anti-war agreement with Nepal." The Two shapes wrote a letter saying that the troops, wherever they may be, should stop there and not come any further. We are here to negotiate and we will try to negotiate from here. This letter reached the Chinese general. The Chinese soldiers might have reached [nearby border] places like Nyalam and some of them may have even reached the Nepalese border. Finally the shapes told him not to march anymore into Nepal, and the general said that if that was the final decision, then the very important, well-known Nepalese general called something Bahadur, hah to come here personally. He did not come personally, but one of his deputies came. A second man had to come all the way to discuss the matter. They demanded that Shamar Lama be handed over, but the Nepalese said that Shamar Lama was dead. They said "if Shamar Lama is dead then we want the body", so they handed over his dead body. They handed over the corpse of Shamar Lama, as well as his wife, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and personal attendant. The Government of Tibet ordered that Shamar Lama's reincarnation could not be recognized. His wife, chandzö, personal attendants, etc. and those who were connected with him were all sent into exile. All of the property of the lama was confiscated. Shamar Lama was probably from Yangpajen [Tib. ཡངས་པ་ཅན] in Tibet.   

**Q:**  This must be the Shamar of the Karmapa, right?   

**A:**  I see. The one in Tsurphu [Tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] was the black <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> [Tib. ཞྭ་ནང]. Regarding the money which had been paid already, they didn't want to pay anything else in the future. Regarding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, whatever they had taken, it was a couple of loads, Nepal said they will return them to Tibet. However, the Tibetans said, let that be treated as a gift from Tibet to you, so that was given as a gift. Thereafter they remained at peace. This was how the border dispute was settled. Then the Tibetans requested that the Chinese General Fu Khangai send his large army back to China. This was during the Pholhane [Tib. ཕོ་ལྷ་ནས] period. He did send quite a large number of the Chinese troops back, however, he kept some troops there [in Tibet] and he advised them that there was still a need to have an army kept at the border, so it would be better to keep some. After the Pholhane['s reign], Wang Gyurme <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> came into power and he requested that all the Chinese troops, even those at the border, be withdrawn as he would like to use local [Tibetan] people [to defend]. It was at this time that the 3,000 troops of the "Gyajong" Regiment [this means "trained by the Chinese"] was established. Even in 1959, we had a position called, "the Acting Depön staying in Dingri" [Tib. དིང་རི་སྡོད་མདའི་ངོ་ཚབ]. They had to send some representatives to functions and things like that. When Gyurme Namgyal collected three thousand soldiers of the Gyajong, 1,000 of these were constituted under two depön. This was the origin of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment. It has been there since Gyurme Namgyal's period. It was called the Trapchi regiment only when it returned from Kham and they established their regiment in the location called Trapchi.   

**Q:**  In the 1920s, the regiments were improved during the Tsarong period, right? After that, what regiments were set up?   

**A:**  Yes. I don't have anything to tell you about the sequence, but when the Gusung Regiment was set up it was called Nyina. That meant that one additional soldier was conscripted from each two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> which had been obliged to send a soldier to the Gyajong regiment. There were also the Shina [Tib. བཞི་སྣ] and Gyena [Tib. བརྒྱད་སྣ] conscription, but I don't have any details to tell you. The Gusung Regiment had to choose between learning the drill systems of France, Britain and Japan.   

**Q:**  You were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Depön. How did they set up the Trapchi Regiment?   

**A:**  The 3,000 soldiers recruited by Wang Gyurme Namgyel were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment in Ü, and the Ü <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> was called the Ünda [Tib. དབུས་མདའ]. They enjoyed higher power and prestige than the other depön. Tashi Bera and I were the Ünda and there were also 4 depön in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> called the Tsangda [Tib. གཙང་མདའ]. Incidentally, from among the fourth rank officials, the highest one was the General Payroll Officer, Jiphog [Tib. སྤྱི་ཕོགས]. This was the position Phala took later on. He had the highest position. He was the top of the Rimshi. He was followed [in status] by the two Ünda, then the four tsipön and then the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a>, then the Tsangda and then the other rimshi.   

**Q:**  What about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a>?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> were considered to be in the category of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> (monk officials) even though they might be lay officials. So they had to go inside the ceremony hall. Tseja means the manager (chandzö) of Tse.   

**Q:**  Weren't there two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a>, one a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and the other a lay official?   

**A:**  There were three.   

**Q:**  How did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. bzhi bna] A supplementary military conscription tax. It required families holding two military gang (tax units), each of which had originally been obliged to send a soldier to the Gyajong Regiment, to send an additional soldier.">shina</a> and gyena work?   

**A:**  [Laughter] I don't know.   

**Q:**  How many military regiments were there?   

**A:**  Let's count this way: One: Kadang was the Gusung (the bodyguard) regiment Two: Khadang was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment. It had two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>. Three: <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> Regiment. It belonged to the Shigatse Gyajong regiment. So you could call it Shitse Gyajong. It had one depön. Before the revolt [in 1959], its depön was Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ]. ... Four: <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> Regiment. It was headed by one depön who earlier was Tsögo and later Ragashag. It can also be called the Gyantse Gyajong Regiment. Five: Cadang Regiment. It was the Dingri Regiment and also had one depön.   

**Q:**  The Bodyguard Regiment was set up during Tsarong's era and this was the only new one [he created], right?   

**A:**  No. There was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Regiment, which was called the Artillery Regiment. Later its <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> was Jünba [Tib. འཇུན་པ]. And there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Regiment with one depön. I don't remember who its depön was.   

**Q:**  If there was one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, they had only 500 soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was something like that. A little over 500 or little less. Later, many of the regiments were disbanded.   

**Q:**  Tell me about the regiments during the 13th Dalai Lama's time.   

**A:**  There were the regiments up to the Phadang Regiment which was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> [Tib. གྲོང་དྲག] Regiment.   

**Q:**  These regiments were set up from 1912-1930, right?   

**Q:**  Yes. Before 1912, there were only the regiments of the 2 Ünda and the 4 Tsangda. Up to the 1920s, there were no [modern] or anything; no modern weapons at all. After that, the Gusung, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Regiments, etc., had modern guns, machine guns and cannons, etc. [he now identifies the photograph of the Tibetan army with Tsarong in Mrs. Taring's book on page 112. In the center is Tsarong who was the commander-in chief of the Tibetan army; at his right hand is the Gajang Tempa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ]. The person behind Gajang Tempa was not known to Mr. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>. The person next to him, also, was not known. There was another person in police dress who was Sambo Depön Pejö [Tib. དཔལ་ཆོས]. Beside him the person was not known and next to him was Dingja [Tib. ལྡིང་བྱ]. The the other names he did not know. At the end he thinks is Gusang Rupön Phurbu Thöndrup [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་དོན་གྲུབ] and then the man on the chair to the left of Tsarong was Drumpa [Tib. bhrum pa]. The person who is sitting in the center, in front of Gajang Tempa, was Tsögo Depön. At the center is the Sursur Dzasa and the young boy in front of Drumpa seems to be Salungwa [Tib. ས་ལུང་བ].]   

**Q:**  Were the soldiers of the Ünda and the Tsanda staying permanently in the regiment headquarters or did they stay at home and come only when they were called?   

**Q:**  They were kept permanently, but they just had ancient weapons like swords and spears, and I think they even carried slingshots before the Water-Mouse Chinese War.   

**Q:**  Did you notice any important military officers who were not included in this photo?   

**A:**  There also were the famous <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> such as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a>, but they might have been in Kham then.   

**Q:**  When the fall due to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> Ara Garpo occurred, wasn't <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> included or was it just these people?   

**A:**  Probably, these were the people [involved] then. I never heard about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> being involved in this. Tsögo and Salungwa were definitely there. When Dingja was terminated it was only when he was a bit late to attend one ceremony. Using that excuse, he had been terminated from government service. Nobody was accused of having attended a separate military meeting [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་ཟུར་ཚོགས]. Some of them were demoted and some of them were transferred into civil service. Netö [Tib. སྣེ་སྟོད] was also terminated from government service. He was the father of the late Netö who is a little older than me. Then all of them were terminated from the service with one or another excuse, either being late for one of the ceremonies or being not properly dressed, or some other excuse, even not taking leave; but they never said that there have been gatherings, or rather meetings, of all the military leaders.   

**Q:**  Were they all terminated in that one year when Tsarong was in India or was it done over a period of several years?   

**A:**  Probably, it was done like this.   

**Q:**  Were they demoted in one year or was it done gradually?   

**A:**  It was definitely done gradually and very nicely and slowly and without being obvious. Netö was terminated from the service completely; he didn't even remain at the ordinary level.   

**Q:**  What happened to Sursur Dzasa?   

**A:**  Surzur Dzasa was separated from Surkhang and he was terminated from the position of Gusung Depön. He was married to a daughter of Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི]. She was his official wife and she stayed in the Surkhang house. He was keeping another woman nicknamed "Balloon Brand" [Tib. སྒང་བུ་ལན་པར]. The official wife was jealous and filed a petition to the Government. The Government was supposed to be looking into it and made inquiries because of the complaints filed by his official wife. In reality because he was involved in this meeting of army officers, he was separated [split off] from the Surkhang House. He was degraded to an ordinary official's status and did not even have the status of Senampa and, as I said, he was also thrown out of the Surkhang family house and was given almost no share of anything [its property]. I even heard that he had cried a lot. He was thrown out of Surkhang house and because there was no place for him to stay, he stayed in Horkhang's house.   

**Q:**  Did he take the "Balloon Brand" woman to Horkhang and stay there?   

**A:**  I am not sure whether he took her there or he just stayed with her in her house. It was also reported that he was not being helped by the family because of his wife who happened to be the mother of the late Surkhang Sawangchemmo. He didn't get along so well, so they didn't help him and he had a great deal of difficulties. It was done by a government order. The Thirteenth Dalai Lama was very powerful and he gave very strong and strange orders. If it was like today's time, then it would be very difficult to carry on. We were not born yet and people regarded him highly saying "he is a lama", but if it were today's time, sometimes he would be very mean and strong and it would be very difficult to continue.   

**Q:**  Sursur might have gotten a lot of money from Surkhang?   

**A:**  Yes, but this might not have been given in full, but just a token.   

**Q:**  Actually, he was the main person of Surkhang, right?   

**A:**  Though he was a real Surkhang member, he and the famous Surkhang Gadrung Chemmo and Künsangtse were brothers. Out of these three brothers, the famous Gadrung died at a young age. Sonam Wangdü [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་དབང་འདུས] went as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a> of my late aunt to Künsangtse's house and he got a share from Surkhang, but Sursur, though he was actually the only [real] member left in Surkhang, because of his involvement in the military meetings he had been thrown out of his own home. I heard that he cried a lot.   

**Q:**  How was he able to regain his status later?   

**A:**  He was very clever. He knew that the Dalai Lama was angry with him and he used to go around in tea shops and chit chat. In these tea shops there were some informants for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, and certain people informed the Dalai Lama what they heard and things like that. He was just observing these people and he though that likely one would inform the Dalai Lama so he told them, "Nowadays I'm quite happy because I have been kicked out of the Surkhang house and deprived of my status. I am quite happy, but I have only one more worry which is that I will be sent to Kham, Eastern Tibet. That is what I worry about most." They said, "Why? What is wrong with going to the east?" He said, "Look, I am not well. I am sick and in Kham there are no good doctors or anything so I might get sick and die there. This is my biggest worry." As expected, the informants reported this to the Dalai Lama and gradually the Dalai Lama appointed him as one of the staff members going to Kham. By getting that, he got some kind of recognition, and he got a job so he didn't have to stay in a rented house and was able to go and do some work. Gradually, he started working and ultimately he was able to attain the highest position in Kham. He became governor of Kham, the Doji. First I think, he worked for the position called Tog Magpön [Tib. ཏོག་དམག་དཔོན]. A Tog Magpön was a very junior job, a very, very junior post. I think he was sent as something like that and gradually he was able to climb up to the position of Doji.   

**Q:**  This was not during the 13th Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It probably was after Doji <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> returned.   

**Q:**  After Tsarong was demoted, did Drumpa become the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>?   

**A:**  Drumpa and Gajang Tempa were also made magji.   

**Q:**  Did Gajang Tempa really become the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> of the army?   

**A:**  He became the junior <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, not the senior magji. He was like Drumpa, etc. Both were junior magji. Gajang Tempa was also demoted later.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> [Tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] of the military regiment, Gajang Tempa became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> of the army. He was in Lungshar's party called Kyichog Kündün [Tib. སྐྱིད་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འདུས]?   

**A:**  Probably he was.   

**Q:**  Who was the Senior Magji?   

**A:**  There was no Senior Magji then. When Tsarong received the letter of demotion, Drumpa was the Magji and Gajang Tempa was appointed as the addition Magji. On top of that, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the Magji Tsondzin.   

**Q:**  Did they appoint the addition Magji at the same time?   

**A:**  When the two of them were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and when there was no Senior Magji, then probably the Magji Tsondzin was appointed.   

**Q:**  Was he appointed right away or after a year or so?   

**A:**  It must be after few months.   

**Q:**  Who was the most powerful?   

**A:**  It was the Magji Tsondzin.   

**Q:**  Actually, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> means the person who give suggestion or ideas [Tib. བསམ་འཆར], not the one who give orders, right?   

**Q:**  He would give orders. For instance Phala Chemmo had been the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> of the present Dalai Lama's family, but since the Dalai Lama was there, he was just named Tsondzin. And the Tsondzin of Reting was the Trekhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> would put large amounts into storage [Tib. བཀར་འཇུག], they would invite the Tsondzin and he probably would make lists and put his seal on it.   

**Q:**  The Jigyab Kehmbo Khyenrabla [Tib. མཁྱེན་བར་ལགས], who was the teacher of Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན], had been the Tsondzin of Demo Labrang, my family, but he didn't have any power.   

**A:**  The Tsondzin didn't use his power.   

**Q:**  He could have used his power if he would have wanted to, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He could behave like a house father. Also, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར] had been the Tsondzin of Drumba.   

**Q:**  This was after Drumpa Dzasa died and Drumpa Chösur was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after the father died, the mother went with a high lama of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a>, although people stopped her saying the child was small. Drumba Chösur was not a real family member of Drumba house, but he was sort of what we call in Tibetan, a semi-servant [Tib. ངོ་མ་གཡོག], which was actually not a family member, but a very senior servant who almost became a family member. When the son was married at the age of seventeen or eighteen, the present Drumba who was the son of the nephew of the thirteenth Dalai Lama, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a>, took the responsibility and even had to give a warning to Drumba Chösur saying that he was not really a family member and the son was the real one and so on and so forth. Such a thing happened when you had Tsondzin like that. Their function was sometimes more important that of family members. Sometimes they didn't bother [with the family]. It depended on the individual relations of the families and the connected houses. Similarly, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a>'s Tsondzin was the Military Headquarter of Tibet, so whenever the Panda had some trouble the Military Headquarter was also involved.   

**Q:**  When Tsarong was returning from India it was probably 1925. He had received a letter of termination as commander-in-chief of the Tibetan army. Later, in 1931 he was terminated from the Kashag also. How did that happen?   

**A:**  There are no specific reasons why he was withdrawn from the post of commander-in-chief of the Tibetan army.   

**Q:**  There was some talk about guns that were missing, right?   

**A:**  There had been some shortage of guns, something like a few hundred guns were short in the accounting.   

**A:**  It was said that about 300 guns were missing. And that was the excuse that led to his being withdrawn from the post of shape.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any reason for demoting him as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, right?   

**A:**  There wasn't any reason, except that it was a time of much peace and tranquility in Tibet so there was no reason or need to have two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> for the Tibetan army. Since the Junior Magji, Drumba, was already there functioning, there was no need for a Senior Commander, so he had been withdrawn for that reason.   

**Q:**  This was written in the letter. Did he say that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about the killing of the people and cutting off people's hands, legs, etc. This was not said in the letter of termination at all, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, not at all.   

**A:**  I don't know what they said when he was demoted from the post of shape.   

**A:**  Probably they said that he had posted guards at his house.   

**A:**  That could be.   

**Q:**  What was the insignia of rank for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>?   

**A:**  It was a crossed vajra on his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> and at the center of the vajra there was a diamond. If you didn't have a diamond you could use a white sort of thing, but it was supposed to be a diamond for the magji. Below the diamond, they placed blue turquoise, in the center of the vajra.   

**Q:**  You said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> enjoyed the rank of Ta lama. If that was true then Künphel should be considered as a government official, right?   

**A:**  Since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> enjoys the rank of Ta lama, he had the status of Ta lama. He may be a government official or he may not be.   

**Q:**  For example the manager of Kündeling and Ditru [labrang] enjoyed the rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> rather than Ta lama, and they were not treated as government officials.   

**A:**  Yes, they were definitely treated as government officials. Kündeling and so forth sat at functions outside the main hall's door. First the monk body guards, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a> sat, followed by the dzasa.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> stayed outside?   

**A:**  Yes. All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> who were part of the lay official's category [Tib. ཤོད་སྐོར] had to sit outside.   

**Q:**  What about the Khenche and Khenjung?   

**A:**  The Khenche and the Khenjung sat inside although the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> were higher in rank than the Khenchen and Khenjung. The dzasa of the lay official category had to stay outside.   

**Q:**  But those were monks?   

**A:**  Although they were monks, they belonged to the lay category so therefore they had to sit outside.   

**Q:**  What about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, the Regent?   

**A:**  He went inside because he belonged to the monk official category [Tib. རྩེ་སྐོར].   

**Q:**  Why? Why was Kündeling in the lay official category and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> in the monk official category?   

**A:**  I think that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> before he got the rank of dzasa. The khenjung normally sat inside so when he became dzasa, it was inconvenient for them to bring him down and therefore he was allowed to sit inside. I am not very sure what the reason was but I do remember that when Reting Rimpoche was the Regent, his manager, Dzasa Jampey Gyentsen [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱལ་མཚན], also used to go inside. The dzasa (chandzö) of any incarnate Lama who happens to be the Regent at the time, this dzasa sat inside, otherwise the dzasa fell into the category of lay officials and sat outside.   

**Q:**  Dr Goldstein: In your personal opinion, do you consider <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> as a government official in the same way that you were an official?   

**A:**  Definitely he was an official because anyone who was below the rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> would have to take their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> off and make a sign of respect to him. He was definitely considered to be an official.   

**Q:**  Do you think t<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> even a shape would have taken off his hat to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> as a token of respect?   

**A:**  The shapes would never do that, but in their individual homes, who knows? But in public they would never do unless he carried an order from the Dalai Lama. Then we had to stand up. That was a different matter.   

**Q:**  How was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> withdrawn?   

**A:**  At that time I was eight years old and in school. I don't know why he was withdrawn. However, while in school, the father of the present Maya [Tib. རྨ་བྱ] came to our school. He was a very close friend of my school's teacher; he came and gave the news that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had been withdrawn from the post of magji. I do not know why he was withdrawn from that post but this is what I definitely remember. I was going to check up later what the reason was, but somehow I missed doing it. It skipped from my mind so I didn't really check on it.   

**Q:**  Did you know anything about who was pushing to get rid of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**A:**  I don't remember hearing that anybody had harmed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> or something like that, but if that had happened, it could have been <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a>. Künphel didn't get along with him very well. I don't know the reason why, but I did notice that they didn't get along well. Both were very strong in the eyes of the Dalai Lama. Künphel was very, very powerful and strong and Lungshar was equally powerful, so they were not very happy about this. Again I have not heard it but in case someone initiated the move to remove Lungshar, then it would have been Künphel. I used to smoke opium with Künphel and we used to lie down and joke. Once he told me that Lungshar had presented an accounting to the Dalai Lama in which there was some mistake [although] probably he didn't intend to embezzle anything. The Dalai Lama said, "Künphel come here. Why don't you look at that accounting." He took the account from the Dalai Lama, looked at it and found it was not correct because there was a gap between the incoming and the expenditures. They did not balance. Then the Dalai Lama returned the account and told them to recheck it. Later they found the balance rolled in a piece of cloth in the office. If this was found at his home, then it would become like he stole it. However he did not do that, it was found in the office somewhere so it was considered to be a mistaken statement. This incident took place.   

