# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.19 : Tape 19  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses Gendün Chömpel's involvement in the organization of Abo Raga, and how Gendün Chömpel was arrested and imprisoned in Lhasa. He talks about becoming Gendün Chömpel's student after his release from jail and about Gendün Chömpel's view on a number of subjects. He also discusses what happened after he arrived in Beijing as a representative for the Sino-Tibetan peace talks.   

---  
### Tape 19  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_19/H_0205_19.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Can you tell us in detail how Gendün Chömpel was arrested and what was the specific reason for this? Also, how were the conditions in the prison?   

**A:**  When Gendün Chömpel came to Kalimpong, Janglojen Gung, Abo Raga [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་བར་དགའ] and Kujar [Künphel] was also together there because they were close friends. They knew that the system in Tibet was not good and that something had to be done to change it so they were talking about what would be better all the time. At this time, Gendün Chömpel arrived there and Abo Raga introduced Janglojen to Gendün Chömpel. They thought that they had found somebody to ask questions and seek advice from. Janglojen was good in writing and he asked Gendün Chömpel a lot of questions to find out if he was really as good as his reputation said. Gendün Chömpel gave perfect answers. So after hearing the answers, Janglojen was greatly impressed. When they told Gendün Chömpel about those things [making change] probably he said it is okay and that would be good. Now Abo Raga and his people were receiving financial aid and support from the Guomindang and in return they had to give reports to the Guomindang about everything that might interest them. They wanted to give a report to the Chinese about the McMahon line drawn by the British. In this McMahon line, Bhutan was included under British Indian territory. To present this report they needed more material and information so they wanted physically to send someone through Bhutan to Tibet, someone who was able to draw a map of Bhutan. To do this they needed permission from the Bhutanese government. This permission was obtained by Janglojen since he was working as a Tibetan tutor in the Bhutanese Palace for the Raja and Rani Sahib's children in Kalimpong. They sent Gendün Chömpel to Bhutan through the Bhutanese palace. At that time, they could not send letters directly. They had to send them through somebody because the British Sir Gould suspected them and there were people keeping an eye on Abo Raga. At that time, the Sikkim Political Officer was also asking us what Abo Raga was doing for his living. We didn't know whether there were people keeping an eye on him, but probably, they were secretly watching him.   

**Q:**  Did they want to present only a map of Bhutanese area to the Guomindang or did they also want to report about Mon Tawang?   

**A:**  They wanted to check out only Bhutanese territory and make a layout in the form of a map and to be able to know about the McMahon line.   

**Q:**  Everyone knew that Bhutan was under British rule so why did they want to make a map of Bhutan?   

**A:**  That is true but I feel that they actually were trying to tell the Chinese that Bhutan was in fact a part of Tibet.   

**Q:**  I don't see why they needed to make a map of Bhutan--how would that help?   

**A:**  I think that they felt it necessary to present a map of Bhutan to confirm their claim.   

**Q:**  Did Gendün Chömpel go anywhere in Bhutan or did he just follow a particular part like northern Bhutan?   

**A:**  He pretended to be on a pilgrimage and went throughout Bhutan and drew a map of Bhutan as a whole. Abo Raga is the real paternal uncle of my father's second wife. While my father was in Kalimpong, he gave my father 10 to 15 boxes of satin to be sold and although we didn't know about the organization, since we had relations, my father accepted to sell it and took it to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1947?   

**A:**  No. Probably it was in 1942-43. When Gendün Chömpel came from Bhutan to Lhasa he wrote directly to Abo Raga. Normally this was not done--people would write to Abo Raga through someone else since the British suspected him and intercepted his letters and so on. Gendün Chömpel did not know this, or otherwise he forgot--I don't know, but he wrote directly and the letter was intercepted by Richardson in Gyantse. He saw the Bhutanese map in the letter and at once notified Sir Basil Gould. Another incident was that they had been able to intercept a letter written to Gendün Chömpel in which Raga wanted to know the position, strength and the types of weapons the Tibetan army possessed. He had further mentioned that if he needed more funds he could collect it from Sambo. Earlier when they gave my father the satin to be sold, we did not realize that Abo Raga and his people had formed an organization. Later the political officer of Sikkim came to know that they were setting up a party for launching a revolt [Tib. གྱེན་ལོག] or revolution [Tib. གསར་བརྗེ] inside Tibet and they started to warn our government. They told the Kashag through Richardson that now it is only a small organization but if you don't take appropriate action and destroy it now, later it will be very difficult to control it when it became very strong and powerful.   

**Q:**  What were the internal relationships in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> family?   

**A:**  Raga and Yamphel were not fond of each other. They had separate bank accounts, separate households. Yamphel didn't trust Raga. Likewise, Tobgye [Tib. སྟོབས་རྒྱས] also didn't trust Raga, so they had separate households.   

**Q:**  Did Tobgye and Raga also have separate households?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was Raga very rich?   

**A:**  No, not so rich, but he was not poor either. He was in between. Tobgye was in Tsögo [Tib. btsho sgo] and he was quite well off. Yamphel was now the main <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> person. Raga comparatively was not so rich.   

**Q:**  I heard that Raga's wife was very rich.   

**A:**  I doubt it, however she had a house called Reneview [?] in Kalimpong and they had an old car given them by Yamphel.   

**Q:**  When Gendün Chömpel was in Lhasa was he staying with you?   

**A:**  No, he was living separately. He was staying at the house called Wangden Pembar [Tib. dbamg ldan dpal 'bar]. He was arrested in that house.   

**Q:**  How was he arrested?   

**A:**  They spread a rumor in Lhasa and brought a false charge against him saying that he was circulating fake 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> notes, but he was not the type of person who would do that. They just needed some charge against him in order to arrest him. Since the organization was in Kalimpong, they [the British] planned to raid and search Abo Raga's house there. However, he was informed by the Guomindang Counselor in Kolcutta who wrote a letter to him saying that the Indian police were going to search his house. He kept this letter in his pocket. They wanted to search for documents on the organization, but he burned all the incriminating papers like the registration of the organization before they could raid his house. When his house was checked, no papers were found to incriminate him--no papers whatsoever to indicate his being involved in the organization. However, Abo Raga was arrested and given only three days to settle his accounts before he had to leave India. Similarly <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> was given seven days to leave India. Since they had nowhere else to go, they left for China. Janglojen's house was also searched but nothing was found. Due to the influence of the Bhutanese Raja and Rani Sahib, he did not have to leave India.   

**Q:**  What about Gendün Chömpel in Lhasa?   

**A:**  His house was searched but no incriminating evidence was found. However, they took away all his documents and materials for his historical book, about 11-12 boxes full.   

**Q:**  Who was on the committee to investigate his case?   

**A:**  Dzasa Gyetag [Tib. རྒྱས་རྟགས] and Surkhang Depön. There were two other monk officials but I don't remember their names.   

**Q:**  Did they find anything in Gendün Chömpel's house?   

**A:**  No incriminating documents or evidence were found.   

**Q:**  I heard that they found a large rubber inflatable woman in his house, is that true?   

**A:**  Yes, that is true [laughter]. I heard about it though I haven't seen it. Later my former wife who was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> asked him about it and he just kept a diplomatic silence and didn't say no. Probably that was true. I told her maternal uncle Pomsur [Tib. སྤོམ་ཟུར] that she asked Gendün Chömpel this. Then Pomsur asked my wife whether she asked that and she said yes. Then he told her, "How could you ask this? What would you do if he slapped you? It was said that you had to inflate this rubber woman, put some hot water in it and then it would look real. The head of this rubber woman could be unscrewed and you could screw on a different head--a new face for each night. That was besides the point. Coming back to the point--no incriminating documents were found in his house.   

**Q:**  Was he writing this book for the government or for himself?   

**A:**  He was writing it for himself.   

**Q:**  How many boxes of documents did he have?   

**A:**  I am not very certain--about 10 to 15 boxes.   

**Q:**  Where was he put in jail?   

**A:**  First he was kept in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག] The main administrative office in Lhasa that was headed by the &quot;mayor&quot; or mipön.">Nangtsesha</a> and then he was kept in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> for about one or two years.   

**Q:**  Did they whip him?   

**A:**  At first didn't whip him. Since no documents were found, he was interrogated at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a> by means of whipping [Tib. ཚ་འདྲི] [a kind of interrogation where whipping is part of the interrogation].   

**Q:**  Was that after those two years?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So for two years he was not interrogated.   

**A:**  Yes, for two years there was no investigation committee or interrogation.   

**Q:**  When Gendün Chömpel came to Lhasa--before he was arrested--in what way was he dressed--like a monk or as a lay person?   

**A:**  He was dressed as a layperson in an English <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> and a woolen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> with long boots like an ordinary Tibetan.   

**Q:**  When he was put into prison for the first two years, there was no investigations or anything?   

**A:**  No, nothing. Actually the British were very much interested in this case. They wanted to get hold of the list of people in this organization. However, since they had already destroyed the list, the British didn't get it. The British sent a telegram to the Tibetan government saying that a man named 'Pa <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>' was also involved. However there was no family of that name so the Tibetan government thought that it was an error due to pronunciation or something like that and they assumed that they were referring to the Baitsang family and they raided their house, but nothing was found there. Anyway, their son, known as Bula, was arrested and given a flogging.   

**Q:**  Why did they gave him the flogging?   

**A:**  I didn't know what questions they asked him. There were many other people - I don't remember their names. The doctor [to the 13th Dalai Lama] Amchi Champala [Tib. ཨེམ་ཆི་བྱམས་པ་ལགས] was one of the members of this organization. He was really scared--fearing that he would be arrested and banished again and he said what shall I do? I have many children. But, the British couldn't find any documents.   

**Q:**  Did you ever hear of a person known as Champa Wöser [Tib. བྱམས་པ་འོད་ཟེར]?   

**A:**  He was a Chinese.   

**Q:**  What do you know about him?   

**A:**  He was a teacher in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> [Chinese] school and I knew him. He also came to our Tarkhang [Tib. ཏར་ཁང] school to learn Tibetan. He was lame in one leg. He was one of the Chinese who got deported from Tibet.   

**Q:**  So Gendün Chömpel got arrested, investigated, interrogated and whipped. Then what happened?   

**A:**  He was kept in jail just like that. Before being arrested, he was writing a history and had reached the dharma kings [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ] period to Songtsen [Tib. སྲོང་བཙན]. It was about 50 or 60 pages. They had already carved the wood blocks for these pages. When this came into the hands of the authorities, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> especially was much impressed after reading through it. He suggested that he should be released to make use of his talent as this would be useful for the future. After he was released he was given the order, "When we examined the history you wrote, it was very good and you should resume writing the history and finish it. The government will give you a salary while you are writing the history." Probably this was in 1948, about two months after his release, I requested him to teach me Tibetan literature. He agreed and I used to go to his place. Sometimes he would teach me and at other times I had to drink liquor or smoke opium with him. I had to listen to whatever the teacher told me, otherwise, he would scold me, right? Then around 1950, I asked him to resume work to complete his history book. I asked him not to waste his time. If you die like this, it would be like a dog dying in the street. I told him that he was a very intelligent and learned person and that he had a lot of information and documents. But he refused to resume his work saying that he didn't want to. He said, "Why should I write it when the government whips me and treats me like a common criminal?" I still insisted that he should continue his work. I told him that if he wrote this book, his name would remain and generations later he would still be remembered. "If you don't complete this book you will die like any ordinary person without any distinction or credit to your name!" After much persuasion he agreed, so I drafted a letter to the government in which he agreed to complete his book and asked them in return to give him accommodations and a salary.   

**Q:**  I thought the government already gave him a salary?   

**A:**  No. They just said that they would give him a salary if he resumed his work on the history book. The government agreed to give a salary as well as accommodations. It was me who drafted this request. My father corrected it and I went personally to the Kashag to submit it. He would not do it himself. Very soon a reply came and our request was granted.   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  Around 1950, during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> period.   

**Q:**  Was it before Ngabö left for Beijing or before Chamdo fell?   

**A:**  Yes. Before Ngabö's departure he had already moved into his new house. It was on top of the Agriculture Office (Tib. སོནམ་ལེཁུང [སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུངས]). It was a good sunny house where they used to keep the copper and silver containers [Tib. ཟངས་རྐྱན་དངུལ་རྐྱན] for the Mönlam.   

**Q:**  What was his way of thinking on political ideology? Was he pro-Chinese or loyal to the Tibetans [Tib. བོད་ཞེན]?   

**A:**  He was loyal to the Tibetans. He didn't particularly care much for the Chinese. He wanted to bring about democracy.   

**Q:**  If he did not care for the Chinese, then why did he join Abo Raga's organization which was supported by the Guomindang?   

**A:**  He thought it was a way to achieve his goal--like bringing changes and improvement in Tibet. He didn't t care about Chiang Kaishek or Sun Yatsen. On the other hand, Abo Raga liked Chiang Kaishek and literally believed in Sun Yatsen.   

**Q:**  How was Janglojen? Was he related to you?   

**A:**  Yes. He didn't have faith in Sun Yatsen, but he thought that it was good to do revolution. Abo Raga was really taken up with the "The Three Principles of the People." [Ch. san min zhu yi; Tib. མི་སེར་དོན་གུམ་རིང་ལུགས] of Sun Yatsen which is about the people's freedom and democracy.   

**Q:**  Was there the religious freedom?   

**A:**  I don't think so. It was about the people's livelihood. He translated it into Tibetan and printed it in a mediocre quality. He also gave me a copy.   

**Q:**  Were people like Janglojen, Gendün Chömpel and Abo Raga favorably inclined towards Chiang Kaishek?   

**A:**  Well, I should say they kind of liked him because of the influence from Abo Raga. Anyway, they neither dislike him nor did they like him very much.   

**Q:**  I heard that Abo Raga and Janglojen were heavily involved with the Indian nationalists [Congress]?   

**A:**  I have no idea about this.   

**Q:**  Have you seen the membership list of Abo Raga's organization?   

**A:**  There used to be a document in which they mentioned that they will do this and that, but, I have not seen it. I didn't come to know about it until 1947 when I came to the Asian meeting [in Delhi]. I knew about it from Pomsur. He told me that they had burned the documents.   

**Q:**  Pomsur was the brother of the fat wife of Pandatsang.   

**Q:**  Did the Indians or British show you this list?   

**A:**  No, the papers had already been burned so how could they show it?   

**Q:**  Yes, the list with the names was burned, but they still might have the other forms.   

**A:**  This I don't know. Anyway, they burned the oath in which people signed their names saying I will do this or that.   

**Q:**  Were there many people in this organization?   

**A:**  Not so many. About 200 to 300 members.   

**Q:**  Were they all big officials or just small fry?   

**A:**  I don't think there were big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> in there. I know about Janglojen, Raga, Amji Champa, Gendün Chömpel, Kujar and Baitsang.   

**Q:**  When Baitshang was whipped, did he confess anything?   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**Q:**  Probably they didn't whip him much.   

**A:**  Maybe they didn't whip him very much.   

**Q:**  What did Gendün Chömpel think about the big monasteries, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>, the monastic estates (Tib. Chöshi [ཆོས་གཞིས]) and so on? How did he feel about them?   

**A:**  He didn't like them. He said that the Lord Buddha did not have big monasteries, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་གཤིས] A &quot;religious&quot; estate held by a monastery or lama.">chöshi</a> and so on, but in Tibet we have that.   

**Q:**  How did he feel about the different religious sects--like the Gelugpa [Tib. དགེ་ལུགས་པ], the Nyingma [Tib. རྙིང་མ] and so forth?   

**A:**  He was non-sectarian. Sometimes I would ask him--there are a lot of different religions like Christianity, Islam, Buddhism and so forth. Out of all of these, which one do you consider to be the best? He would tell me that Buddhism is the best of all religions. I asked him about the Muslims and he said that the Muslim religion is a fool's religion. It has no real depth and there is nothing to think about it very much.   

**Q:**  Among the Tibetan sects, probably he was kind of neutral, right?   

**A:**  Yes, although he tended to be a bit more inclined towards the Nyingma tradition. He found it very deep.   

**Q:**  What would he say about the people who didn't like certain sects?   

**A:**  He would not say much about this. He was the author of a book known as the "Thought of Nagarjuna [Tib. ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་དགོངས་རྒྱན]." It was very popular and famous in Derge, since most of the people in that area followed the Nyingma tradition. Probably, he was holding a kind of the strong ideology for the Nyingma, but he would not say that the Gelugpa was bad and such things.   

**Q:**  Suppose they were able to bring about a revolution in the religious and political system in Tibet, what did he intend to do with the institution of the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  I did not ask him such questions and he didn't tell me about it. In general, he would say that if the political system was good then the religious system would improve. He said that it was impossible for religion exclusively to hold the political realm. At that time, the government stationed soldiers in the four northern regions [Tib. བྱང་རིགས་སྡེ་བཞི]. This was kind of a militia. I don't know who the heads were. They were mainly around Nagchu. In Nagtsang, half of the Bodyguard Regiment was there. Probably at that time the some American representatives in Xinjiang were coming to Tibet. The Americans sent a telegram to the Kashag saying that some of our people who were like representatives in Xinjiang have disappeared. We think that they might have gone towards Tibet. So if they come to Tibet, please help them to cross the Tibetan border. Maybe the Kashag might have agreed to it. An edict was sent by the Kashag instructing the Nagtsang area that some Americans may be coming there, and if they arrive, they are not communists so you should receive and entertain [Tib. སྣེ་ལེན] them and then they should be brought to Lhasa if necessary with the help of the soldiers. The edict was delayed someplace like in Nagtsang and did not reach the border in time, so when about 3-4 Americans arrived they [the border guards] opened fire on them and shot them. One was killed and one was wounded. The Americans still came nearer shouting, "America, America". They wanted to say that they are not communists, but they didn't know the language and the people did not understand them and continued to fire. They not only shot them, but robbed them. The edict arrived the next day. Then they said that we have made a big mistake and probably returned the things, but one who was killed was killed and they couldn't do anything. The Kashag sent soldiers to receive them or they did something for them. There was one Bodyguard Battalion there. At that time, its <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> was Nyamön [Tib. ཉ་སྨོན]. He had some problem with his thumb--some infection--so he had gone to Gyantse for treatment. He appointed one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> to be responsible when the Americans were shot. The gyagpön was stripped off his rank and he was discharged from military service. I met him from time to time before 1959. He had some problems with his eyes. Another thing I forgot to mention earlier was that in the 8th month they decided to transfer the power to the Dalai Lama. He assumed power in the tenth month. There was a popular song sung then: "The Regent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> made the [government] empty and offered the torn-up-politics [to the Dalai Lama]" [Tib. rgyal po stag lung brag gis/ tag tak sig sig bzos nas/ phul song la dang phul song/ chab srid rtsab ral phul song]   

**Q:**  Some people say that at first the young Dalai Lama did not want to assume control or power, is that true?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anything like that. He was very young, around 16 years old. He took power in the 10th month.   

**Q:**  It was on the 8th of the 10th month which was an auspicious month according to astrology [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཟླ་བ].   

**A:**  Another thing I forgot to tell you about Gendün Chömpel is the following: He also told me that during the Buddha's time, there wasn't any kind of reincarnation and protector deities. Once I asked him about the deities and ghosts about which people talk about a lot. Gendün Chömpel told me that he was not sure if there were really deities and ghosts, etc. Even if there were, he said then they wee much less powerful than human beings.   

**Q:**  Today we shall talk about Beijing. What happened when you reached Beijing?   

**A:**  we arrived at the railway station on the 22nd or 23rd of April, 1951. Zhou Enlai was at the station to receive us. When we met, we shook hands and they put us in some cars and put us in the Beijing Hotel [Ch. beijing fandian].   

**Q:**  Was it a big hotel? Was it the one called the Beijing Friendship Hotel that had been built by the Russians? [note: It was not]   

**A:**  I have no idea. At that time, it was the biggest hotel. We waited there for a few days for the arrival of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་དྲུང] Abbr. Dzasa and Trunyichemmo. Frequently it refers to the two specific officials (Dzasa Künsangtse and Trunyichemmo Lhautara) who were sent from Yadong in 1951 to negotiate the 17-Point Agreement in Beijing.">dzadrung</a> (the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> from Yadong). On the 26th, they informed us that the dzadrung were arriving. Both my colleague and I, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a>, along with Ngabö, went to receive them. Ngabö told me that we should not greet them with the traditional exchange of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves. I went ahead and told them about it. They had brought khata scarves in their pockets. So when Ngabö arrived they greeted by taking off their hats [Tib. ཕྱག་འབུལ].   

**Q:**  Ngabö would not salute to them, right?   

**A:**  Not at all. How could he?   

**Q:**  Wouldn't he make this kind of hand gesture?   

**A:**  Yes, he must have.   

**Q:**  What is the reason for Ngabö's decision not to exchange <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves?   

**A:**  I don't know. Maybe he thought it was not in accordance with Chinese customs. There was a big welcome committee--a lot of people beating drums and shouting words of greetings--at the station and the Commander-in-Chief Zhu De was there. After exchanging pleasantries they delivered us to the Beijing Hotel. In the hotel we exchanged news with each other.   

**Q:**  What was the news? What did they say?   

**A:**  There was no definite news. They gave us their travel accounts. They also brought a 10-Point Statement with them. Along with them, there were two interpreters--Sandu Rinchen and Takla. I didn't read the ten points. Besides this, they were given verbal instructions that said, "Here are the ten points but you must use your best judgment according to the situation and circumstances and report back to the Kashag."   

**Q:**  Who was the head of the mission?   

**A:**  Ngabö, and then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་དྲུང] Abbr. Dzasa and Trunyichemmo. Frequently it refers to the two specific officials (Dzasa Künsangtse and Trunyichemmo Lhautara) who were sent from Yadong in 1951 to negotiate the 17-Point Agreement in Beijing.">dzadrung</a>, and then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> and after him it was me. On the 29th, the meetings started in one of the houses that they said had been used by the Japanese previously. It was a little distance from our hotel. The meeting was held there. The Chinese officials were Li Weihan, Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Song Zhiyuan. Zhang Guohua was yet to arrive, although his name was on the list.   

**Q:**  Did you meet in the morning?   

**A:**  It was past noon.   

**Q:**  Was it in one room, a big room? Were there tables and so on?   

**A:**  It was a big room, and there were tables and chairs that were more like sofas.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese sit on one side and were the Tibetans facing them?   

**A:**  Yes, we sat like that. On our side we sat according to our ranks--first Ngabö and so on. The Chinese side, Li Weihan was first in the row. The sofas were more like benches. The interpreter was Phüntso Wangyal. He was very good. Being a Tibetan he had no problem in Tibetans and his Chinese was excellent. Our interpreters did not have to translate.   

**Q:**  Did they also sit in a row?   

**A:**  Yes, they were supposed to make corrections if something was translated wrong, but they didn't have to do that. The meeting began with Li Weihan saying that we were here to talk so how should we start. Ngabö replied, "Whichever way you want, you can start. It makes no difference." He then asked Ngabö if he had any plans. Ngabö said, "No." Then Li Weihan said, "If you agree, how about first making a plan and deciding on the agenda [Tib. མགོ་རྩ་སྒྲིག]." Ngabö agreed.   

**Q:**  What happened to the 10-points?   

**A:**  It was deliberately not mentioned--it was kept a secret to see what the Chinese were going to say.   

**Q:**  What was in the 10-points?   

**A:**  Probably, there wasn't any substance in it.   

**Q:**  We should list the 10-points, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but it has been so many years. I remember that the talk was not based on that. If it had been used as a base, I might have remembered something. It became kind of rotten and was just left aside.   

