# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses Kujar Künphel's interrogation and fall, and about Lungshar's organization and his monastic support. He also mentions Trimön's payment of grain to the fishermen for killing the Nyarong's Gombo Namgyal. He also discusses the Pandatsang incident.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_06/H_0205_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  They say that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> was summoned for two days. Why was that? On the first day they could have read out the charges against him. The charges were that when the Dalai Lama got sick he didn't inform the Kashag. What did they talk about on the second day because I feel that there was no need to call him for two days? Did they make him stand up or let him sit down?   

**A:**  They say that he was called twice in front of the Investigation Committee regarding the charges.   

**Q:**  Twice?   

**A:**  On the second day he was imprisoned.   

**Q:**  What happened on the first day?   

**A:**  On the first day they must have read out the charges against him. Beside that, there was nothing else.   

**Q:**  What answers did he give? He must have said something. I think he wouldn't keep quiet and must have had something to say.   

**A:**  I have no idea about this.   

**Q:**  Usually, would Kujar carry a gun with him when he went out?   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**Q:**  Normally when he went back and forth in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, did he carry a gun with him?   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**Q:**  You don't think so?   

**A:**  I think he did not carry any guns. If he did go with arms, he might have had a pistol inside his dress.   

**Q:**  Yes, I mean that. I mean that you don't expect him to go about carrying a long rifle. I mean did he go around carrying a pistol?   

**A:**  Yes it is possible. He might have had a pistol in his dress or somewhere outside it.   

**Q:**  Didn't he have a pistol inside his dress? I feel that he must have gone out carrying a gun.   

**A:**  Was that so?   

**Q:**  In Lhasa, normally younger people like us would go about in the town with guns inside our dress. Even the Lamas would carry pistols with them.   

**A:**  When the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, everyone who went for the meetings went about carrying pistols with them.   

**Q:**  Was it?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time there was a lot of uncertainty and people went about with arms.   

**Q:**  How was it?   

**A:**  At that time, a lot of meetings were held after the 13th Dalai Lama passed away and there was a lot of talk. The government was not fully in control. The monks like Jamön Depa [Tib. བྱམས་སྨོན་སྡེ་པ] and Tigejag [Tib. རྟི་གི་ཅག] who were on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s side spread talk that the monks were about to rebel and so on, and they might have threatened the meeting.   

**Q:**  Why would the monks rebel?   

**A:**  Probably, these monks were the so-called "representatives" of Sera and Drepung.   

**Q:**  For what reason did they say that the monks would burst out [of the monastery]?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea about the reason. The monks were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s followers and probably they were supporting Lungshar. So there was a lot of talk that the monks would burst out of the monastery and so on. I heard that at that time <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a> [Tib. གདོང་པོར] was the one who stopped them. He said that although there is a saying that when there is a war against religion, the monks can use the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སློང] A monk who has taken the full set of vows.">gelong</a>'s staff as a spear [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ལ་དགྲ་བྱུང་ན། འཁར་བསིལ་མདུང་དུ་སྤྱད]. However, we don't have any choice but to issue this order and he issued the order saying, "From today onwards, whoever would go out after the late evening gun signal [Tib. ཕྱི་མདའ] was fired, will be shot on sight." When some people asked him in such cases who would take the responsibility for this, Dombor said that he will take this responsibility. So the other people said that this cases we accept your decision. Anyway, they talked just like that and the incident faded away during the meetings.   

**Q:**  I see. What other things did they say?   

**A:**  That the monks might cause disturbances in support of Lungshar.   

**Q:**  They meant that the representatives of Sera and Drepung would stage a show of force, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s supporters and they were just trying to stage a show of force. So at that time, there were a lot of different kinds of talk. One particular talk that I remember clearly was that people were using a former line from the 5th Dalai Lama, "We should not be discouraged about executing and beating the [criminals] who definitely need to have this done." [Tib. གསོད་རྡུང་ངེས་པར་དགོས་ལ་སྙིང་མ་ཆུང]. They probably didn't say the second line which is, "Do not let the people get exempt from paying the taxes and working for the taxes that they were really obliged to pay." [Tib. འབབ་ངེས་ཁྲལ་དང་ལག་འདོན་ཡང་མ་འཇུག]. Wasn't there a person known as Lobsang Norbu [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ནོར་བུ]? I don't think that you knew him Rimpoche. Anyway he was one of the officials at that time.   

**Q:**  Yes. He was the one who jumped out the window and broke his leg.   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. At that time he had also said few things in the meeting. So at night when he was about to sleep, a messenger came to inform them that there was a meeting tomorrow and so on. So this messenger picked up a stone and banged it on the iron binding on the door, making the sound "da da da" like that. This guy got very frightened and shouted out, "Father, probably, they are shooting." and he ran up onto the rooftop and he went through the window and he jumped from two stories and broke his leg. At that time, the situation was quite tense. We were very small and we saw our father going around carrying a pistol inside his dress when he went for a meeting although he was not a person who talked much. We didn't know about other people, but now we realize that everyone went to the meetings fully armed.   

**Q:**  So, at that time, there was quite a big disturbance when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> [Tib. གྲོང་དྲག] Regiment came?   

**A:**  It was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> who started these problems. At that time there were a few disturbances. To be precise, the situation was tense and everyone thought that unless I am careful, my life might be in danger. Everyone thought like that. I remember this very clearly. At that time, I must have been 9 or 10 years old. After that, when Kujar was exiled, then Lungshar started the new organization.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> started the new organization only after he had managed to oust Kujar?   

**A:**  Yes. Only after that.   

**Q:**  It was not before that?   

**A:**  No, it was not before that. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s new organization was known as, "All people gathering towards happiness" Kyichog Kündün. If I tell you the real purpose or gist of this organization, I think, it was more in the line of democracy.   

**Q:**  Who knows whether he really wanted to introduce democracy or if he wanted to do the feudal system?   

**A:**  At that time the talk was like that. They held one meeting at the Tsikhang Office in which they suggested that government officials should be appointed in a equal way. They must take into consideration their seniority, their accomplishments and their capabilities, and the promotions should be based on these things. They objected to people who were appointed to the government service without taking these things into consideration. They said that they did not approve of appointing people at random [without qualifications]. So from this you can detect that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was laying the foundation for democracy.   

**Q:**  That's not the foundation for democracy. There is no question that government officials should be selected based on their abilities. Even in democracy, the top officials are elected by the people and the low officials are appointed by the top officials. So there is no question about selecting people with abilities and so on.   

**A:**  Precisely. They were laying the foundation for overthrowing the old government. This gesture or move implied that what the old government was doing was wrong. They held a meeting for many days and they might have had a kind of procedure for doing their work. But probably they didn't get much chance to do that. Wasn't there a talk about my late uncle Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] who was in the Kyichog Kündün having said that there will be some people keeping a lot of snuff on their nails while talking at the meeting. [this meant the representatives of the monasteries].   

**Q:**  Was he one of the most important members?   

**A:**  Yes, among the most important members. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was there, of course, but he would always stay and manipulate from behind the scene. Janglojen's position was like this or this [seems he was pointing with his fingers to indicate the second or third position].   

**Q:**  Who were the other ones?   

**A:**  Gajang Tempa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ] was one of the more important members.   

**Q:**  Was Gajang Tempa also acting from behind the scenes?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> never came out openly. He would always operated from behind. The other important members were [the tsidrung] Kongtrug [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྲུག] and Gajang Tempa. These were the other important members, and the next might be Janglojen. [laughter] This was what I thought.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> never came out openly?   

**A:**  Never. They would convene a meeting and they would never let it be known who the head of the organization was. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> would also attend the meeting, but they would never point out who was the real leader of the organization. At that time, we went for a pilgrimage in Lhoka. Wasn't the abbot in charge of Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས་མཁན་ཆོས] a lame person. He was close to my father and came to visit my father. Demo Labrang also might have visited the abbot in charge.   

**Q:**  Of course, because he was the abbot in charge.   

**Q:**  What happened to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> became mad.   

**Q:**  Is that definite?   

**A:**  Yes. He definitely became crazy.   

**Q:**  Did he become crazy before he resigned or after he resigned?   

**A:**  He became crazy before he resigned.   

**Q:**  Is that definite?   

**A:**  Yes, it is definite.   

**Q:**  Why did he become mad? I mean normally when you become mad there is bound to be some reason or cause.   

**A:**  There was no any definite reason. Actually, they had this madness streak in their family.   

**Q:**  You mean it was hereditary?   

**A:**  Yes, people say that. I will tell you an incident to prove that madness was in their blood. One of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s sons used to be in charge of the treasury that collected grain or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> to be used for the ritual purposes [Tib. ཙམཤེཔ].   

**Q:**  You mean <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> Shape's son?   

**A:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>'s son. He was known as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་བཞེས་པ] The person in charge of the Tsamshe Legung [tib. རྩམ་བཞེས་ལས་ཁུངས], the treasury for collecting tsamba used for ceremonial ritual purposes.">Tsamshepa</a> and at that time he lived in Lhasa with his wife. Trimön at that time was a Shape and had been posted as the Doji in Kham. He became the Doji after Champa Tendar [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར]. He used to live in Chamdo and his son was in Lhasa. So once his son wrote a letter to him saying that his wife had died.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  His son had written him a letter saying that his wife had died. [laughter] So <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was really worried and all his friends and his well-wisher came and offered condolences. Then after one month he received another letter saying that his wife was not very obedient and had not died. These prove the madness streak that was in their family. [laughter]   

**Q:**  What type of person was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>? Was he a liberal or conservative, easy going or mean and so on?   

**A:**  There is no doubt that he was a very learned man, but at the same time he was quite cruel.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by cruel?   

**A:**  He would not have any compunction about having someone killed or beaten. He had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>'s eyeballs gouged out. Wasn't that terrible? That was really done by Trimön.   

**Q:**  As a person he was very cruel, but how was his loyalty to the government? Was he a person who had ideas or thoughts to improve or make progressive moves for the country? Like having a modern outlook. Did he want to advance the country or was he conservative?   

**A:**  He was more on the conservative side. He didn't think that the new system was good. He was very powerful and he was not a person who would let anyone go above him. He wanted to keep all the power for himself.   

**Q:**  What about Langchungwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ]?   

**A:**  He was a very weak person.   

**Q:**  Was Langchungwa very stupid?   

**A:**  Yes. He was a person who did not have any character. Anyone could do anything with him. He didn't have strong willpower of his own.   

**Q:**  Then what about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Gendün Chödar [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་དར]?   

**A:**  He was already dead.   

**Q:**  No, he was not dead. When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> problem arose, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Gendün Chödar was the Kalön Lama. You know the Gendün Chödar of Kundeling. He was the Kalön Lama.   

**A:**  According to my recollection, Trekhang was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama.   

**Q:**  He was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama after Gendün Chödar.   

**A:**  Yes it must have been like that. Gendün Chödar did not have any connection with our family so I really don't know much about him.   

**Q:**  Earlier you told us that when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> resigned he showed your father a wire message saying that it was from Janglojen Gung?   

**A:**  That was not Janglojen, that was Chiang Kaishek. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had already asked permission to resign and the permission had been already granted.   

**Q:**  Did Reting let him resign because he was behaving rather crazy? Once a person becomes crazy then he cannot remain as a shape.   

**A:**  Yes. A few outside people were also saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> had become crazy.   

**Q:**  Was it widely known?   

**A:**  A few people in the government offices were talking about his madness. However, it was not very widely known by the public. It was not very widespread. At that time, probably <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> went to Reting.   

**Q:**  He had worn a white shamtab.   

**A:**  Yes, he had worn a white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤམ་ཐབས] The lower part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">shamtab</a>, but I doubt whether he had worn a white shamtab when he went to see Reting.   

**Q:**  People were saying that he had gone wearing a white shamtab. It's definite.   

**A:**  I doubt it. I think he had not gone that crazy. However, there was talk that he had gone wearing a white <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤམ་ཐབས] The lower part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">shamtab</a> and was seen going around the Wontöshinga [Tib. འོང་སྟོད་ཞིང་ག] Market. There was talk like that. But I doubt if he had gone to Reting wearing a white shamtab. Probably he went to Reting wearing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> official outfit and said, "Now I want to resign." He then recited the role he played in the Simla Treaty. He mentioned all the details about this to Reting and he also told about his deeds while he was the Doji in Kham.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was the one who brought down Nyarong Gombo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. ཉག་རོང་མགོན་པོ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. It was Trimön who brought Nyarong Gombo Namgyal under control.   

**Q:**  How did he do it?   

**A:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and Nyarong Gombo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> was a very powerful and cruel man. He was sort of a bandit and a very bad person. So the government was feeling uneasy and in danger because they thought since he is becoming very powerful, he might create problems for the government. At that time Gombo Namgyal didn't appear at all. Trimön made friends with this fellow and when they became quite friendly, one day he called this person to him and then he set a trap and he finished off Nyarong Gombo Namgyal. So he told the Regent that he had broken his oath to Nyarong Gombo Namgyal. Before he could made friends with this fellow, Trimön had made a oath with him that he would not harm him. But later, he went against his word, so now Trimön wanted to repent for his big sin. Trimön said that I committed this big sin for the government and want to repent it. So, at that time, the people in Sherong [Tib. ཤེ་རོང] and Lumpa [Tib. ལུམ་པ] were catching a lot of fish. So he said that as repentance from his personal side as well as from the government's side, they must stop the people from killing fish. In compensation, they must pay these people a certain amount of grain, known as Nyandru [Tib. ཉ་འབྲུ]. The government accepted this, since our government is the master of religion and offerings. So they stopped these people from killing fishes and paid them the Nyandru as compensation.   

**Q:**  What does Nyandru mean?   

**A:**  The people in these regions did not have very good crops and couldn't manage having the seeds and their food. The yield of the crop was not good because the fields were located at the river bank and when the river was in spate, the crops would get damaged. So the government distributed a certain amount of grain to them and collected a small amount of interest and ordered them to stop killing fish. This was known as the Nyandru. Otherwise these people used to catch a large number of fish. Normally we have a custom in Tibet that when anyone gets sick they ask for divination and the divination [sometimes] said that they had to spare 1,000 or 10,000 lives. If the household was poor, how could they spare so many lives? Therefore, they would buy a large quantity of fish and let them loose giving them a fresh life. They would fix the rates for the piles of fish. So previously, what these people did was that when some people bought these fish and let them loose, the fishermen would catch them again. In the past, people would use nets for fishing. So it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> who prohibited these people from fishing for large quantities of fish, although might catch a few fish to eat. He had done it like a repentance. He had given his word to Nyarong Gombo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> that no harm would come to him, but that was a false promise and he killed him. So as a way of repentance, he abolished fishing in this area. So Trimön related his past deeds [to Reting] when he went as a staff member when they made the Simla treaty. At that time, he was a tsipön.   

**Q:**  When they were signing the Simla treaty, was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> a tsipön?   

**A:**  He was one of the tsipön and a commissioner [Tib. དོ་དམ་པ]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] was the overall person in charge of this treaty and he also was the prime minister (Tib. the Lönchen [བློན་ཆེན]). After coming back from negotiating the treaty, he was made a shape. When he was appointed as a shape, then he went down to he Kham area where he was Doji for three years and then he came back to Lhasa. In Lhasa, for many years he served the government as a shape. So after relating all this, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> said, "Now because of old age I cannot serve the government anymore and I am thinking of seeking permission to resign."   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> said this himself?   

**A:**  Yes, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> said this himself. When Reting heard this, he asked Trimön not to resign. He said if you resign, then I am very young now and inexperienced, so how shall I be able to take the political responsibility?. Actually, we should offer you the prime minister position [Tib. སྲིད་བློན] because of your past contribution to the government. You should never resign from the government. If you insist on resigning, then since I am very young, I cannot run the country. To run a country it is very dangerous and difficult. So please never ask to resign. Trimön thought that if he really insisted that he resign then they would not let him resign. So he thought if he kept on insisting, maybe they might offer him the prime minister position. Then it would be very good. So with this in mind he wrote a petition of resignation. When he wrote this, there was no one who would reject it. They granted him permission to resign and he was relieved of his duties. Trimön could not say anything and his plan misfired.   

**Q:**  When he submitted the petition of resignation and no one requested him to stay, couldn't he have said that I made a mistake and I want to withdraw my petition of resignation?   

**A:**  No, that was not possible. He voluntarily offered his resignation, so it was very awkward to say that he changed his mind.   

**Q:**  But was he crazy?   

**A:**  At that time, he behaved as if he was normal. He was the overall person in charge of building the golden stupa (Tib. Gelek Dönjo [དགེ་ལེགས་འདོད་འཇོ]) to keep the remains of the 13th Dalai Lama. Drunyichemmo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Rampa</a> was the commissioner and my late father was the tsipön.   

**Q:**  I thought <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བ] The name of the aristocratic family of an important government official.">Trogawa</a> was the person in overall charge of that project.   

**A:**  Maybe <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བ] The name of the aristocratic family of an important government official.">Trogawa</a> was the tsipön in charge earlier. I am not very certain. I doubt Trogawa was there. I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the tsipön then.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བ] The name of the aristocratic family of an important government official.">Trogawa</a> was the tsipön.   

**A:**  Anyway my father was one of them.   

**Q:**  When a person is not well mentally then they tend to do funny things. For instance, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> might have said he wanted to resign without meaning it. Crazy people get crazy notions. Reting might have said "No, you must not resign, without you the country cannot function smoothly and so on." Do you think that Trimön still insisted that he wanted to resign with a hope of getting a better position?   

**A:**  Yes, most probably it seems like that. Anyway, then he was permitted to resign. However, he used to come regularly to carry out the work of building the golden stupa in which the remains of the late Dalai Lama were to be kept. Once <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> came and took out the telegram and showed it to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> and my late father. At that time, Ramba was the drunyichemmo. Trimön said I resigned a few days back and now I have received this telegram from Chiang Kaishek. The telegram was in Chinese. Ramba and my father could not make out what was written in it, but later they found out that the Chinese had asked Trimön not to resign. Trimön told them that he had already resigned so now what should he do? Ramba kept quiet and so did my father. They did not make any comment. My late father told me this. At that time, there was talk that it was said in the Kashag that since Trimön had resigned, so we are going to withdraw his cushion [seat] from tomorrow.   

**Q:**  Why did he think that he would become the prime minister when there was already a prime minister in office?   

**A:**  Yes. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> Künga Wangchuk [Tib. གླང་མདུན་ཀུན་དགའ་དབང་ཕྱུག] was the Prime Minister then. However, you cannot really count on Langdün as a man. I mean he was completely without any force of character. Whatever the Regent would say, Langdün would obey without questioning. Most of the older generation with some idea about the government officials knew about this. The younger generation might not have known it. If Langdün said something as a command everyone would smile and say, "Yes Sir" with great respect, but no one would treat it seriously. They would just ignore it.   

**Q:**  Did Reting really tell <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> that he must not resign?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How is that? Do you have any proof?   

**A:**  No, but my father told me these things.   

**Q:**  I see, your father had told you that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> and Reting had such a talk?   

**A:**  Yes, he told me that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> went to Reting and told him these things. Trimön told him about his achievements and the different work he had done for the government like the Simla pact and his other achievements in Kham where he had served as the Doji. After that, for a long time he served the government as a shape, but now he said that he was physically not well and he could not serve the government anymore, so he must be permitted to resign.   

**Q:**  Had he mentioned these things in his petition of resignation?   

**A:**  Most probably he must have written it like that. Yes, I think it is highly probable. However I have not seen his petition of resignation.   

**Q:**  When Reting implied that he might be made the prime minister, did Reting plan to kick him out? Maybe Reting realized that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> should be made to resign. So maybe he tricked him and made him resign voluntarily?   

**A:**  Reting said these things because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> himself had made it clear in his narration how ably he had served the government. He recited the Simla pact, his achievements in Kham area and his shape-ship in Lhasa and so on. Therefore, Reting didn't want to disagree with him and said that you are one of the most capable shapes, well experienced and well informed. At that time, Trimön was quite powerful and the Kashag was completely under his control.   

**Q:**  How did he have control over Kashag?   

**A:**  In the Kashag, he was the most powerful person and most of the other influential people were under him.   

**Q:**  Was he crazy at that time?   

**A:**  A few people were saying that he was crazy, but only behind his back. No one accused him of being crazy to his face. Therefore Reting answered him in a very diplomatic way. Secondly Reting didn't want <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> to stay in power. In view of this there was another talk.   

**Q:**  What was that talk?   

**A:**  There was a petition sent to the Regent that had used highly honorific language and along with the Regent's name they had mentioned the Prime Minister's name as well as all the Sawangchemmo. Just before <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> became crazy, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> brought the petition to the Kashag after the Regent had already read it. Trimön was also in the Kashag. Trimön asked the nendrön to show him the petition. When he saw that the petition was addressed to the Regent, Prime Minister and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>, he said, "See, we are also mentioned here." He was implying that they were mentioned because they were ones with influence in the affairs of the government. From this incident we can conclude that he was a person who loved power and had high ambitions.   

**Q:**  I would like to ask you two questions: First, when was the talk that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was crazy and so on going on, and the second point is when he said that our names have also been mentioned in this petition, did he do this before or after he had resigned from being <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>?   

**A:**  It was before he resigned.   

**Q:**  Are you definite?   

**A:**  Yes, I am definite   

**Q:**  Have you heard any talk that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> had instigated or had any hand in this incident?   

**A:**  No, I haven't heard anything like that.   

**Q:**  Now, there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] event. In the Kham area Panda attacked Nornang and captured the military regiment stationed there so was there any compensation made for the property looted and destroyed in this battle?   

**A:**  Yes, compensation was made.   

**Q:**  How did they compensate?   

**A:**  They sought permission from the government to be permitted to compensate for the property lost in the attack.   

**Q:**  How did they ask this?   

**A:**  There were about 500 rifles, as each soldier had a rifle. Besides this, there were four machine guns and a Lewis gun. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> had asked that they be permitted to compensate for the loss of these. He asked the government's permission.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What proof do you have that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> asked for permission from the government to compensate for these properties?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> himself told me about this.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> himself told me this.   

**Q:**  Who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> at that time? Was it Yamphel? I think at that time Tsongpön Nyima was the [head of] Panda?   

**A:**  No, Yamphel had already come to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  At that time was the main person Nyima?   

**A:**  Yes. Nyima was the main person, but he had recently passed away.   

**Q:**  No. He hadn't passed away yet. Then in Kham, Tobgye [Tib. སྟོབས་རྒྱས] was there but in Lhasa Nyima was the person in charge.   

**A:**  Tobgye was then in Kham.   

**Q:**  But at that time Nyima was still alive.   

**A:**  The person who stayed in Lhasa was Nyima.   

**Q:**  Is that true?   

**A:**  However, before Nyima died, Yamphel had already come up [to Lhasa].   

**Q:**  Yes, he had already come.   

**A:**  Maybe 2-3 months before the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, Nyima died.   

**Q:**  During the trouble was Nyima was there?   

**A:**  No, he was not there.   

**Q:**  During the trouble Nyima was there?   

**A:**  No, he was not there. I doubt it. I swear that I have never heard about him. I would have known about him for I was very closely associated with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> family, almost like a family member.   

**Q:**  Yes, I know that.   

**A:**  At that time, Nyima was already dead and Yamphel had assumed responsibility for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> family.   

**Q:**  No, this does not appear correct. In the talk I had with Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] Chandzö, he told me that Nyima was the person who was in charge of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> family.   

**A:**  Yamphel himself told me that he had asked the government for permission to compensate for all the government property lost during <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye's attack in Kham.   

**Q:**  What about the private property of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  He did not tell me anything about the private property of the depön.   

**Q:**  Did you have any discussions with Nornang?   

**A:**  No, none at all. Jangling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> [Tib. བྱང་གླིང་ཇོ་ལགས] went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye and told him, "You didn't stay still which almost created a lot of problems for us. Now I have already promised the Tibetan Government that you will remain quiet. If you create disturbances, we and also our wives and children will have a disaster." So he listened, but he was not allowed to return to the Tibetan area. He was permitted to live in the Chinese area [where he had fled], and carry on a business or whatever.   

**Q:**  What answer did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye give to this?   

**A:**  Tobgye promised to behave himself and did not create any more trouble.   

**Q:**  Why did he all of a sudden attack in this crazy way. Was he mad?   

**A:**  At that time, there was no telegraph or wireless service in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Are you definite that there was no wireless and telegraph service in Tibet then?   

**A:**  I am quite certain.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a telegraphic message sent to China saying that the Chinese should hand over Tobgye?   

**A:**  Yes. It is possible that telegrams could have been sent to China from Lhasa via India and then relayed on to China. In Lhasa we did not have a telegraph office, and there were no other facilities like wireless or telephones either. Messages were sent on horseback, something like the pony express. It was said that Jangling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> reached <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye in one week going from Lhasa to Chamdo. This was a little more than 500 miles.   

**Q:**  That was very fast, right?   

**A:**  Yes, usually it took one month and 15 days to get there on horseback. You must however realize that we did not travel very fast, riding only for three or four hours a day. If someone was really determined, they could ride fast enough to do the distance in that time.   

**Q:**  Couldn't Tobgye have sent somebody to Lhasa to find out what was happening? But instead he chose to invite some lamas to perform prayers, etc. Why was that?   

**A:**  Tobgye had been informed that Kujar <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a>, the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama, had been arrested and sent into exile, and also that Gen Lame [Tib. རྒན་བླ་མེད], had been arrested and imprisoned. Nyima was also a favorite [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ] of the late Dalai Lama, and Tobgye was anxious about the fate of his half brother and the great distances [between them] did not allow for the quick transmission of news. Being a firm believer in doing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery, he did it and when he found that omens were not very auspicious, he invited some lamas and performed prayer rituals for seven days to the protector deities in Tibet. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> family were very firm believers in senriy lotteries. I will cite an example that will prove this. If a doctor had to prescribe some medicine, they would consult the senriy lottery to ascertain which medicine should be taken in the morning or when. This shows how firmly they believed in divine lotteries. So since he was then already suspicious and the divination prophecy was not favorable about the news of his half brother, he attacked the government forces in the area.   

**Q:**  Was he under Nornang at that time?   

**A:**  Do you mean <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a>? Panda at that time was Panda himself. He was not under anyone.   

**Q:**  Tobgye was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> in the Tibetan Regiment and Nornang was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and it is possible that he had to follow Nornang's orders.   

**A:**  No, he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> in the Markham Regiment   

**Q:**  When you say that he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> in Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས], do you mean that he was not under any other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, he was not under any other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>   

**Q:**  Was he under the Markham <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  I do not know who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> at Markham at that time. I heard that his rank was that of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a>, but he enjoyed the powers of a depön and became sort of independent. Coming back to the original answer, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery did not forecast any favorable prophecy, he got suspicious and attacked Nornang's Regiment.   

**Q:**  Let me ask you this? Did Tobgye not realize that the government would take reprisals against his family members in Lhasa. For example, if my relatives lived in Kathmandu, and I was to kill or harm a Nepalese, could I not expect reprisals against them there. How did he not think of this?   

**A:**  That is true, but Tobgye did it. Not only that, but Tobgye hated the government officials in Lhasa. He would say that the government officials did not treat them well, and would come and treat them very cruelly and take things away from the Khambas and become rich themselves. He was always thinking such thoughts and when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery showed an unfavorable prophecy, he acted without thinking.   

**Q:**  Did he distribute any pamphlets at that time?   

**A:**  I doubt it. At that time, Raga was with Tobgye.   

**Q:**  Which Raga? Do you mean Abo Raga? What was the relationship between Raga, Tobgye, Yamphel, and Nyima? Were they very close or was there some friction between them?   

**A:**  Their father's name was Tsongpön Nyijang [Tib. ཚོང་དཔོན་ཉི་བྱང]. He had one wife and Raga, Tobgye, and Yamphel were their children.   

**Q:**  And what about Nyima?   

**A:**  He was the child of a relationship that the tsongpön had with a mistress.   

**Q:**  Who was the eldest of them?   

**A:**  Nyima was the eldest, but from the legal marriage, Yamphel was the eldest, then Raga, followed by Tobgye. They also had a daughter, but I am not definite about her status, although I am sure that Tsongpön had a daughter.   

**Q:**  Were they on good terms?   

**A:**  They were on good terms with each other, although Yamphel and Tobgye were closest to each other. Yamphel and Raga were not as close, and also Tobgye and Raga were not very close. But Tobgye and Yamphel were very close.   

**Q:**  What about Nyima?   

**A:**  Nyima's case was like this. His father was Tsongpön Nyijang. He had sent Yamphel to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> [Tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ] to do business, and Raga and Tobgye to Lhasa. When the situation was like that, Nyijang was killed. He was shot.   

**Q:**  Who shot him?   

**A:**  No one knows for certain, but they suspected Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] [depön] who was known as a hero for being the killer.   

**Q:**  He was also the one who went to kill the [drönyerchemmo] Ara Garpo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They just suspected him, but they didn't have any proof. So as I told you, Yamphel was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> when Nyijang was killed. He had been picnicking playing mahjong during the picnic season called Dzamling Jisang [Tib. འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་བཟང]. Since Nyima was not the legal son, he could not have an equal share, but at that time Yamphel was in Dartsedo and Raga and Tobgye were very young and also not there. So the 13th Dalai Lama ordered that Nyima should take over the family responsibilities and look after the household as its head. In the meantime, Jangling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> was arrested as he had given the picnic or party. Consequently, he was suspected and taken into custody. After two or three years, Yamphel sent messages asking for money, but no reply or money was sent to him, so he realized that something was wrong with his father, and when his creditors started pressing him for money, and he could not pay he was kept under custody like a hostage. Finally, on the pretext of going to visit a hot springs, Yamphel left all his property and people behind and went to Markham. He stayed for ten or fifteen days there and then he went to Lhasa. When he reached there, he found that Nyima was about to die. I am not sure whether he was dead or about to die. And then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> trouble started. The problem started about two or three months after Yamphel reached Lhasa. That was when Tobgye's rebellion started.   

