# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.16 : Tape 16  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. bsam pho, bstan 'dzin don grub  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. bsam pho, bstan 'dzin don grub  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he continues his discussion about the expulsion of the resident Chinese from Lhasa and about how aristocratic officials got training in the use of bren-guns. He also talks about serving as one of the heads of the Sherpang legal office in Lhasa and about how he decided murder cases. He also discusses the Tibetan Foreign Office where he also worked and then he discusses the use of radios in Tibet in 1949-50. He then discusses how the Kashag divided responsibilities among the kalön for the first time in Tibetan history in 1949 and then talks about the fighting during the Chamdo invasion in 1950, including how Derge Sey and Ngabö surrendered.   

---  
### Tape 16  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_16/H_0205_16.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  However, soon the Guomindang government had to leave the mainland and run away to Taiwan.   

**Q:**  At that time, who took the responsibility for gathering the information and expelling the spies?   

**A:**  This was done by Namseling.   

**Q:**  Why were the Tibetans more worried about the Chinese Communists than about the Guomindang?   

**A:**  That was because the Guomindang may have said a lot, but they were not capable to put it into action. They looked rich and great, but they were broken. While with the Chinese Communists, whatever they said they put it into action. That was what the Tibetans were worrying about and that was why they had more fear of the Communist Chinese than of the Guomindang. Another thing is that in October 1949, the Communist Chinese were well established in China and were broadcasting on the radio. At that time we heard Geshe Sherab Gyatso making Chinese propaganda towards Tibet on the radio from somewhere in the Sichuan area.   

**Q:**  When they expelled the Chinese, at the same time did people say that now we have to build up the army, we have to buy guns, train soldiers and so forth. Did anything like that happen? Was anything like that going on?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time they started to think in that way. They started to train the young government officials, the kudrak. They started teaching them how to use Bren-guns, etc., and not only how to use them, but also how to dismantle and put them together. Both lay officials and monk officials were trained, probably in 1948-49. For example, Shölkang Jedrungla was one of them. They were supposed to do something, but by that time it had became kind of casual.   

**Q:**  Did they make relations with foreign countries and call in teachers to train them?   

**A:**  The Indian Government's troops taught them how to fire Bren-guns.   

**Q:**  That was in 1943.   

**A:**  Those were soldiers [being trained then]. But they also trained government officials.   

**Q:**  Who was the instructor?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  Did they raise a new army?   

**A:**  At that time they established new military regiments. They reestablished the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment which had been dismantled in the past. The Depön of the Drongdrag was Kharna [Tib. མཁར་སྣ]. Also some other regiments were set up; probably they reached the Ba and the Ma regiments. It might have reached the Tsa regiment, but I really don't know from where the troops were collected. [Regiments were numbered alphabetically]   

**Q:**  Were you a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> at that time?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Were any attempts made to start to negotiate with the Khambas? Did they start to coordinate assistance with the Khambas?   

**A:**  They made an attempt and there were the militias of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a> which included, Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ], Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར], and Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང]. Those were all Khambas.   

**Q:**  Were those places located close to each other?   

**A:**  Not really close to each other, but for many years we couldn't go beyond the Yangtze River.   

**Q:**  Weren't those places near Kongpo?   

**A:**  Kongpo was the nearest place. They were still three days horseback journey from Kongpo.   

**Q:**  How many people? Who were the leaders?   

**A:**  I don't know the numbers.   

**Q:**  Who was the leader?   

**A:**  The leader was the monk official Drumba [Tib. bhrum pa]. Probably, he didn't have the rank of depön. Later, he was imprisoned and became old and very poor. He is still living in Tibet as the caretaker of the Lukhang [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང] park in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When was that started?   

**A:**  Probably in 1948-49.   

**Q:**  What about the other groups, like Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ], Chamdo, Markham, Denkhog [Tib. ལྡན་ཁོག]?   

**A:**  Denkhog was already on the other [Chinese] side of Yangtze. Traya and Markham were on this side. Derge Sey was guarding the Markham area at that time. I heard he died just before the New Year.   

**Q:**  Were those militia or were they Tibetan government troops?   

**A:**  They were the militia collected from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a> area, and not from the other groups. At that time, the Depön Karchungwa [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང་བ] was in Gamtog [Tib. སྐམ་ཐོག] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Regiment, Shagjang Surpa [Tib. ཤག་བྱང་ཟུར་པ] was in Jomda [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ]. Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] was also somewhere in Kham and there were regiments there.   

**Q:**  These were the soldiers sent from Lhasa. There were no militia from those places, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you came back from India, what did you do?   

**A:**  I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤེར་དཔང] The Tibetan government&#x27;s investigatory/prosecutorial/legal office that investigates. 2. The heads/judges of this office.">Sherpang</a> [Tib. བཤེར་དཔང] [judge].   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤེར་དཔང] The Tibetan government&#x27;s investigatory/prosecutorial/legal office that investigates. 2. The heads/judges of this office.">Sherpang</a> means a judge?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you do as a judge?   

**A:**  There are eighteen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung (office) [Tib. ཞོལ་ལས་ཁུངས]. The people in these areas were under the jurisdiction of Shöl Legung and all their cases were decided by the head of the Shöl Legung, the Shölpa [Tib. ཞོལ་པ]. They would send their petitions to the Kashag and the Kashag would send the case to the Shölpa. In the area of Lhasa city, the cases were given to the Mipön by the Kashag. For the people under the Doji, all the cases were decided by the Doji <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>. The Doji Shape had power equal to that of the Kashag.   

**Q:**  You mean this one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>, the Doji, had the power equal to all the Shape of the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes, they all had the same power. All the cases we mentioned concerned murder cases. The rest of the murder cases in other areas went to the Kashag which handed them over to the legal office, the Sherkang.   

**Q:**  Who tried the other cases?   

**A:**  The Kashag would send them to various other offices and there was also a new office called Gyöship [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ] which was a branch judicial system where civil disputes were settled.   

**Q:**  Was there any set of legal codes for settling murder cases in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤེར་ཁང] The Tibetan government&#x27;s investigatory/prosecutorial/legal office that investigates cases.">Sherkang</a>? Was it according to the Code of the Ten Virtuous Deeds [Tib. ལྷ་ཆོས་དགེ་བ་བཅུ] and the Code of the 16 Virtuous Ethical Principles [Tib. མི་ཆོས་གཙང་མ་བཅུ་དྲུག]?   

**A:**  Yes, we had that.   

**Q:**  That is ridiculous because they were ancient codes.   

**A:**  We also had the 13 Legal Codes [Tib. ཁྲིམས་ཡིག་ཞལ་ལྕེ་བཅུ་གསུམ].   

**Q:**  Did you have that in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤེར་ཁང] The Tibetan government&#x27;s investigatory/prosecutorial/legal office that investigates cases.">Sherkang</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, we had that, but it was very, very old and we would not look at it because if we had to punish people according to that code it would be impossible. When there was a murder, we would arrest the murderer and lock him up and then we would make a verdict.   

**Q:**  How did you make the verdicts?   

**A:**  When there were murders due to fighting, there would be some kind of arguments made (about the facts of the case).   

**Q:**  Who made the arguments?   

**A:**  The family members of the killed person would make the argument. The murder cases were of two kinds -- on purpose or by accident. In the latter cases, some were given about 50 to 60 lashes and then let them go. Some were given about 100-150 lashes and were also given 100 lashes just after they arrive [called arrival lashes]. For the murders done on purpose, people were given more severe punishments like a lot of lashes and being sent to various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> to work as additional servant-type workers to do <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འུལ་ལག] A generic term for corvée labor that had to be performed for one&#x27;s manorial estate/lord without pay. One kind of ula required people to go and work and another kind required the provision of transportation animals.">ula</a> for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> families [Tib. ཁྲལ་སྣོན].   

**Q:**  When you became a new judge, a lot of cases would be settled by your judgments. To pass judgment, were there any law books or regular rules or records of previous cases which you could use as a reference?   

**A:**  There were no rules. Nothing to look at. It was only one's own judgment. Normally, for a killing that was done out of anger or greed and for the sake of money, etc., they give harsher punishments. In other cases when some people died accidentally or when people say things like when I touched my hand to him he died, then he would get off light. We were liberal in such cases. There were no written rules and there was no system of looking at previous cases. It was entirely up to the presiding judge to use his own judgment and pass sentence.   

**Q:**  Was there only one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤེར་དཔང] The Tibetan government&#x27;s investigatory/prosecutorial/legal office that investigates. 2. The heads/judges of this office.">Sherpang</a>?   

**A:**  There were two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤེར་དཔང] The Tibetan government&#x27;s investigatory/prosecutorial/legal office that investigates. 2. The heads/judges of this office.">Sherpang</a> and both had to agree to pass a sentence. Since I was young, I used to feel worried about making judgments because there were no documents to look at. I tried to make the decision plan [Tib. འཆར་གཞི] as fair as I could.   

**Q:**  Where did you have to submit the plan?   

**A:**  We had to submit the plan to the Kashag. After each trial, we had to submit all the petitions and interrogation notes from both sides to the Kashag. In this report, everything was written down word for word: the charges against the defendant, his denials or explanations along with the decision of the judge and the punishment. The murderer could not sign this report with his seal or name, but had to put his thumbprint because he was considered unworthy to sign since he was found guilty as a murderer. The other prisoners or defendants who were not killers could affix their seal and sign the report. Besides that, all the reports had to be collected, returned and be checked and then a suggestion of punishment was submitted for the approval of the Kashag together with a list with all the statements, counter statements, everything. Then it depended on whether the Kashag approved it or not.   

**Q:**  How many times did they approve it in your cases?   

**A:**  In my cases it was a hundred percent approved.   

**Q:**  You would say fifty lashes, forty lashes, like that?   

**A:**  Yes. Because when there was a fact-statement and a counter-statement, then you said: according to this counter-statement that was wrong, give him this punishment. And here he said, "This, this, this" but he was wrong so give him ten lashes for that. Then all of these were totaled up at the end and finally they came to a decision.   

**Q:**  Did you give the Kashag a choice of punishments or just one suggestion?   

**A:**  Sometimes we had one recommended decision and sometimes we would write two different suggested punishments and ask for the approval for one of them. They would approve it by writing on the letter, "Approved" [Tib. འཐུས].   

**Q:**  How long were you a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤེར་དཔང] The Tibetan government&#x27;s investigatory/prosecutorial/legal office that investigates. 2. The heads/judges of this office.">Sherpang</a>? Till the Chinese came?   

**A:**  For four years. I became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤེར་དཔང] The Tibetan government&#x27;s investigatory/prosecutorial/legal office that investigates. 2. The heads/judges of this office.">Sherpang</a> when I was 26 years old.   

**Q:**  Was this before you went to Beijing?   

**A:**  Yes, this was before that.   

**Q:**  What were you doing when you were first appointed? What was your job?   

**A:**  I was a Fourth Rank official, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a>, in the Foreign Office (Tib. ཆིགྱེ་ལེགུང [ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཁུངས]).   

**Q:**  What did you have to do when you first joined the Foreign Office?   

**A:** "> In the beginning, there was no work. We offered a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to our two superiors who had a separate room for their office and we were given tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མ་འབྲས་སིལ] A special dish consisting of sweetened rice, melted butter and wild sweet potatoes (gro ma).">droma dresi</a> and the staff were given one lump of butter for each of them.   

**Q:**  How was this given? By the office?   

**A:**  Yes. Actually, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> in the Foreign Office had to act as the secretary general [Ch. mi shu zhang] of the office. We would sit in the outer room. There were some 10 staff members under us.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a>?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't. Whatever matters there were, the person inside would tell us what to reply. Accordingly, we drafted the replies and showed it to them and they corrected it. When the corrections were done, then you looked at the staff members to see who had no work and gave it to them for the final copying.   

**Q:**  What kind of things do you remember doing? What kind of letters did you draft?   

**A:**  At that time, the communists had taken over China. We were all apprehensive about a Chinese invasion. We were sending troops to Kham. Then the Indians wanted to send an airplane to Tibet to take the Dalai Lama to India. This was suggested by an Indian airplane company. When we told them that there are no airstrips, they told us that they could built one in the big field at Tsesum Thang [Tib. ཚེས་གསུམ་ཐང]. They planned to build a rough one. When we asked them, "Wouldn't it take a long time? They said, "Usually, to build an airstrip it takes a lot of time, but this time, since it is planned that the plane would come all of a sudden, we will just build it roughly. Then amongst ourselves we said, "Suppose we build an airfield and the Chinese airplanes come, then what?"   

**Q:**  Did you have that talk in the Foreign Office?   

**A:**  Yes. They said, "Well, there is no problem. We can normally leave huge stones, hundreds of stones, on the ground. When you know it is your own plane coming, you can remove the stones so it could land. When you know it is not your own, then don't remove the stones and the plane cannot land." Anyway, they attempted to build a field, however ultimately it did not work out. That is what I remember.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag approve building an airfield?   

**A:**  The German Harrer was involved. Probably the idea of putting stones and removing stones was Harrer's idea. Whether the Kashag had approved it or not, I don't remember.   

**Q:**  Do you remember if the work actually started. Did people started to move stones and clear the area?   

**A:**  I did not see that. I heard that it was not a good one. Even in Chamdo, people asked me whether it was true that they were building an airfield near Lhasa. So I think it was made. After that, it might have been given to another office. At that time, probably, they might have built the airfield.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that the job of the Foreign Office to build the airfield?   

**A:**  Yes, but after that, they might have given this work to other offices. By that time, it was almost the time for the Dalai Lama to leave.   

**Q:**  At that time, Chamdo was already lost, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Chamdo was already lost or we were just about to lose it to China.   

**Q:**  Didn't the foreign office complain to the other international foreign offices?   

**A:**  At that time, an attempt was made to send representatives to China, America, England and Nepal. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Mindrubu [Tib. སྨིན་དྲུག་སྦུག] were supposed to go to China; Surkhang Surpa and somebody else were supposed to go to America. They did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery to find out who would go where. But finally, they had to wait at Gyantse and couldn't go. Some of them were also supposed to go to India.   

**Q:**  Who stopped them at Gyantse?   

**A:**  The Kashag stopped them. Our Kashag was very powerful. If they said that you must refrain from going, then that's it.   

**Q:**  The foreign office should be the one in charge of it, right?   

**A:**  The Foreign Office was under the Kashag and they had to obey the orders from the Kashag.   

**Q:**  You said that the Tibetans feared the Guomindang less than the Communist Chinese because the Guomindang was not well organized and the Communist Chinese were putting into action what they said. That was around 1948-49, right? The question is how did the Tibetans realize that the communists were better organized and the Guomindang was not well organized?   

**A:**  Because we had dealt with the Guomindang for a long time and whatever they said they might not be able to put into practice. They were like a drunkard. It was like our government in the past. For example, in the beginning, the Guomindang said that they are going to send bodyguards with the Panchen Lama, but they could not send soldiers with the Panchen Lama and he died in Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ]. They said that they would do this, but they couldn't do it.   

**Q:**  How did the Communist act?   

**A:**  On the other hand, the communists fought right after they made the decision, and the Dongbei area was lost. And they were moving into Beijing and Shanghai so these were also lost. At that time, we could hear the news one after another about such and such places being lost. At the time of Reting, probably the Guomindang might have sent troops.   

**Q:**  What was the real evidence that Chinese troops were sent to Tibet during the Reting period?   

**A:**  Except for the telegram from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a>, there was no other evidence. Chiang Kaishek sent a telegram to the Tibetan Government stating that the Kashag was not allowed to touch Reting because Reting was, firstly, the person who recognized the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama and brought the Dalai Lama [to Lhasa]. Secondly, he was the Regent of Tibet. Thirdly, he was a person with a rank from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 中央] 1. The Central Committee of the CCP. 2. The Central Government of China. 3. Sometimes it also conveys &quot;China.&quot;">zhongyang</a> [China]. That was a strong telegram. On top of that, the Khendrönlosum sent another telegram saying that such and such a regiment had been ordered to move towards Tibet. Probably, they did that. This was the only proof. There was no other evidence.   

**Q:**  Was it really true that Chiang Kaishek sent a telegram to the Kashag?   

**A:**  That was true. In the years 1948, 49 to 50, people started moving towards India. People started packing up their valuables and started shifting towards India and towards the monasteries also [leaving things in the monasteries for safe-keeping]. It was in that period that the monasteries even started buying Indian rupees and started to exchange and save Indian currency.   

**Q:**  Even in my own little <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> in the monastery they did this. I remember that they packed a bag full of Indian currency and left it in front of my table so in case anything happened, you could pack that bag and run. It was there until 1959, I didn't pick it up then.   

**A:**  In 1949, in April, the Guomindang started running towards Taiwan. Then it became a sort of hopeless. From that time onwards, the situation became hopeless. In October, they announced the formation of the new Chinese Government. In the 7th or the 8th month, Xining was lost. Then people almost became hopeless.   

**Q:**  How long did you work in the Foreign Office before you left?   

**A:**  I became the Rimshi in the Foreign Office for a few months only, then the Dalai Lama left [for Yadong]. The day after the Dalai Lama's departure, I was ordered to go to Chamdo. I had only been in the Foreign Office a few months. From 1944 onwards, people started worrying and a lot of meetings took place in Lhasa. People were talking about their fear that the Communist Chinese were going to be stronger and scarier and were coming up towards Tibet and we were sitting near China. They started buying guns from the British and of course the guns were terribly bad and useless and rotten things, and there were even old ones that had been painted new. The gun barrels had become so wide that if you put a bullet in the barrel upside down, it would pass through the barrel. The guns were repainted and given as new or given to us as a great treasure. Actually, it was the left-over waste of the 2nd World War. Since we had been unable to produce anything ourselves, we accepted it with gratitude. That was what happened.   

**Q:**  When did they do that?   

**A:**  Probably, they started doing that from 1944. At that time, my late brother Tsögo was the Phari Dzong head, and he had to transport a large number of guns and ammunition and cannons and other military requirement. When the communists became stronger and people were saying that we couldn't handle them, about two years later we started to send people to various countries. For example, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Mindrubu were supposed to go to China to talk. Chömpel Thubdenla and Dzasa Gyetagba were supposed to go to the United Nations.   

**Q:**  At that time, did the people know what the United Nations was?   

**A:**  Yes, we knew that this was an international assembly. Many others were going to different places. I don't remember the names and people properly, but a few groups were supposed to go. Their mission was to go to various countries to seek help because the communists were going to attack us. They were supposed to go to seek their help.   

**Q:**  At that time they couldn't go. What was the reason that they were stopped at Gyantse?   

**A:**  I don't know the reason. At that time the government was doing whatever the Chinese and British told them to do, but the Chinese didn't have much power at that time. Probably the British, we were relying upon them, told them not to send them. It must have been a British idea not to dispatch them and we had to wait. At that time, the majority of the people in Lhasa were thinking about moving towards the south, to India. The Chinese, at the same time, were making propaganda in Tibetan language over the radio saying, "The people should oppose the Dalai Lama's government, we are coming up." Many people may not have heard the radio announcement, but quite a number of people will have definitely heard about it.   

**Q:**  How many people had radios at that time?   

**A:**  In Lhasa, probably most of the individual households might have had radios. Almost all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> families had them, the business people also will have had them.   

**Q:**  Did the common people have radios?   

**A:**  Quite a few among the common people also owned one.   

**Q:**  How did the radio work?   

**A:**  The radio ran on batteries. Charged batteries. At this time, the Kashag could not meet very often because there was a lot of trouble and there was much work to do. The four people [kalön] had to discuss these and all four members had to agree so it took a very long time to reach a unanimous agreement. So they divided up the responsibility. Probably this was the first time for this in the history of the Kashag. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> was responsible for military affairs and he also became the Magji Kalön. At the same time, Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> took responsibility for economic affairs, including military-civil supplies [Tib. འདུ་འགོད]. I was also working in that office. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> took responsibility for foreign affairs and Ngabö went to Chamdo. In this way, they divided responsibilities among the kalön. Decisions were then taken by individuals.   

**Q:**  Was this the first time that the Kashag divided up their duties?   

**A:**  Probably it was.   

**Q:**  When was this? Before you left for Beijing?   

**A:**  Probably at the end of 1949 or 1950. At this time, there was not much hope and many people were unsettled, like birds ready to fly.   

**Q:**  Then they liberated Chamdo and it was lost. Before Ngabö, Lhalu was in Chamdo. What did he do?   

**A:**  Lhalu did whatever he could. He organized some military units. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> Regiment had two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, Muja and Karchunga. I am not sure whether Muja took the 1st and the 2nd battalion and Karchunga took the 3rd and 4th battalions. Anyway, each depön took 2 battalions and Muja was sent to take over Denkhog in the 3rd or the 4th month and Karchunga was staying at Gamtog which is located at the river bank of the Yangtze. On the other side, it was Chinese territory.   

**Q:**  Isn't Denkhog located on the other side of the river?   

**A:**  I am not sure. Probably, it was on the east side of the Yangtze. Muja and those soldiers were sent to Denkhog to fight in the place where there was the Tara Temple [Tib. ལྡན་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལྷ་ཁང] before Chamdo was lost. At that time, the Battalion Leader, Rupön Bökhangwa was lost and Muja had to flee.   

**Q:**  Each battalion had 500 soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Depön was Shagjang Surpa. He was stationed in a place called Jomda. Derge Sey was the Tadang Depön and he was posted in Markham. Almost all the older regiments were divided and posted in various places except the Nyadang Depön, whose name was Laya Jarigpa [Tib. བླ་ཡ་བྱ་རིག་པ]. He was the son of Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར] who had gone as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a> [to Laya Jarigpa]. He was left behind because whenever he was ordered to go, he had some excuse like he didn't get the horse and pack animal corvée, so he was left. Except for him, all were posted out to the border areas. When the Chinese started to attack Gamtog in the eighth [Tibetan] month, the Chinese claimed that they didn't shoot guns but were only beating empty cans. As a substitute for cannons, they beat drums. Anyway, Karchunga fled from Gamtog. However, whether they shot guns or not, a lot of people were killed and quite a number were wounded, I saw them. They attacked in the night when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, Karchunga, was fast asleep. People woke him up. He suddenly got up not knowing were he was standing. He was wearing a cloak [without sleeves] and started running and probably, he didn't have his boots on and everybody was running. In the early morning when the sun rose one soldier saw him and said, "Aren't you the Depön? He said, "Yes, yes." Then he said, "What happened to your arms? Show me your arms" He said, "Nothing happened, but use your knife and cut my cloak so that I can put my arms out." At that time, he was wearing a double cloak.   

**Q:**  That was a cloak?   

**A:**  Yes, like a cloak. It didn't have sleeves. He had to cut little holes in the side so that his arms could come out. They ran up to Jomda, which took about three of four days on horseback. They arrived in Jomda.   

**Q:**  Is Jomda located on the north side in Riwoche?   

**A:**  It is in the Derge area.   

**Q:**  Wasn't Derge under Chinese control?   

**A:**  The east side of the Yangtze was under the Chinese and the west side was under the Tibetans.   

**Q:**  Where is the main part of Derge located?   

**A:**  It was on the Chinese side. The Yangtze runs through the center of Derge. A portion of Derge was located on the Tibetan side, but the major part was on the Chinese side. They reached Jomda late in the evening, at night. They said, "Now the Chinese will not be able to come because they have to come from two-three days away. They will not come that far [that quickly]." They relaxed that night and went to sleep. At that time, Shagjang Surpa was also in Jomda. While they were asleep, the Chinese arrived there. It was the day after the Chinese claimed that they had beat the cans. [They said] We have come to serve the Tibetans, we didn't come there to kill them, so we were just beating cans. But the Tibetans regarded that they made real war and quite a number of people were wounded and killed so they had to run away that night. Both Karchunga and Shagjang Surpa started running away for Jomda.   

**Q:**  They ran with their troops?   

**A:**  Yes, they ran with the troops and they might have made reports to Chamdo. Derge Sey was in Markham because he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of the defense garrison. When I [later] asked him about that, he himself said that when he realized that he was already surrounded by the Chinese, he thought that there was no way except to surrender. But people say that he surrendered even before the Chinese came. Whatever it might be, nothing happened to him, and not a single of his soldiers were wounded. He was the depön and under him the troops remained in tact. The Chinese left him like that. He took his orders from China that is all. Derge Sey's regiment was in tact and became part of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and he must have received all the salaries and expenditures from the Chinese. Even after 1962, when I was living in a house, even after the Lhasa trouble, I met an old soldier who said that he was related to the landlord and he said, "I am a soldier of Derge Sey." So the other soldiers of Derge Sey must be in tact also.   

**Q:**  When were they converted to be part of the People's Liberation Army?   

**A:**  I didn't know whether they were converted right at that time, or when they were converted.   

**Q:**  Derge Sey himself also became a Chinese military officer, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Probably the Chinese also paid them salaries because they couldn't get it from either the Tibetan government nor from Derge Sey. Later, the soldiers were still there. I heard that Muja Depön had fought a little bit in places like Gotö [Tib. གོ་སྟོད] and Singda [Tib. སིང་མདའ] and Dolado [Tib. དོ་ལ་མདོ] and he might have killed some Chinese and some Tibetans might also have been killed. In the reports that were sent from Chamdo they were saying that they had lost this area and that area, it was written that Karchungwa and Shagjang Surpa fled at night from Jomda and reached Kyurshung [Tib. སྐྱུར་གཞུང྄]. At Kyurshung they got attacked at night. It was two days from Chamdo. Then it became impossible to remain in Chamdo, so they had to run away again.   

**Q:**  Out of these <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> how many had military training?   

**A:**  Derge Sey might have had some. I am not sure, because he was a member of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment, so he might have had some training, otherwise no one had any.   

**Q:**  Muja?   

**A:**  Muja didn't have training, but he was a very brave man who was not afraid of anything.   

**Q:**  Tell us something about Muja's life?   

**A:**  In 1959, he looked as if he was 50 years old. At the time when he was in Kham, he might have been 41- 42 years old. Later he died in a Chinese prison in Gansu. I don't have many ideas about him.   

**Q:**  Why do you say he was brave?   

**A:**  During the Reting period when the Sera War took place, probably, he was a depön. I heard that he used to boast that the Abo Hor [northern nomads] cannot manage a war. Don't worry he said, it is not necessary for me even to go there. He had some experience about warfare. He took part in the Denkhog battle. By nature he was a brave man, not easily frightened. In everyday life he was not a sort of easy, impressionable person. He was little bit something else [Tib. ཏོག་ཙམ་ཡོད་རེད].   

**Q:**  Can you tell me the ages of the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  At that time, I was 26 so Karchunga should be in the early forties. Laya Jarigpa must have been a little older than Karchungwa, say about 4, 5 years older. Derge Sey was 14-15 years older than me, so he should have been 40 or 41. Muja was about the same age. Then the Doji and his retinue had no other option but to run away, so they decided to flee. At night or at dawn, he ordered the armory in Chamdo to be burned down. When they were 10 miles from Chamdo town and crossing the Guru bridge, they could hear the arms and ammunition exploding. Nevertheless, some individuals [in Chamdo] were able to take some of the guns from there. They [Ngabö] fled that whole day and night. They left before sunrise from Chamdo and then went the whole day and night. However, they lost their way and somehow they returned to Drugugön [Tib. གྲུ་གུ་དགོན] Monastery and spent the night there. At Drugugön, before Muja came, they said that they would like to go to Lhasa via Lagong Ngamda which was on the main road. Before they left they were told that the Chinese had already arrived in Lagong Ngamda so Ngabö sent somebody to check whether the Chinese already arrived there. At about that time, before he received the answer, Muja arrived and told them I went to Sithogthang. You were not there and when I asked around, they said that you have left in this direction, so I followed you here. Muja told Ngabö, "Now let's go to Lhasa straight away, and there won't be any problem." Ngabö wondered how that could be possible because he had heard that the Chinese had already arrived at Lagong Ngamda. Muja said, "According to my judgment, even if the Chinese have arrived, there won't be many of them, maybe 1.000 or 2.000 at most, not more than that. I think 2,000 is not a problem at all, I will escort you, and we can attack them. We can cut across and go." Than Ngabö asked him how many soldiers he had. Muja said that he had a few cavalry. When he counted them they came up to 30 or 40. On top of that, the retinue of the Doji included 20 people on horseback. Ngabö told him that it was no use to go with 50 people against 2,000; so he decided not to go.   

**Q:**  Where did you hear that story?   

**A:**  Ngabö told me.   

**Q:**  Have you ever talked to Muja?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

