# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.20 : Tape 20  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he continues his firsthand explanation about how the 17-Point Agreement was discussed in Beijing, including how the Chinese insisted on the recognition of the Panchen Lama. He discusses the main points of the Agreement and how he suggested that the police force in Tibet should be maintained and built up so it could be used to fight the Chinese in the future if the Chinese government might get toppled by internal struggles. And he explains Ngabö's decision not to ask the Tibetan government's opinion before signing the agreement.   

---  
### Tape 20  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_20/H_0205_20.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  In that case, the Chinese said we will make some plans and present it tomorrow. That was all that was said on the first day.   

**Q:**  When did Panchen Lama come and from where did he come?   

**A:**  He came from Xining and arrived in Beijing on the 27th or 28th.   

**Q:**  At that time, he was yet to be recognized, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time we [the Tibetan government] had yet to accept and recognize him as the real reincarnation of the Panchen Lama. The Chinese told us to go and meet him at the railway station.   

**Q:**  How did you go to receive him when he was not yet recognized?   

**A:**  We discussed this among ourselves and I said that I will go to meet him.   

**Q:**  Did Ngabö give you instructions about how to meet him and how to act with him?  

**A:**  No. He gave no instructions, but I acted as if I was meeting an old friend. I did not offer him a khata. We also did not shake hands. The Chinese actually wanted me to go in full official dress, but Ngabö didn't say anything about this so I went wearing an ordinary chupa. Most probably the Panchen Lama thought that I was just an ordinary Tibetan.  

**Q:**  Did he talk to you?   

**A:**  No. Then the Chinese took the Panchen Lama away, I don't know where they took him. I went back to my hotel. On the 30th, in the afternoon, we met once again. The Chinese had made ten points. These were the same ones that they had published and posted as a proclamation [Tib. རྩ་ཚིག] in the Chamdo area saying the people should return to the great home of the motherland. There will be freedom of religion as is written in the Common Program [Ch. gong tong gang ling] and so on.   

**Q:**  Were these points printed and distributed amongst you?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then what did they say?   

**A:**  On that day we just went through these points and pondered over them.   

**Q:**  Didn't they say anything after distributing these pamphlets?   

**A:**  Yes, they said, "We are presenting these 10 points - please read them and think it over. These points are subject to discussion and negotiation. If you accept them, that is good. The points which are not acceptable to you we will reconsider and we will remove them. Then, when the talking continues, we can add more points from both sides." After that, there was a silence for a while. Then the Chinese said that we should adjourn the meeting. Tomorrow we shall not meet, but the day after we will have a meeting. We have to attend a function and that would be very tiresome. We would have to stand for a long time. This was on the 1st of May [Ch. wu yi].   

**Q:**  When you returned, what did you talk about amongst yourself?   

**A:**  We didn't talk about it. There were no discussions amongst ourselves.  

**Q:**  Isn't that a bit strange?   

**A:**  No. We already knew how the Chinese operate so we were not surprised. Besides, we had already seen these points in Chamdo.  

**Q:**  No. I mean didn't you talk among yourselves saying they just distributed 10 points? And wasn't there any conversation regarding what you should answer?   

**A:**  There was no discussion.   

**Q:**  Was the general feeling that you were leaving it entirely up Ngabö because he is the leader?   

**A:**  Yes. Everyone was waiting for him to take the initiative since he was the head of the delegation. Even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་དྲུང] Abbr. Dzasa and Trunyichemmo. Frequently it refers to the two specific officials (Dzasa Künsangtse and Trunyichemmo Lhautara) who were sent from Yadong in 1951 to negotiate the 17-Point Agreement in Beijing.">dzadrung</a> were also doing the same.   

**Q:**  Isn't that a bit weird?   

**A:**  It was the old custom. Everything was left to the leader. If the leader didn't take the initiative, his subordinates just keep quiet.   

**Q:**  I want to ask you if before they sent the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་དྲུང] Abbr. Dzasa and Trunyichemmo. Frequently it refers to the two specific officials (Dzasa Künsangtse and Trunyichemmo Lhautara) who were sent from Yadong in 1951 to negotiate the 17-Point Agreement in Beijing.">dzadrung</a> from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> was there any agreement with the Chinese that they wouldn't proceed onwards to Lhasa until the time that the talks and negotiations were finished?   

**A:**  Yes. The Chinese had voluntarily made this agreement. Wang Qimei suggested this to Ngabö. First you send Samling and those two and we will not send the soldiers, who in turn must have reported this to the Kashag in his report.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese say this voluntarily?   

**A:**  Yes. This was the basis of the talks. On the 2nd of May, Li Weihan asked Ngabö what special instructions he had received regarding the Panchen Lama. Ngabö told him that he didn't have any instructions concerning the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  Was that true that he didn't have any instructions?   

**A:**  Yes, Li Weihan said: "How is that possible because this is one of the most important concerns and events for the Tibetan". Ngabö agreed, but told him again that he didn't have any instructions. Then Li Weihan asked him: "Would you accept him as the real Panchen Lama?" Ngabö said "no".   

**Q:**  Did Ngabö just say, "No," or did he say something like, "I can't do this. The recognition of the Panchen Lama is done by others like high Lamas, etc."   

**A:**  Ngabö said that we cannot accept anyone as the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama until he has been officially accepted by our Local Government.   

**Q:**  At that time, you didn't say the term "local government" [Tib. ས་གནས་སྲིད་གཞུང], right?   

**A:**  Yes. I meant the Tibetan Government. Ngabö explained to the Chinese how the Panchen Lama was normally selected. He told them that at present there were two or three candidates for the position of Panchen Lama in Lhasa. With these candidates names they would do a divination (Tib. thukdam [ཐུགས་དམ]). The Chinese asked him what he meant by divination. Ngabö explained that this was the traditional system of shaking the golden urn [Tib. གསེར་བུམ་སྤྲུགས] [with candidates names wrapped in small balls of tsamba dough]. Unless and until the candidates' name successfully passes this traditional test, there was no way one could become the Panchen Lama. To this the Chinese replied that China/the Central Committee [Ch. zhongyang] has already accepted him as the true incarnation. In other words, the Chinese were implying that since they had already chosen him as the Panchen Lama, we must support it. Then Ngabö told them, "If you have accepted him that is it, but we have not accepted him."   

**Q:**  Did everybody hear this? Was there a microphone? Were the Chinese angry or were they still polite?   

**A:**  There were no microphones, but since the discussions were being held in one room everybody could hear it.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese become more polite?   

**A:**  Later the Chinese became more polite and diplomatic. Later they were saying that before Qinghai was liberated, the Panchen Lama accepted Chairman Mao and Chairman Mao in return sent a telegram to accept him as the Panchen Lama. After that, the Chinese also told Ngabö separately, "Please accept the Panchen Lama."   

**Q:**  This was not decided in 1-2 days, right?   

**A:**  This discussion went on for about 6-7 days.   

**Q:**  How long did each session last - one hour, two hours?   

**A:**  Each session would last for about 2-3 hours.   

**Q:**  All the time you were discussing Panchen Lama?  

**A:**  Yes. Zhongyang would put forward some new reasons trying to convince us to accept the Panchen Lama. We resolutely refused to accept him.  

**Q:**  Did the Chinese ever say that you should contact your government?   

**A:**  No, nothing. They insisted that we should accept him. So the discussion was going on very seriously with dark faces.   

**Q:**  Didn't Ngabö ever say why don't we move on to another topic?   

**A:**  No. Finally the Chinese said, "Please accept him in order to save Mao's and Zhongyang's People's Government's face. You definitely have to accept it." This put us in a difficult situation. Then suddenly we received a telegram from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> saying that according to divination done by the Dalai Lama, the Chinese candidate called Gombo Tsering or Wangchuk something [Tib. མགོན་པོ་ཚེ་རིང། དབང་ཕྱུག] was the true incarnation of the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  This was after about 5-6 days, right?   

**A:**  Probably, after 6-7 days. This made us very happy since the Chinese had forced us into a difficult situation.   

**Q:**  Had this accepting the Chinese candidate as the real Panchen Lama have something to do with the negotiations? Had the Chinese contacted <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>?   

**A:**  I don't know if there was any connection with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, but it relieved us of a heavy burden.   

**Q:**  Goldstein: Did you [to Gelek] hear something about this?   

**A:**  Gelek: According to what I heard, people say that Ngabö had sent a telegram to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> saying that the Chinese were putting us under great pressure, so please accept their candidate as the Panchen Lama.   

**A:**  I don't know about that. I don't recollect anything like that. After receiving the wire, we went to visit the Panchen Lama. We offered him three prostrations and showed him all the respect you owe to the Panchen Lama. [laughter] While visiting him he asked us to sit down. All the sofas were covered with yellow brocade so we didn't feel comfortable. Normally the yellow color is accepted as a holy color and Tibetans don't use them as sofa covers and so on. Then the Panchen Lama gave us a dinner.   

**Q:**  On that day were you wearing your official dress?   

**A:**  Except for the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་དྲུང] Abbr. Dzasa and Trunyichemmo. Frequently it refers to the two specific officials (Dzasa Künsangtse and Trunyichemmo Lhautara) who were sent from Yadong in 1951 to negotiate the 17-Point Agreement in Beijing.">dzadrung</a> who were wearing the dress called tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ], we were wearing the same usual chupa. During the dinner party, Phüntso Wangyal was teasing me. He was laughing because until now we had vehemently refused to recognize him as the true incarnation and now here we were, showing him all the respect and being so submissive.   

**Q:**  Did the Panchen Lama speak to anyone?   

**A:**  No. He was very young, around 15-16 years old. So the discussion continued and then the Chinese put in the 17-Point Agreement that the rank, power and position will remain as before.   

**Q:**  Do you mean in the 10-points, right?   

**A:**  The 10-points were the base and it was not in that in the beginning.   

**Q:**  You did not discuss the points except regarding the Panchen Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They discussed about the Panchen first because it became an urgent issue. Then while the discussion went on, they said the rank, power and position of the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama will also remain the same as before. We said that it is all right to mention this about the Dalai Lama, but the Panchen Lamas' name should not be mentioned in this discussion. To this the Chinese retorted that if the Panchen Lama's rank, power and position need not be mentioned in this settlement, then the Dalai Lama's rank and the power also need not be mentioned. Do you want to withdraw his name as well? They further said, if you want to withdraw then you must withdraw both names. It was very difficult to withdraw the Dalai Lama's name so we had to concede the point.   

**Q:**  Were there any talks concerning the first point saying the foreign imperialist forces should be expelled and Tibet should return to the motherland? Didn't you talk about that?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't any talk about that.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  The Chinese claimed that foreign imperialist forces were operating in Tibet and that they will root them out. We Tibetans denied that there were foreign imperialist forces in Tibet. The Chinese said that they were there but that we didn't know about it. So then we said, "All right, if they are there then you take them out."   

**Q:**  Was this all said by Ngabö alone?   

**A:**  Ngabö would start and conclude the point that we had talked about the previous night, but when we were discussing with each other, everyone was expressing their views.   

**Q:**  What about this phrase "returning to the great motherland?"   

**A:**  That was the whole point. We had come to attend this conference because we were more or less forced to return to the great motherland.   

**Q:**  Did they say how you should return to the great motherland?   

**A:**  Before accepting to join the great motherland, we made numerous appeals to various countries but no one came to our assistance, so we had no other choice but to accept and to agree to return to the so called motherland.   

**Q:**  Did the instructions from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> say to make an agreement at all costs - whatever the terms might be?   

**A:**  No. In the 10-point instruction from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, there was no talk at all about returning to the motherland.   

**Q:**  What was the order of discussion? Was this the next issue that was discussed after the discussion about the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did anybody ask what this meant, this 'returning to the great motherland'?   

**A:**  No. there wasn't anything like that. Our understanding was that it meant to accept Tibet as a kind of part of China, but the internal power would be left entirely in our hands.   

**Q:**  Did no one talk about this after retiring from the sessions to your rooms?   

**A:**  I don't know. I really don't remember. Anyway, it was understood we would be a part of China externally.   

**Q:**  The second point was that the local government of Tibet shall actively assist the People's Liberation Army to enter Tibet and consolidate the national defense?   

**A:**  Yes, that is true.   

**Q:**  What discussions took place on this point?   

**A:**  There was no discussion on this point at all because it meant that we should do our best.   

**Q:**  Did anyone ask how many soldiers were going to be sent, etc?   

**A:**  No, there were no such talks.  

**Q:**  Why is that? Did you feel that it was inappropriate to ask those questions?   

**A:**  We could not ask for specification about the number because the Chinese said that there was no need to keep a large force on the border when there was no trouble. In case trouble should arise, they would have to send a large force. They said that they would accept any help given by the local government.   

**Q:**  The Third Point is: The Tibetan people have the right to exercise national and regional autonomy under the unified leadership of the Peoples' Central Government.   

**A:**  I don't think there was any discussion on this - no there was no talk on it.   

**Q:**  [Then there was the point] The central authority of China will not alter the existing political system of Tibet; will not alter the established status, functions and power of the Dalai Lama. The officials of the various branches shall hold office as usual.   

**A:**  We had no objection to that.   

**Q:**  The sixth point mentioned the established status, function and power of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama. That means the same as the status functions and power of the 13th Dalai Lama and 9th Panchen Lama, when they were friendly and had amicable relationships with each other?   

**A:**  Yes that is true. In the beginning, it was said the power of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama will not be altered. But, the Chinese said that this will not be okay. The power of the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama should be as same as when they were friendly and had amicable relationship during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and 9th Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  Why did they say that?   

**A:**  That means when they were not friendly. The Panchen Lama had to go to China. For example, the first Panchen Lobsang Chögyen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན] was even tutor to the Dalai Lama and became higher than the Dalai Lama. So they just made a kind of adjustment [Tib. ཡས་བསུ་མས་འགེབས] and said the power of the 13th Dalai Lama and the 9th Panchen Lama when they were friendly.   

**Q:**  Was there any talk about freedom of religion and the power and functions of the monasteries and monks and that there will no change regarding the religious endowments [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱུན་གཏོང་རྩ]?   

**A:**  There were some problems concerning the translation of the word religious endowment so Phüntso Wangyal asked whether it would be okay to replace religious endowments [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱུན་གཏོང་རྩ] with the word [Tib. ཡོང་སྒོ] which means 'income'. This was accepted.   

**Q:**  Wasn't the term endowment written by the Chinese?   

**A:**  It was written that China [Ch. zhongyang] will not alter the monasteries and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and will protect the monasteries and the tratsang. So Phünwang said why don't you call it "income" instead of "protection."   

**Q:**  Did they write the word endowment before Phünwang said that or what?   

**A:**  At first it was written protection for the monasteries and the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Was it written that the land belonged to the monasteries?   

**A:**  I don't remember every detail as it has been a long time. Before I could have recited every detail but now I don't remember them. Maybe I might recall them later.   

**Q:**  The next point, number 8 said, "The soldiers of the Tibetan army will be gradually reorganized into the People's Liberation Army and will become a part of the defense force of the Peoples' Republic of China. At that time, you were a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> so you might have had something to say about this.   

**A:**  I was yet to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> then. It was in a side agreement [Tib. ཟུར་ཡིག], which had 7 or 8 points. This was not one of the 17 points.   

**Q:**  It was discussed and drafted during the same period?   

**A:**  Yes, it was a continuation of the same points.   

**Q:**  It explained more?   

**A:**  Yes, it was in more detail and explained it better.   

**Q:**  Was there any objection from the Tibetan part to the 8th point?   

**A:**  Yes, there was much talk and discussion on this point. Later, there were a lot of talks about this.   

**Q:**  Later, from where?   

**A:**  There was a lot of talk after this. The 11th point was an important one.   

**Q:**  Did it mainly deal with language and the schools?   

**A:**  No, it was mainly on changing custom. Wasn't it written there [points to book]?   

**Q:**  It says that there will be reforms in Tibet and there will be no compulsions and force from the central authority. The local government should carry out the reforms when the people raise a demand for change, and when they do, the change should take place based on consultations. Are all the points we have been reading out to you the same as the original points or are there some changes?   

**A:**  I guess the content are basically the same but when you translate it there will be some differences, but actually the basic meaning or content is the same.   

**Q:**  No. I mean did the first ten points which were submitted by the Chinese as a basis for your talks change as the meeting progressed?   

**A:**  No. There was not much change in the original points, but later new points were introduced like The Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama would enjoy the same status, rank and power. Among these points, according to my own opinion, the 8th and 11th points were the two most important ones.   

**Q:**  Those two remained the same as they were originally proposed?   

**A:**  Yes, but the difference is that we did not know that the Chinese were capable of creating problems inside Tibet by instigating the people and making them say that we can't abide by the law and work doing the taxes. They thought that they could mobilize the people gradually, and the Chinese kind of duped us and made us sign the agreement. They were always emphasizing that the central government will not do this and that. When they spoke like this, we thought that it was true and that they will not do anything. We didn't have that kind of plan. One of the most important points is as follows: Normally before signing any treaty we would send a report by telegram to the Kashag and we would sign the agreement only after their approval. But in this case we sent a telegram only after signing the agreement.   

**Q:**  How did this occur? Did you talk about this?   

**A:**  We were saying that the Chinese were definitely going to liberate Tibet if we didn't agree to sign the treaty. Without hesitation, they were going to march to Lhasa. So if we sent a report and waited for a decision it would take a long time and there was a great possibility that our government might not agree and the Chinese would march right up to Lhasa. We discussed this and decided to sign the agreement instead of seeking an approval. Ngabö really took all the responsibility and sincerely made the decision that it was the best course to follow under the given circumstances. We naively believed that the Chinese would keep their word.   

**Q:**  Basically what you are saying is that you felt that you understood better what the real situation was. The Tibetans in Lhasa and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> were out of touch with reality and you knew what was really happening?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  That is very interesting. What were the Chinese saying? Did they suggest that you should sign the treaty and so on? Were they putting a kind of pressure on you?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did they say now it is the time to sign the agreement and so on?   

**A:**  They said, "Do we agree now?" If we all agree, then we have to put it down on paper and we will sign it on the 23rd." This was said on the 19th or 20th of that month.   

**Q:**  At that point, did anyone ask you all whether you had the authority to sign the treaty?   

**A:**  I forgot to tell you that in the beginning, on the 2nd or the 3rd, they told us that we can have talks and if we agree and conclude the talks, you have to sign it. In that case do you have all the authority and power to sign it? Ngabö said, "I have all the power to sign a treaty if I agree to it."   

**Q:**  Did Ngabö really have the power to sign the agreement?   

**A:**  It's like this. I think that the Dalai Lama had said, "Here are the ten points and I trust that you will not do anything bad. Therefore whatever you can achieve go ahead." Gelek: A shape has the right to make independent decisions - normally they don't exercise this power, they consult the Kashag. In theory, the 'shape' has the title, Kungö Denthob, [Tib. སྐུ་ངོའི་གདན་ཐོབ], enjoys the power to make independent decisions if he is alone. In case there is another shape, then they must consult each other.   

**Q:**  In the past, when they signed the Simla treaty did the Prime Minister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] ask the government?   

**A:**  I am not sure, but at that time, probably the Dalai Lama was here in Darjeeling.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama was in Lhasa. I don't think he asked because he was the Prime Minister.   

**Q:**  The ones who had the title of Kungö Denthob had the power to make decisions, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Wherever they go to an office, they don't need to make accounting [Tib. རྩིས་ཁྲ་བཞག]. If a shape's signature is there, they can withdraw the money.   

**Q:**  What was this rank?   

**A:**  It was above the shape.   

**Q:**  Earlier, when the Chinese asked them, "Do you have the right to sign?", Ngabö decided that he had. Then later while concluding the treaty the Chinese said, "Okay shall we conclude and sign?" Was this on two different occasions? The first statement in the beginning of the meeting and the second at the conclusion of the meeting? Were there discussion in between the two?   

**A:**  Yes, it was. When Ngabö said that he had all the power, the Chinese further asked him in the beginning, "In that case can we call you "The representative who has all the power and authority?" Ngabö agreed.   

**Q:**  Was this discussed in front of all the delegation members? Did Ngabö consult the other members before saying "Yes," or did he say it straight away?  

**A:**  Ngabö answered straight away.  

**Q:**  Did every one of you think that was true?   

**A:**  Yes. He was our leader and the main person. There was no question about his authority and we were just representatives.   

**Q:**  You people were also called the representative who had all the power?   

**A:**  There wasn't any talk about having or not having the power. We were just called representatives. Then there were a lot of other discussions.   

**Q:**  Such as?   

**A:**  They said that they were going to start a Military and Administrative Committee in Tibet.   

**Q:**  This is probably was the 17th point.   

**A:**  It was the 2nd.   

**Q:**  In the 15th [point], it was written, "In order to order to assure the implementation of this agreement, the Central People's Government shall set up a Military and Administrative Committee and a Military Area Headquarters of Tibet. The Central People's Government and the personnel sent by the Central Committee shall absorb many local personnel Tell us about that.   

**A:**  So we asked them what does this Military and Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] mean? They answered by saying, in Chinese, "jun" means military and "zheng" means administration. Then we asked him what its function would be, they said it will do whatever is needed to be done in Tibet. In that case, we pointed out to them that isn't it contrary to the point which states that the Beijing government will not alter the existing system? To this they replied, "Are you saying that you are against the central government [Ch. zhongyang]?" In that case you can go. You need not stay. We will send the People's Liberation Army. On such an occasion we had to be more diplomatic and try to cool down the Chinese. We said, "Let's relax for sometime and take a break".   

**Q:**  What did they say on such occasions? Did you talk among yourselves?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. We talked among ourselves and said, "What is to be done?" and so on. Since we couldn't handle the Chinese and nobody was helping us, we finally we had to give in since we had no other alternatives when they were threatening to send the People's Liberation Army to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was it only on this occasion that they threatened you?   

**A:**  There were other disagreements, but it was only on this point that the Chinese threatened us with their army.   

**Q:**  That's why the Dalai Lama said that the agreement was signed under the gun. After the 17-Point Agreement did they discuss the separate 8 points?   

**A:**  I don't remember much. Only Ngabö and I are alive. The rest of the members of the delegation are dead. In the separate 8 points, they talked about transforming the Tibetan army into a People's Liberation Army. I remembered that they mentioned that only the Gyajong Regiment of 3.000 soldiers will be kept and the rest will be dismissed.   

**Q:**  Kadang, Khadang?   

**A:**  No. The Kadang [Regiment] does not have any Gyajong soldiers. Khadang, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> regiment, is part of the Central Tibet [Tib. དབུས] Gyajong Regiment. Gyajong means trained and drilled by the Chinese. There were 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང་མདའ] and 2 depön of Ü [Tib. དབུས་མདའ] under the Gyajong Regiment. These soldiers were from the old troops of the Dalai Lama who were retrained and drilled by the Chinese. It was during Wang Gyurme <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a>'s [Tib. ཝང་འགྱུར་མེད་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] period [in the 18th century]. Besides the 8-Point [side] Agreement, there was another 2-Point Agreement - a secret one concerning whether the Dalai Lama stays outside or inside Tibet. If the Dalai Lama stays inside, it is good, but if he stays outside Tibet, the Chinese will not be happy, but they will accept it [Tib. མཁས་པར་སྟོན]. I don't remember the other points. When the agreement was being discussed the Dalai Lama was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> so it is possible that the Dalai Lama could either go to India or go back to Lhasa. The Chinese were saying that even if the Dalai Lama goes to India, for the time being the 17-Point Agreement will still hold and be valid. I heard that the Chinese were keeping all the documents of the Kashag and probably they might have to hand them over to the Dalai Lama in the future. This office was started in 1961-62.   

**Q:**  No, all the countries have to keep documents. In other words, is what they were saying is if the Dalai Lama doesn't agree with it, it doesn't matter? It doesn't make any difference and he can disagree and go to India?   

**A:**  It said that in case the Dalai Lama left, and there was hesitation because the Dalai Lama was then in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, even if he went the agreement would be valid.   

**Q:**  So there were two side-agreements: the 8 point one and the 2 point one, right? The 8 point agreement dealt entirely with the army, right?  

**A:**  Yes, there will be 3.000 Gyajong soldiers to be kept and the rest were to be disbanded.   

**Q:**  For how many years were these supposed to [...question not finished]   

**A:**  There was no fixed number of years.  

**Q:**  What were the other important points?   

**A:**  There was something about keeping a police force [Tib. ཁྲིམས་སྲུང]. We talked among ourselves and decided that we should maintain a police force. The Chinese normally have a lot of internal power struggles and internal conflicts so [we thought that] in the future they will get toppled. So if we kept a large number of people who were well-trained in combat techniques under the pretext of being a police force, when an opportunity arose we could fight the Chinese. That was my personal suggestion. Then the Chinese asked us about the number of police force members we wanted to keep, we replied that there could not be any fixed number of the police force. It would depend upon the situation. If the country kept on progressing and developing, then there will be a need to increase the police force.   

**Q:**  Why were the 8 point and 2 point agreements separate?   

**A:**  They said that these two separate agreements should not be disclosed to the general public. It was confidential!   

**Q:**  At this stage the Chinese were referring to Tibet as the autonomous region?   

**A:**  No. They referred to Tibet as the local government and we were calling it the Tibetan Government. We were not aware of the subtle difference between these two names - autonomous region and local government. For us the Tibetan Government was the Tibetan Government, no matter what different names you gave to it. How naive we were!   

**Q:**  In the Tibetan language they were referring to you as the local government?   

**A:**  This word came up during the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  In point one they were talking about nationality autonomy. What was that?   

**A:**  No, that must be in some other point.   

**Q:**  You are right. It is in the third point. It says, the Tibetan people have the right of exercising nationality regional autonomy under the unified leadership of the Central Government."   

**A:**  Yes, it must be. Can you read the whole point?   

**Q:**  In accordance with the policy towards nationalities as laid down in the common program [Ch. gong tong gang ling]."   

**A:**  Yes, I remember. They said that one can exercise the right of regional autonomy. We didn't know what they were inferring - for us the word local [Tib. ས་གནས] meant "local."   

**Q:**  What were the Chinese calling the central government?   

**A:**  They were using the word zhongyang.   

**Q:**  Had the word local government ever been used before in the Tibetan language?   

**A:**  No, it only came into usage during and after the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  That is very, very important. You were only thinking or interpreting the word government [Tib. སྲིད་གཞུང] and did not pay any attention to the word "local". So when they said, local government, you understood or thought about it as our own government? You did not know that it meant government which falls under the Central Chinese government, right?   

**A:**  I personally did not think it to be anything other than our own local government. It is possible that Ngabö might have known it, but I doubt it.   

**Q:**  Then they had the signing ceremony?   

**A:**  Yes. The entire agreement was written in Chinese and in Tibetan, two copies each; one for the Chinese to keep and one for us. The Tibetan document was written in the large <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚུགས་ཐུང] A type of &quot;headless&quot; script in Tibetan that is larger than cursive script, but smaller than the block print script. It is a type of Ume script.">tsugtung</a> script. The Chinese requested us not to write in the small cursive script. I and the Nendrön wrote down the agreement. Someone read it out and both of us took it down. There were two copies - one for the Chinese and one for ourselves. It took us until nighttime to finish writing it.   

**Q:**  Did the two of you check the versions?   

**A:**  There were two people dictating to us.   

**Q:**  Who were they?   

**A:**  Probably, one was Rinchen [Sandutsang].   

**Q:**  Rinchen's Tibetan might not be good.   

**A:**  But he could read.   

**Q:**  Was there anybody checking the spelling?   

**A:**  They dictated the spellings. So there was no need to check the spelling.   

**Q:**  You were one of the better ones in writing, right?   

**A:**  My writing was just mediocre.   

