# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. bsam pho, bstan 'dzin don grub  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** ca. 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses Gendün Chömpel's life and relationship with Abo Raga in Kalimpong. Then he discusses going to Chamdo and Beijing to participate in the negotiations with the Chinese regarding the 17-Point Agreement.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_01/H_0205_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I would like to ask you something about Gendün Chömpel [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ]. He was a very highly learned scholar and a great person. There are very few people in India who know anything about him. Rakra Rimpoche is the person who knows most about Gendün Chömpel. At least, that's what he claims. Anyway, Rakra Rimpoche has written a biography about him. Now you actually met Gendün Chömpel and you were his student. We know that he was born in Amdo and came to Lhasa where he joined Drepung Monastery as a monk. And we know he visited India. This is common knowledge, but can you tell us about these things in detail?   

**A:**  As you say, many know about him and his background, but not in detail.   

**Q:**  In what part of Amdo was he born?   

**A:**  He was born in Amdo in a place called Regong [Tib. རེ་གོང]. However, he wasn't born in Regong proper, but probably in a small village nearby. Actually he was a very strange person and very talkative and eloquent. He was unique in the sense that he knew English as well as Sanskrit. He was a very brilliant scholar.   

**Q:**  Was he?   

**A:**  Yes. However, by nature he was very strange. He told me that originally he was a Lama in Amdo.   

**Q:**  I see. He was originally a Lama?   

**A:**  He told me that he was a Lama but that someone else had been recognized as his reincarnation. When he was five or six or seven or nine or ten years old, he could recollect his previous life very clearly as if they had happened just a few days back. He further told me that he would make many people weep because he would recognize them as his previous incarnation's friends and tell them precisely where they had left any conversation unfinished or any work uncompleted. With such anecdotes and talk, many people would weep. He studied in Amdo and when he was five years old, he mastered the middle stages of poetry composition [Tib. སྙན་ངག་ལེའུ་བར་པ] and could successfully compose a poem of his own. When I asked him how he could do such a difficult feat, as a way of answer he would tell me that when he was only three years old he made his own fuel operated boat. He would put the boat made from some metals in a basin full of water and ignite a fuel like a kerosene oil and the boat would move in the water. I don't know, but he was a real strange person. He would tell me that until he was 15 or 16 years old, he could remember his previous life though not as vividly as when he was 7 or 8 years old. After that, slowly this ability faded away. He stayed at Tashi Khyil [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ] for sometime and then he came to Drepung and stayed at Lumbum [Tib. ཀླུ་འབུམ] (Khamtsen).   

**Q:**  Was it Lumbum?   

**A:**  Yes, it was Drepung Lumbum. His tratsang was Gomang. Yes I think it was Gomang. Geshe Sherab [Tib. དགེ་བཤེས་ཤེས་བར] was in the same khamtsen and he was already well-established and famous. Gendün Chömpel was a new monk hence he used to serve Geshe Sherab and he would learn literature from him. When Gendün Chömpel made any critical observation concerning a subject, he would never accept it. Geshe Sherab, being the senior monk, would never allow him to raise his head.   

**Q:**  Yes, that's quite possible.   

**A:**  Then he also studied dialectics from him, but Geshe Sherab would never allow him to really show his ability. After some time, Geshe Sherab became very jealous and spiteful, so Gendün Chömpel left Drepung. When he was 30 years old he left for India.   

**Q:**  How long did he stay at Drepung?   

**A:**  I think he stayed there for not more than 5 or 6 years.   

**Q:**  I see. Then he left for India. [unclear]   

**A:**  When he was 30, he left for India. When he reached the river Ganges, he celebrated his 30th birthday. He stayed in India and learned English at that time.   

**Q:**  Did he know English well?   

**A:**  His grammar and his pronunciation were not so good, but his vocabulary for fancy words [Tib. ཚིག་ཆེན་པོ] was vast. He learned his English in Darjeeling. Actually he had already picked up the alphabet. In Darjeeling he learned his English from Kaji Dorje Tsering [Tib. ཀ་ཅི་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང]. About 26 days after he started studying English, his teacher left for Kolcutta.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  So his teacher had taught him for about 26 days and then he had to leave for Kolcutta. But before leaving, his teacher told him that later "If you can write a letter in English then you must write to me." Then he taught himself English by looking up words in the dictionary asking around and making himself work hard at it. After 3 months, his teacher still had not returned so one day he wrote a letter in English to his teacher. A reply came in which his master refused to believe that he had written the letter all by himself, i.e., without someone's help. However, the teacher had written that if he had truly drafted the letter without someone else's help then you are incredible. He had received such a letter. So he continued his self-education and after one year he went to visit Dr. Roerich who told him that he wanted to translate the sutra called Do Dzanglün [Tib. མདོ་མཛངས་བླུན] from Tibetan to English. He asked him if he could translate it. Gendün Chömpel agreed to translate it so was told to start the very next day. The next day before he had translated one line, the doctor came to check three times. After he completed the line, the doctor read it and compared it to the Tibetan text. Then he asked him where he had learned his English. After that, he never came back to check even once. He asked him to translate the full volume. So Gendün Chömpel thought that he must have done rather well. He spent 4 years translating the full text.   

**Q:**  He lived in the Punjab?   

**A:**  Yes. He stayed somewhere in the Punjab. A little later when he finished the translation, Dr. Roerich passed away.   

**Q:**  Didn't Roerich pass away in Russia?   

**A:**  I wonder where he had died. Then much later when Gendün Chömpel went to visit Dr. Roerich's house, he found Dr. Roerich's widow and children were in a very poor state. They were not in the same condition as when the doctor was alive.   

**Q:**  When he was working for Roerich, was he getting paid?   

**A:**  He was given 5 gold coins [Tib. གསེར་ཏྲམ].   

**Q:**  As a fee for translating the Do Dzanglün?   

**A:**  He was given 5 sertam and food while he was working.   

**Q:**  So there was no salary as such?   

**A:**  No. There was no salary. From there he went to Kolcutta and stayed there for a few months. While he was in Kolcutta, Dr. Roerich paid him a visit and gave him one gold coin and he told him that his mother was saying something. Probably, his mother was scolding him [if he gave more than that]. Then he left for Sakya [Tib. ས་སྐྱ] and there he met Rao la with whom he had certain talks and then he came back to India with Rao la.   

**Q:**  I think it must be Mr. Rao Shanker?   

**A:**  Must be--normally we don't take much notice about such matters and for us his name was just Rao la. Anyway, then he went back to India with Rao la.   

**Q:**  I heard that Rao was living with a woman in Sakya and that she had a child by him?   

**A:**  Most probably it was true. He was a rather fast man.   

**Q:**  So he came back to India with Rao la and there he learned Sanskrit?   

**A:**  Yes, he learned Sanskrit and lived with Rao la.   

**Q:**  He learned Sanskrit only after he came back to India?   

**A:**  Yes. Rao was very good in Sanskrit so Gendün Chömpel learned from him. Then while he was with Rao he went back to visit Dr. Roerich but found out he had already passed away. He had passed away about 3 years back. His wife was living in a very poor condition. It wasn't the same as when her husband was alive. Once I asked him that from the 3 languages he knew, Tibetan, English and Sanskrit, which one did he know best. He told me that actually there was not much difference. He said, "Since Tibetan is my mother language I should say I know it best." I used to get awed at this. We all know how good he was in Tibetan. However, he would make lots of spelling mistakes and his handwriting was also not very good. I had checked his correspondence and looked up certain spelling mistakes. Sometimes, I just couldn't make out what he had written so I would mark them and ask him about it. Sometimes, he would also say, "This is not wrong. I wrote it this way for this purpose." Before he was imprisoned, he used to drink a lot.   

**Q:**  What else did he do in India?   

**A:**  So he stayed and studied Sanskrit. I don't know exactly how long he stayed in India. Anyway, his relationship with Rao la fluctuated a lot. Sometimes they had disagreements and did not get along well. Then again they would be friends and be on good terms.   

**Q:**  Why did they have these arguments?   

**A:**  My teacher (Gendün Chömpel) used to smoke cigarettes. He told me that he used to purposely chain smoke--cigarette after cigarette. The cigarettes were the expensive ones. Even when there was not really a need to smoke, but he couldn't just help it--he would smoke one cigarette after another at Rao la's house. So probably this would sometimes lead to disagreements.   

**Q:**  I see! Then?   

**A:**  Then I don't know when it was, but he returned to Tibet. At that time, there was Abo Raga [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་བར་དགའ] living in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Yes, I know him.   

**A:**  Abo Raga used to write very interesting articles but his handwriting was horrible. He did not follow any of the set rules. However, his writing style was very beautiful. Since Raga was more of less a literary person like my late master, they had something in common. I think it was most probably Abo Raga who invited my master and gradually they came to know each other.   

**Q:**  What was Raga doing at that time?   

**A:**  There was nothing in particular that Raga was doing then, but we know that his family had a trading operation in Kalimpong. At that time he was very much taken with the Guomindang's theory known as the, "Three Principles of the People." [Ch. san min zhu yi; Tib. མི་སེར་དོན་སུམ་རིང་ལུགས].   

**Q:**  What does it mean?   

**A:**  They are the three rights of people: peoples' power, people's democracy and the livelihood of the people.   

**Q:**  So these were known as the Donsum Ringlug?   

**A:**  Yes. Abo Raga used to have a very strong faith in this theory. He would literally worship it.   

**Q:**  You mean Raga himself?   

**A:**  Yes, Raga himself. This organization had just been introduced and I do not think that they had much of a following in Kalimpong. My late teacher was a highly learned and intellectual person, but he did not have any false pride or snobbishness. Gendün's morals were also questionable.   

**Q:**  How was that?   

**A:**  He was a big womanizer, and smoked opium and cigarettes.   

**Q:**  Is that true?   

**A:**  Yes, that is true. He did not have good morals. His dress was not worthy admiration. He would dress like a common or poor person.   

**Q:**  What type of dress would he wear?   

**A:**  He would wear a loose chupa with boots and an Indian hat on his head.   

**Q:**  I see. So he would be dressed like the common traders of Amdo.   

**A:**  Something like that.   

**Q:**  Was his chupa made out of serge?   

**A:**  Yes, they were made out of serge.   

**Q:**  In India what type of dress did he wear?   

**A:**  In India, I do not know what dress he wore. I never asked him about this, but I think that he may have worn a dhoti, because he never wore any clothes with care. He wore what caught his fancy. As I was saying earlier, Abo Raga and my late teacher had very close relations. At that time there was also a person called Jayan Drakpa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་གྲགས་པ].   

**Q:**  Was he from Amdo?   

**A:**  Yes. A lama who also came to Lhasa and two people carried him in a kind of leather device because his legs might have been crippled. He was called Lama Gumril [Tib. གུམ་རིལ]. Jayan Drakpa was probably was the lama's servant. He might have telling Gendün Chömpel some inconsistent things.   

**Q:**  Is that so?   

**A:**  Yes. I think he stayed in Kalimpong for about 1-2 years. At that time, Abo Raga was wholeheartedly following the Three Principles of the People and he regarded Sun Yatsen almost like a second Buddha. Abo Raga also said that the feudal system of Tibet was not good.   

**Q:**  At that time, the British were in India, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So Gendün Chömpel became very friendly with Abo Raga and Kujar Künphel [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར་ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས] was also staying in Kalimpong and living with Abo Raga. Janglojen Gung [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་གུང], who was Kujar's informal bodyguard [Tib. aptru] was also staying with him. So they used to have long discussions on the revolution and they were hoping for Tibet to have a revolution and democracy. It was the time when the Indians were trying to expel the British.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see. At that time the Indians were trying to oust the British. Gandhi was there and he was leading the freedom movement. At that time the Indian freedom movement was in full swing, and there was talk among themselves that the British had injured our country too. And I think probably they also talked about the British having annexed certain parts of Bhutan and that otherwise the Bhutanese and the Tibetans were of the same race. So they sent Gendün Chömpel from Kalimpong to Bhutan, and from there he went to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did they purposely send him?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was their goal?   

**A:**  They should have send him directly, but they sent him through Bhutan and he had been instructed to get a map of Bhutan, and he was further instructed to observe closely what the British were doing and what they were up to. When he reached Lhasa, he sent a letter to Abo Raga. Gendün Chömpel had sent a letter directly to Abo Raga, but the letter had to be sent through someone. At that time, the Sikkim Political Officer, Sir Basil Gold, was a very old man and he suspected Abo Raga. He even asked me about him, saying, "What is this Raga, the son of Pandatsang [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] up to?" He would ask us how does he manage to live without working.   

**Q:**  Pandatsang was very wealthy, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but Raga was separated from Panda. At that time, we did not know anything and we did not suspect that the British were keeping Abo Raga under surveillance. At that time, Gendün Chömpel sent the letter directly to him.   

**Q:**  Didn't they tell him in Kalimpong not to send the letter directly?   

**A:**  Probably, they didn't. Anyway, the letter that was sent by Gendün Chömpel was intercepted [by the British] and they found the map of Bhutan. At that time, Richardson was in Gyantse and it was he, under British orders, who had intercepted the letter in which they found the map of Bhutan and a lot of other important information. Sir Richardson had conveyed this information to Sir Basil Gold, and then those suspicions were confirmed and he started the investigation. As a result, they further suspected that they had formed an organization.   

**Q:**  Didn't they know that before, they had started an organization?   

**A:**  Yes. At first they didn't know about it, but they suspected, vaguely, but they did not have any clear information. On making inquiries they found that Abo Raga and Kujar and were part of the organization.   

**Q:**  Do you know who were actually the members in this organization?   

**A:**  I think probably there were many people in this organization. I came to know about it only much later. Most of the Tibetans in Kalimpong belonged to this organization. They had formed an association, a kyidu, and they had made guarantees [of support] [Tib. གན་རྒྱ].   

**Q:**  What was [the name of] this kyidu?   

**A:**  I don't know the name of the organization. I only know that they had formed a kyidu. They must have had a name, but I do not know. Then they reported this to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  I see! Was it Richardson who reported this to the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who were the kalön at that time?   

**A:**  The kalön were, I think: Kapshöba, Ramba, Surkhang, and the fourth probably was Langchungwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ].   

**Q:**  No, Langchungwa was not a kalön then. And Ragashag [Tib. rag kga shag] was yet to become a kalön. Probably, it was Phünkang [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང].   

**A:**  Probably Phünkang was one of them. When Richardson reported his findings about the organization to the Kashag, he also added that it would not be good for the government in the future. This was like a small fire [he said]. Unless the fire is extinguished when it was small, it would prove very difficult to do so after it had spread. So my late master Gendün Chömpel was taken into custody by the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  Was he arrested in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, he was arrested in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How was he arrested? Was it without any warning, all of a sudden?   

**A:**  He was arrested all of a sudden without any warning.   

**Q:**  Who went to arrest him?   

**A:**  At that time, Gendün Chömpel and I were yet to become teacher and student, but I had hoped to become his student. At that time, they sent the two mayors of Lhasa [Tib. mipön] to arrest him.   

**Q:**  Who were the two mipön?   

**A:**  Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིད་དཔལ་བར] and Shagchang Surpa [Tib. ཤག་ཉང་ཟུར་པ] were the two mipön who called Gendün Chömpel and asked him to come immediately to their place.   

**Q:**  I see. They just called him; they didn't go to his place?   

**A:**  I think they did something like that. Someone sent a letter to Abo Raga to India warning him that his house would be raided and searched the next day, so he was able to destroy all the agreements. A letter, however, was left in his pocket. [laughter]   

**Q:**  You mean he was not arrested then?   

**A:**  At that time, he had not been arrested. So he had kept this letter in his pocket and had forgotten about it.   

**Q:**  Yes, it is possible that they may not have checked his pockets. The Indians may have overlooked it.   

**A:**  Later, I heard that they found the letter. When he changed his clothes, the letter remained forgotten in one of the pockets and when his clothes were searched they found the letter and confiscated it. Abo Raga and his organization, however, had managed to burn all the agreements.   

**Q:**  Did they burn all the documents as soon as they received the letter?   

**A:**  No, Abo Raga was given three days to settle his affairs and leave India. Kujar was given seven days to settle his affairs and leave India, he was however, not told where he should go, so Kujar went to China from India. Janglojen managed to stay back in India with some influential support that he had. I heard that the Bhutanese royal family did something. This was possible because they were very friendly. At that time, in Lhasa the son of Baitsang was lashed.   

**Q:**  Yes, I heard about it.   

**A:**  You would have been very young, so it is likely that you may not know much about it.   

**Q:**  I did not know about this, but I had heard that Gendün Chömpel had been arrested. It was then quite sensational news. I also heard then that some counterfeit currency was introduced by some people. The rumors went that the hundred sang note [Tib. བརྒྱ་ལོར] had been counterfeited.   

**A:**  Gendün Chömpel was an extremely good painter but he was not the kind of person to make counterfeit currency notes. Later, Baitsang was given sixty lashes.   

**Q:**  By the mipön?   

**A:**  I doubt that he was lashed by the mipön. I think it was the Investigation Team (Tib. shibsa [zhib sa].   

**Q:**  Did they appoint a shibsa?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. Some of the members were Dzasa Gyetag [Tib. རྒྱས་རྟགས], Surkhang Depön Lhatob [Tib. ལྷ་སྟོབས], who was the younger brother of Surkhang Sawangchemmo. And there were two monk officials besides them, but I do not remember who they were.   

**Q:**  At that time, they appointed the drungtsi to do the investigation, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they gave sixty lashes to Gendün Chömpel.   

**Q:**  Was he given only sixty lashes? I heard that they lashed him many times.   

**A:**  People say that he was only given sixty lashes and I doubt they gave him any more than sixty. Also, these sixty lashes were not given very strongly. I have also been lashed, and although the people say that when one is given a severe lashing the pain is felt searing through the bones, I did not feel that. It is possible that since the lashing that I got was in school, it may have not been a very severe one. It was only the first fifteen to twenty lashes that were painful. After that the buttocks seemed to go numb and one did not feel the pain any longer. It was said at that time that Gendün Chömpel was not so severely whipped.   

**Q:**  I see. Do you think it is true? I thought that he had been very severely lashed.   

**A:**  I do not think that he was severely whipped. As I said, I think he received sixty lashes.   

**Q:**  So Gendün Chömpel was arrested all of a sudden and probably his house was searched also. Do you know what they found in his house? It was said that they found an inflatable rubber doll. Do you think that it is true, and if so what was the reason for this doll being in his house?   

**A:**  Gendün Chömpel was not married then and he had this doll to sleep with.   

**Q:**  Do you think that this could have been true?   

**A:**  Yes, I think it was true.   

**Q:**  I doubt it. I do not think it is true. Did you ask him later?   

**A:**  How could I dare to ask him such things.   

**Q:**  I still do not believe it. I feel it may have been a child's toy doll. I think these rumors were just made up.   

**A:**  I do not think so. My late wife, Panda Tobgye's [Tib. stobs rgays] daughter, asked him once "Teacher, I heard that when your house was investigated they found a rubber woman in it, is this true?" "Genla" (teacher) just said, 'Yes, yes' and nothing more. I was very scared then, for I feared he would slap me." [laughter]   

**Q:**  Actually, it is not important.   

**A:**  Yes. It would be better than masturbating, right? [laughter] It would be good if one did not have any sexual attachments. Then there would be no problems in the future, so wouldn't it be better [to have a rubber woman]?   

**Q:**  Yes, you are right. Anyway it is not important. The rubber woman is not really important. Did they find any documents besides this?   

**A:**  Yes, they found some documents. Among the documents, there were statistics about the army strength, arms and ammunition and also about influential persons in power politics in Tibet. From this we can deduct that they had just started this organization. Actually, people like Abo Raga might have the intention of bringing about changes in the country, but he was not that kind of person who could put it into action because he was an opium addict.   

**Q:**  Was he a real heavy addict?   

**A:**  No. He was not totally addicted, but he we could say he was mediocre. To bring about a change is not an easy affair, and the person should have a good knowledge of revolutionary theory and proper plans to bring about this change. If one does not have these, it is very difficult to bring about any change if you are not quite familiar with actual movements.   

**Q:**  Then money also would be required, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that is true. And one should be able to manipulate people. For example, in the case of a machine, if certain buttons are pressed then some parts should operate, and likewise one must have everything thought out and the plans all proper and carefully laid on. Opium smokers are not able to achieve this, so for these things, they were punished.   

**Q:**  He was only given sixty lashes? Was this just the arrival lashing [Tib. འབྱོར་ལྕག]?   

**A:**  No, he only got sixty lashes. He did not get more than that. There are two kinds of whipping. One is called the arrival whipping and the other was severe lashing when interrogating [Tib. ཚ་འདྲི]. Gendün Chömpel got this lashing during interrogation. So when he was lashed, it was not severe, but Gendün Chömpel was feeling very sad and was heartbroken. At this time I requested that he continue writing the history book he had started earlier.   

**Q:**  Yes, the White Annals [Tib. དེབ་ཐེར་དཀར་པོ], right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was not a very large book. I think it was about seventy or eighty pages. I asked him to complete this, and tried to convince him that if he did so, his name would long be remembered, even 400-500 years after his death. Otherwise, day by day you are talking less and less and if you die like this, there will be nothing left. He persisted in not writing it, so I used to tell him that as he had the knowledge and the intelligence to write it so why didn't he do it. In our cases, we do not have either the knowledge or the intelligence to write, so I was always asking him why he didn't write it. I used to insist he do it, but he used to say "No." When I asked him the reason, he said "They whipped me, so why should I complete this book." Later he continued to write this book, and the Tibetan government paid him for the work.   

**Q:**  Do you mean much later? Can you tell me how long he was kept in the prison?   

**A:**  For three years.   

**Q:**  Where he was imprisoned?   

**A:**  He was in shut up in the Shöl Office, and then at Nangtsesha.   

**Q:**  What a pity. So he stayed in prison for three years. Can you describe the conditions of the prison? Were they very bad?   

**A:**  You meant the prison where Gendün Chömpel stayed?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  It was not bad compared to some other prisons.   

**Q:**  It is said that there used to be lots of scorpions in these prisons and many dogs. Can you tell me something about this?   

**A:**  Yes, there were scorpions in these dungeons/ For instance, in the new prison at Sangyib Nang [Tib. གསང་ཡིབས་ནང], one night when the Chinese were holding something like a struggle session [Tib. འཐབ་འཛིང], a scorpion came near the interrogator and really frightened him so he ran quite far from it. Quite a few scorpions came to these prisons. There may have been quite a few nests in the prison, so sometimes they came.   

**Q:**  That is true. But I had heard that there was a prison where a lot of scorpions were kept specially.   

**A:**  I do not think there were such places. Not at the place where they imprisoned Tsenya [Tib. རྩེ་ཉ].   

**Q:**  Where was he imprisoned?   

**A:**  He was kept under the Shöl Office.   

**Q:**  Under the Shöl Office were there any scorpion pits?   

**A:**  No, there were no scorpion pits intentionally made. The dungeon was just a pit dug out in the earth.   

**Q:**  I see, the earth had been dug and a pit had been made.   

**A:**  Yes, I think it must have been like that, but I have never been to visit these dungeons.   

**Q:**  So they had just dug a pit in the earth where the prisoners were kept?   

**A:**  I am not very definite sure about this, but I heard that under the Shöl Office there was an underground dungeon. We could see the prison from the street as it was level with the houses, but some people who had stayed in the prison used to say something about an underground cellar or dungeon, so I feel it must have been a cell of dungeon dug out from the earth. So if it was a dungeon dug out from the earth, there may have been a lot of scorpions. Since the prison was situated at the foot of the hill where the Potala was built, there may have been scorpions in the cracks or crevices of the rocks, but otherwise there were not any specifically made scorpion pits.   

**Q:**  People talk about these being very cold places with scorpion pits.   

**A:**  I do not think there were any specifically made scorpion pits.   

**Q:**  If there were lots of scorpions, the prisoners would have been stung and possibly died of poisoning, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Have you heard of any such cases?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Then, it is true that Lumbum [Tib. ཀླུ་འབུམ] Khamtsen vouched for Gendün Chömpel?   

**A:**  Yes, they vouched for him and he was then released from the prison. Only after that did my relationship with him as a student start.   

**Q:**  Where did he go after being released from the prison? Didn't Kapshöba keep him for some time? Or before that?   

**A:**  First I had to approach him and ask him to teach me. He was first staying with Phünkang. After that I remember going to Wangden Pembar's [Tib. དབང་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབར] house, and for some time later, he stayed with Kapshöba. It was then that I insisted he complete his history book and it was me who approached the government to give him some salary for his work.   

**Q:**  I see, so it was you who got the government to pay him to complete his work?   

**A:**  Yes, I wrote the petition. After I drafted the petition, my late father made the corrections after which we sent a copy to the government.   

**Q:**  Did Gendün Chömpel go with the petition personally to hand it over?   

**A:**  Yes. He went himself to hand it over, but I do not remember this very clearly so I cannot say precisely.   

**Q:**  Where did he submit his petition?   

**A:**  Most probably he must have submitted it to the Kashag gaa, the gadrungs' office, or to one of the gadrung's. He may have given it to one of the gandrön. It was after that, that he was given a salary.   

**Q:**  Had Sambo Sawangchemmo already become a shape then?   

**A:**  No. He was yet to become a shape. Then Gendün Chömpel was given a salary to do his work.   

**Q:**  What was he given as a salary?   

**A:**  He was given a certain amount of barley. I think he was given thirty or forty khe of barley.   

**Q:**  Was it given to him for a month? Was it an adequate salary? Where did he have to go to collect this grain?   

**A:**  I wonder if he collected it from the Sonam Legung [Tib. སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུངས], but I am not very sure. Gendün Chömpel himself used to go to collect this grain. Above the Sonam Legung there used to be four or five rooms and he used to go and collect them from there. Later he passed away above the Sonam Legung office.   

**Q:**  Then what did he do? Did he complete the book?   

**A:**  No, he did not write even a single word of that book after that. Then there was a lot of talk that the Chinese were coming to Tibet, and so on.   

**Q:**  Is that so?   

**A:**  There were twenty boxes of documents.   

**Q:**  Do you mean to say that Gendün Chömpel had twenty boxes of documents, and if so, who took these documents?   

**A:**  When the Kashag had the property of Gendün Chömpel sealed, some boxes were taken by Surkhang and some by Kapshöba. Anyway there were no documents left.   

**Q:**  When you say twenty boxes, can you say what type of boxes they were?   

**A:**  I really do not know what type of boxes they were as I did not see them. These boxes contained all that information he had collected when he was in India, Burma and so on. He had recorded in his history book that Xinjiang was a part of Tibet, and he mentioned that he had seen proof in Xinjiang that it was part of Tibet. He also mentioned that the government used to send specific edicts to the dzongs. He had also mentioned the various changes in the names of places. That is the information these boxes contained.   

**Q:**  Do you think that Shakabpa got any of these boxes?   

**A:**  I do not think that Shakabpa got any of the boxes. He was a tsipön at that time. I have read his history books and none of this is mentioned.   

**Q:**  Yes it is not mentioned. Could it be that he did not mention this on purpose?   

**A:**  Yes, that is possible because he has not mentioned anything in his book. Anyway, there were about twenty boxes and none of them were left. I wish that he could have been able to complete his book for some of the material was very old and authentic, and we would not have been able to interpret this very accurately. As he knew about them, he would have been able to interpret it precisely. At that time there was a lot of gossip and tension.   

**Q:**  Do you mean because of Communist China?   

**A:**  Yes. It was in the fourth or fifth month in 1950 that I had to stop my education with him leaving many things to be learned.   

**Q:**  Can you explain?   

**A:**  There were a lot of rumors, and a lot of movement. People were going to Kham and the north, and coming and going, and even government activity had increased. And as we were working for the government, we had to do various duties and I did not have time to go to take my teaching from Gendün Chömpel.   

**Q:**  What did you learn from him before these problems started?   

**A:**  Before this, I learned poetics [Tib. སྙན་ངག] and Tibetan grammar (Tib. སུམཏག [སུམ་རྟགས]). I was then young so could only learn these things and did not have a chance to learn about religion or philosophy from him. I would have liked very much to study these subjects with him. It was around 1950 when I started working for the foreign office (Tib. ཆིགྱེ་ལེཁུང [ཕྱི་རྒལ་ལས་ཁུངས]).   

**Q:**  Is that so?   

**A:**  At that time there was a lot of talk about airplanes coming to Tibet and things like that.   

**Q:**  According to the rumors who was going to send these airplanes?   

**A:**  There was a lot of talk about airplanes, but I do not remember the details. I remember having to write a lot of letters regarding these airplanes.   

**Q:**  Was it said that these airplanes were going to be sent by the Indian Government?   

**A:**  They were saying that the planes would land at Tsesumthang [Tib. ཚེས་གསུམ་ཐང].   

**Q:**  There were no landing fields for the planes, so how could a planes land without proper arrangements?   

**A:**  It was then said that regular airfields were not required. If the ground was made level, the planes could land.   

**Q:**  Who said this?   

**A:**  Most probably this information was from India. This gossip was so prevalent that they even leveled the Tsesumthang. They were saying that if a plane was brought in, and if the plane was ours, then it was alright. Otherwise, they would send a hundred people to block the field each person carrying a rock so that the planes could not turn and take off. I vaguely remember this.   

**Q:**  I see. Did they do something like that?   

**A:**  Yes, something like that did happen.   

**Q:**  Was the plane sent as a gift by the Indian Government to help the Tibetans?   

**A:**  The talk said that the planes were coming from India, although they were not from the Indian Government. Possibly they were from a private plane company.   

**Q:**  At that time there was no airplane company in India.   

**A:**  I think there must have been a company. The plane was not sent by the Indian Government, for if the plane was to be sent by the Indian Government to invite or take away the Dalai Lama, then the Chinese would have something to say about it.   

**Q:**  I see. So the reason they were sending the plane was to invite and take away the Dalai Lama.   

**A:**  Yes, it was supposed to be like that. Later on I found it was only talk, and nothing really came out of it.   

**Q:**  Who was making these contacts?   

**A:**  At that time they used to send a lot of telegrams, and there was some talk about some airline.   

**Q:**  Was it the Indian Airlines?   

**A:**  It could have been the Indian Airlines. There was a lot of talk about it and a lot of confusion, and I do not know exactly which company it was. So the situation was like that at that time and then finally the Dalai Lama went [note: but not by plane].   

**Q:**  Was Gendün Chömpel still alive then?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama took over the political and temporal power was Gendün Chömpel still alive?   

**A:**  Yes, he was alive. When the Dalai Lama went to Yadong, two or three days before that, Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེག་སྨོན] and I were confirmed to go down [to Chamdo]. So early in the morning of the day we were supposed to leave we met our teacher very briefly. He came to us and gave us scarves, and I offered him some money. I did not get time to see him for more than a short period. I was then sent to Chamdo in Kham. That was probably in the beginning of 1951. In those days we did not pay much importance to calendars and we did not keep the dates in mind so it could have been 1951 or 1952 or somewhere around that.   

**Q:**  Yes, we used to keep in mind whether it was spring, summer, autumn or winter.   

**A:**  It was probably winter when we left. It was quite chilly so it could have been November. I feel it was 1951 [note: it was 1950]. So we went down and stayed in Chamdo. While in Chamdo, we stayed for some time and then in the second month of the Tibetan calendar, on the fifteenth day, they said they would send two dzadrung [a dzasa and a drunyichemmo] from Yadong, and from Chamdo [tape is unclear and the answer was not finished]   

**Q:**  Thubden Rabgye [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བར་རྒྱས]?   

**A:**  No, Ngabö Ngawang Jigme and we two khenrim [Tib. མཁན་རིམ] [note: khenjung and rimshi] left from Chamdo. They were sending the two dzadrung from Yadong, so on the fifteenth of the second Tibetan we left. I do not know the date in the Western calendar, but it may have been the March or April.   

**Q:**  Most probably at that time.   

**A:**  We left from Chamdo and went to Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ] and then to Horkhok and to Ganzi. From Ganzi we went to Minyag [Tib. མི་ཉག] and then again onwards to Dartsedo. From Dartsedo we went to Chengdu and from there to Xi'an, and from Xi'an we then went on to Chongqing by plane and from Chongqing we went [to Beijing] by train.   

**Q:**  Ngabö was with you along with a Chinese liaison guide [Tib. ནེཤེན]?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a Chinese liaison with us who was called Alo Buzhang [Ch. a le bu zhang].   

**Q:**  Yes, yes, I heard about him.   

**A:**  Then there was Phüntso Wangye [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ] who accompanied us from Chamdo onwards.   

**Q:**  Had Phüntso Wangye come to Chamdo already?   

**A:**  Yes. He was already in Chamdo when we arrived.   

**Q:**  So they had already made arrangements?   

**A:**  Yes, I think that they had already made arrangements, because when we arrived in Chamdo he was already there.   

**Q:**  Did you already know Phüntso Wangye from Lhasa?   

**A:**  I did not know him in Lhasa. From Chamdo to Ganzi, Phüntso Wangye was the leader. Together with him there were ten to twelve Chinese. From Ganzi they sent Alo Buzhang, so Phüntso Wangye came with Alo Buzhang.   

**Q:**  Did they come as joint staff? Were they equal in rank?   

**A:**  I think they were equal in rank. When they sat down, they sat together and on the same seat, so I think they were of the same rank.   

**Q:**  Were your people more of less like prisoners?   

**A:**  We came all the way from Lhasa, and although we were not in the ordinary sense prisoners, we cannot deny that we were in some ways like prisoners. The situation was like that. Here I must mention that we had already lost a certain amount of faith and Sawangchemmo had lost the most faith of any of us.   

**Q:**  Did Alo Buzhang and Phüntso Wangye stay in better accommodations and give poorer accommodations to you and Sawangchemmo?   

**A:**  They offered better accommodations and beds to Sawangchemmo and us. They used good accommodations and offered us good accommodations. They used to treat us as equals, but among us we had to maintain the proper rank and seniority. We had to follow the traditions and show respect according to rank and seniority, so we would always show due respect to Sawangchemmo. Between my colleague and me, I had to show respect to my colleague as he was senior to me.   

**Q:**  You mean to Thubden Lengmön?   

**A:**  Yes. Then on the 21st of the fourth Tibetan month, we heard that the two dzadrung were coming. They reached us on the 26th, and we together with the Sawangchemmo gave them a warm welcome.   

**Q:**  You mean Sawangchemmo went to receive the two dzadrung?   

**A:**  Yes. He came to welcome the dzadrung. The situation was such that Sawangchemmo was just a title, there was nothing different.   

**Q:**  When Sawangchemmo went to receive them, the dzadrung did not expect him, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time the Sawangchemmo told me that we would not offer scarves as usual. He asked me to go and inform the two dzadrung accordingly, which I did. They had already made arrangements to present scarves. Normally it was our custom to offer scarves when we meet so this was why Sawangchemmo sent me to inform them that this practice was not to be observed at this time.   

**Q:**  When you conveyed this to them were they surprised?   

**A:**  They were surprised. They had brought ten points with them.   

**Q:**  From whom did they bring these ten points, and what were the ten points?   

**A:**  I do not remember all these points, but the main idea was that even if we had to accept external control by the Chinese we would have to be assured of complete independence in relation to our internal affairs. Another thing was that the Chinese could be allowed to have soldiers on the border. It was based on these conditions. But later the ten points proved to be useless. In the meantime, we had discussions and made plans how to bargain, etc. This was on the 28th or 29th of the 4th month. So then someone suggested that we should add on some more conditions concerning the territories from Chamdo onwards. The Chinese have brought ten points based on the Common Programme [Ch. gong tong gang ling], concerning the right to practice religion and that the Chinese should help and protect the cultural traditions of the area, and also various monasteries and educational institutions of the area. There was a lot of talk which did not bear any fruit. So after sometime they returned.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the meeting was over?   

**A:**  They said that on the next day there would be no meeting, and that on the day after that, they had to celebrate May Day [Ch. wu yi], and they would have to have this meeting on a platform overlooking the common people going about and doing their work [Tib. མཛད་གཟིགས་ཚོགས་འདུ].   

**Q:**  What does this [Tib. མཛད་གཟིགས་ཚོགས་འདུ] mean?   

**A:**  A lot of people would be going about on the platform in rows, and the discussions would be held overlooking the normal activities of the common people. The Chinese said that this would be very tiring and left a day's gap. On the 30th of the fourth month, we had this break.   

**Q:**  Did you all have to go to this meeting on May Day or was only Sawangchemmo required to attend it?   

**A:**  Sawangchemmo had to go on the platform where Mao was.   

**Q:**  I see. So they invited him right up there? And who was with Sawangchemmo?   

**A:**  He was alone.   

**Q:**  Was Chairman Mao with him?   

**A:**  There were a lot of people from the Chinese side.   

**Q:**  I see, where was the Sawangchemmo asked to sit, or what was the seating arrangement?   

**A:**  Chairman Mao was here.   

**Q:**  Where was Sawangchemmo? Were Zhu De and the Zhou Enlai also at the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. Zhou Enlai was there, and so was Liu Shaoqi.   

**Q:**  Was Lin Biao also at the meeting?   

**A:**  At that time there were so many people of equal status that Lin Biao did not appear very obvious to me.   

**Q:**  Was everyone required to keep standing right through the meeting?   

**A:**  The place where we stayed was much lower. Sawangchemmo's platform was almost two stories high and where we stood was about a story lower. We all stood together, the two tsidrung and the two of us.   

**Q:**  Did all of you stand in a line? And what clothes were you wearing?   

**A:**  We were wearing a big chupa [Tib. ཕྱུ་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  Were you not wearing your uniform?   

**A:**  No we were not. We were wearing the chupa and the two dzadrung were wearing the chupa with openings on both sides that was called Tsechuma [Tib. rshal phyu ma], I think. On the second or third day they talked about the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  I see, so did they have talks on the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  They were insisting that we should accept the Panchen Lama as the real reincarnation. They said when it [Qinghai] was liberated, the Panchen Lama had accepted Mao, and Mao had agreed to help the Panchen Lama. They insisted that the Panchen Lama should be accepted as the real reincarnation. We didn't have any choice but to accept it so we sent a telegram to Yadong. We received a telegram [from Yadong] saying the divination was favor of this candidate. After this recognition, all the members of the delegation went for an audience with the Panchen Lama. When we entered there were no ordinary seats. All the sofas were covered with yellow brocade. When we entered the Panchen Lama asked us to sit down but since all the sofas and chairs were covered with yellow brocade we felt very uneasy since yellow was the color reserved for the highest Lamas and monks and we did not normally use it for seat covers. We were already feeling very uncomfortable and awkward.   

**A:**  Was Panchen Lama also sitting on a chair?   

**A:**  Yes, he was also sitting on a chair.   

**Q:**  Did he offer you tea and snacks?   

**A:**  Yes. I think he gave us some tea. We did not stay for very long. After that we gave a small party to his retinue.   

**Q:**  You gave a party. Did Panchen Lama come to this party?   

**A:**  No. he was not there, but his attendants and retinue and his assistants, were there. I do not remember who was there, neither do I recall their names. I was acting as receptionist and host, trying to make them feel comfortable, looking after them, and helping them to enjoy the party.   

**Q:**  That was the first time that contact was made between the [Tibetan] government and the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  Yes, most probably that was the first time. I remember congratulating him in a small speech and expressing our joy and pleasure at the Panchen Lama's selection. I remember saying something like this. [Laughter]   

**Q:**  So at that time they had this Panchen candidate in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. He was in Lhasa, but there also was no unanimous decision about him.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa they had not reached a decision on the selection of Panchen Lama? Was this done on purpose or was there any reason for this?   

**A:**  At that time there were a lot of problems and chaos, and in the midst of this chaos it was no time to make a decision about the real Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  If there had been peace, was is it possible that the candidate in Lhasa would have been selected as the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  Yes. That was possible. There were two or three candidates for the post of Panchen Lama. They had invited one from Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད]. I wonder what he is doing nowadays.   

**Q:**  The Panchen candidate is here in India somewhere.   

**A:**  Is he? In Lhasa there are a few known as false Panchens [Tib. རྫུས་མ].   

**Q:**  Is that so? Who was he? How was he known?   

**A:**  I heard that he was a very big liar.   

**Q:**  Yes, I have heard something to that effect.   

**A:**  I heard that he used to live somewhere in Shöl. I heard about that when I was in prison. There was a Muslim boy with me in prison who used to say something about the false Panchen. When I asked him where he was and what type of person he was, the Muslim boy told me that he lived in Shöl. He said that when we got out of prison he would bring him to me. But I was afraid, feeling scared, so I asked him not to bring him to me for if he was crazy or mad then one cannot know about such people. So if he had brought him to me, and if this false Panchen kept on coming, it would have been very awkward for me.   

**Q:**  So the Government's and the Panchen Lama's contact started from the meeting in China?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Had Tashilhunpo monastery invited you to a party?   

**A:**  Yes. They gave a party and the Panchen Lama himself attended it. I do not think the Panchen Lama drinks, so maybe they had offered some fruit juice or something like that. He was just taking small sips, but they gave us some drinks, that I remember.   

**Q:**  Was it in the same room in which you had the audience?   

**A:**  No, it was not the same room, but it was in the same house. After that I came up to Lhasa, but before arriving I stayed for about two months in India.   

**Q:**  Did you come by sea?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you come by sea via Hong Kong?   

**A:**  Yes. From Hong Kong I went to Singapore where I spent one night.   

**Q:**  Yes? Is that so? How was Singapore?   

**A:**  Singapore was on the sea coast. I did not have much chance to see it. After a short time the airplane landed.   

**Q:**  Did you come by air from Beijing?   

**A:**  No. We came by air from Hong Kong.   

**Q:**  I see. From Beijing to Hong Kong you came by ship?   

**A:**  No, from Beijing to Hong Kong we came by train.   

**Q:**  I see. Was there a railway service?   

**A:**  From Beijing we went go Guangzhou where we stayed for some time.   

**Q:**  Yes. You stayed for quite some time in Beijing?   

**A:**  You mean Beijing?   

**Q:**  You must have had a lot of discussions, so you must have stayed some time?   

**A:**  Yes, a few days, about ten to fifteen days.   

**Q:**  So it was possible that you publicized the seventeen points [in India]. What about Ngabö Sawangchemmo?   

**A:**  Ngabö said he would also come with us and go to Lhasa via India, but they objected and said that it was not possible for him to go.   

**Q:**  Why was that?   

**A:**  They said that since he was the leader of the delegation, there was danger to his life. Going through India, which was another country, there would be danger to his life.   

**Q:**  A foreign country?   

**A:**  They said that it was not necessary for him to go to a foreign country. If he went via Hong Kong he would be on British Territory and the direct plane from there to Kolcutta was operated by the Americans, so he would have to pass thorough American hands. So they said they would not dare risk him going through various countries and places. They said that they were uncertain since he had to go through British lands and American planes, and India was also a foreign country and that he should not insist on going on with this plan.   

**Q:**  So they did not send him at all?   

**A:**  Yes, they did not send him. So then we said that we would go via India and then said we could. Then Thubden Lengmön stayed with Ngabö, and the two dzadrung and I came via India. Zhang Jingwu, Mao's representative also came with us. Along with him there were some children also.   

**Q:**  Did they come to accompany you?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  I see. They just came together with you?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we stayed for some time in Guangzhou   

**Q:**  Guangzhou means Hong Kong?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  I see, Canton itself.   

**A:**  Now were about to reach Hong Kong. From Hong Kong to Guangzhou was about two or three hours by train. So we stayed at Guangzhou and sent somebody to buy the tickets at Guangzhou.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese give you some kind of passport?   

**A:**  You mean to us? We had this diplomatic passport.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  Zhang Jingwu also had a diplomatic passport.   

**Q:**  Did all of you have the same type of passports?   

**A:**  Yes. They were calling it a diplomatic passport.   

**Q:**  Did they use the English word?   

**A:**  No. It was written on the passport. They called it the green passport. They were talking about a green passport, a red passport and so on. At that time we knew how to read a little bit.   

**Q:**  I see you mean English?   

**A:**  Yes. They had written on the passport "diplomatic." We stayed two or three days in Hong Kong and then we stayed one night in Singapore.   

**Q:**  Was Hong Kong a nice place?   

**A:**  It was a busy and active place.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the market?   

**A:**  Yes I went to the market.   

**Q:**  In Hong Kong most of the commodities must have been in Chinese, were there any foreign goods also?   

**A:**  If one were a business man, it was a nice place, but otherwise for people like us it was too noisy and too hectic and did not mean anything special to us. Since we had no business to do, the place did not mean anything special to us.   

**Q:**  Were you all together?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In what type of hotel did you stay?   

**A:**  In Kolcutta?   

**Q:**  No, in Hong Kong.   

**A:**  In Hong Kong there was a house of the Chinese government. It was not a hotel. Normally it was empty.   

**Q:**  Was it a guest house?   

**A:**  Yes. It was something like a guest house. It was not in the city, but was on top of a hill and quite a ways from the city. From there we went to Singapore where we were kept in some kind of a park. I think it was one of the hotels in Singapore.   

**Q:**  In which plane did you fly? It was something B.O. or something?   

**A:**  BOAC. Yes they said something like that. They said something like that. Then the plane reached Kolcutta. In Kolcutta, Manang Abo came to see me, as we knew each other from earlier.   

**Q:**  What did he say? Did he say all was not well?   

**A:**  That evening we were kept at East Square, so Manang Abo came to see me. He had sent a card to my room. The Chinese asked me, "What is this?" and I explained to them that he was with us in Chamdo when we were sent to sign the Seventeen-Point Agreement and that he had been sent to the Chamdo by the Kashag to record the matters. So they said in that case they should invite him for a dinner. So that evening we had dinner together at a dinner party thrown by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Abo was in Chamdo?   

**A:**  Yes he was. From Chamdo he went up [to Lhasa] earlier. In Chamdo there was a lot of talks saying that the Chinese were in Chamdo and then they would go up to Lhasa and take over Tibet and so on. Abo said, "In that case I will go up and report to the Kashag." Then they sent Abo to Lhasa. Abo stayed in Chamdo for only ten or fifteen days.   

**Q:**  Actually where was Abo supposed to be going?   

**A:**  Abo just came along with us, he had no definitive destination or aim. In Chamdo the people from his home area came to receive him, but he did not go there to visit his house. He stayed with me. After the dinner party, I went to accompany Abo to his hotel, the Hotel Continental, and we made plans to meet the next day.   

**A:**  Did the Chinese show any displeasure at your going with Abo?   

**A:**  No they did not say anything. They sent a car for us.   

**Q:**  Did they tell you not to go?   

**A:**  They asked where I was going, and I told them I was going to see an old friend.   

**Q:**  Then what about the car?   

**A:**  They said they would send a car with me. So I said that it was not necessary, as it would be boring for the driver, so I hired a taxi. So I met Abo there and he was saying that everything was not well.   

**Q:**  Did he?   

**A:**  Yes. He was complaining that everything had not been done as it should have been, and I said now what has happened has happened, and we kept on like that till about eleven or twelve at night. Then I returned to my hotel.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Kolcutta?   

**A:**  We stayed there for about three days, and then flew to Bagdogra. From Bagdogra we motored to Kalimpong. When we reached Teesta Bridge we were greeted by a reception committee.   

**Q:**  Who had arranged this welcome reception?   

**A:**  It had been organized by the Tibetan Trader's Association of Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  Who was the welcome for?   

**A:**  It was given for Zhang Jingwu.   

**Q:**  I see. So that is what was done in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes. That is what they did.   

**Q:**  Wasn't Shakabpa a member of the Tibetan Trader's Association?   

**A:**  You mean Shakabpa?   

**Q:**  Wasn't Shakabpa in the Dedön Tshogpa [Tib. བདེ་དོན་ཚོགས་པ]?   

**A:**  This was formed later, after that.   

**Q:**  I see. That association had not been formed then. At that time didn't they have the Panchyat Kyidu and the Yitön [Tib. ཡིད་རྟོན] Kyidu?   

**A:**  That association was the Trader's Association. It was the one that hosted this reception.   

**Q:**  So it was the Trader's Association?   

**A:**  Yes. So they did like that and made a lot of arrangements in Kalimpong. However, when I reached there I told them that I wanted to go. When they asked me where? I said that I wanted to go to my wife's home. My wife was Panda Tobgye's daughter. They asked where her home was, and when I explained, they agreed.   

**Q:**  Was Tobgye in Kalimpong at that time?   

**A:**  No, he was not there, but he had a house there. Yamphel was there, so it was just like Tobgye's house. They gave us a dinner.   

**Q:**  Do you mean to Zhang Jingwu?   

**A:**  Yes. They gave a party for Zhang Jingwu and did some other things. There was a Chinese School in Kalimpong at that time, but it was very poor. The school was run by collecting donations from the Chinese. So they invited Tang Chiu to the school, probably hoping to get some donations from him. He gave them about three thousand rupees as a donation.   

**Q:**  Where they Chinese rupees?   

**A:**  They refused to accept it. So he told them they should not refuse, as it was his personal money and not the Chinese Government's money. They gave him a receipt for that amount, but he said because it was his personal money he did not need a receipt. He did not accept it.   

**Q:**  Do you think he had so much personal money to give?   

**A:**  Yes. I think it was possible, as he was one of the old staff members.   

**Q:**  Was he from one of the old rich and powerful families in China?   

**A:**  He was not a small.   

**Q:**  Was he from an old Chinese aristocratic family?   

**A:**  No. He was not from one of them. He was from the PLA. He was one of the higher ranking officers in the military. He had three stars on his shoulder epaulette. He was a jiang jun. The lower generals had one star on their epaulette.   

**Q:**  What does jiang jun mean?   

**A:**  I think it means "general." The lowest generals had one star, the one above that had two, and the one above that had three stars. The highest had four stars   

**Q:**  Did they have any five star generals?   

**A:**  No, they did not have five star generals.   

**Q:**  What about the Commander-in-Chief, the Jigyab Magji [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་དམག་སྤྱི]?   

**A:**  After one gets four stars, the next promotion one got only one big star and was known as the marshal [Ch. yuan shuai]. There were ten of them. There are only ten of them in the whole of China, and among these ten, one was Zhu De, known as the Commander-in-Chief [Ch. zong si ling] . He was the main person among them. After him was Lin Biao. So there were only ten generals who have these big, big stars in China. After that, came the four star generals. There were also only ten of them, and again there are only ten of the three star generals. Zhang Jingwu was one of the ten three star generals. When we were in Beijing, he used to wear very poor clothes and looked like any ordinary poor citizen. But the soldiers who met him on the street would always salute him. I do not know how they recognized him as we could not make out any differences. So they stayed for about a week in Kalimpong during which they spent their time visiting places and observing. The two dzadrung looked after him.   

**Q:**  Were all the arrangements made by the two dzadrung?   

**A:**  I had taken leave.   

**Q:**  I see, so you had taken leave at that time?   

**A:**  At that time I had cut off my hair as it is now, very short. Consequently, since I did not have long hair, I could not have my hair knot [Tib. spa lchog]. So in Kalimpong I told them [the government] that I had a lot of rashes on my head so I had to shave off my hair. I wrote a petition to that effect and they said, "Try and grow your hair as soon as possible," and they gave me permission [to stay] for the time being.   

**Q:**  They asked you to grow your hair as soon as possible? But there is no remedy to hasten the growth of one's hair.   

**A:**  They just said, "Try to grow your hair as soon as possible." Then they went to Gangtok for about two or three days, and I went to see them off.   

**Q:**  You went to see them off?   

**A:**  I went to Kalimpong to see them off and then I took leave.   

**Q:**  Did you shake hands with them?   

**A:**  [Not very clear] After two months passed, when I reached Lhasa, Gendün Chömpel was still alive. So after two or three days I went to visit him. At that time he was living at the Agriculture Office. When I saw him, I saw that water had collected in his body [edema]. He was not wearing any clothing. He was only covered with a quilt. When I asked him what had happened, he told me that water had collected in his body.   

**Q:**  Was there no way by which the water could be drained off? I think that there were no good doctors there?   

**A:**  I asked him if he was getting any treatment and he told me that he was going to the Tibetan Medical Astrological Institute [Tib. སྨན་རྩིས་ཁང] there. Seeing his condition, I realized that there was no hope for him, and knew that he was going to pass away very soon. So I stayed there for a little while.   

**Q:**  Did he ask you what had happened while you were in China and so on?   

**A:**  No. At first he did not ask me anything about Beijing. He said, "You did quite well. At first you waged a small war, and then you had talks and sort of a treaty, you did things in style." Besides this he did not say anything. After that I was thinking of going and visiting him, but I got held up for two or three days. That was kite flying season, and one day when I went to fly a kite, I looked in the direction of my teacher Gendün Chömpel's house and noticed that they had already put up a Surkhok [Tib. གསུར་ཁོག]. Surkhok I think is some sort of incense which is burnt when someone passes away. They had put up a red surkhok. I sent someone to check and found that my late teacher had already passed away. He was 48 years old. It is written in a book that he was born in 1895.   

**Q:**  If he died at forty eight then he was very young.   

