# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.21 : Tape 21  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses his participation in the 17-Point Agreement negotiations and his return trip to Tibet via India. Sambo discusses how he met Taktse Rimpoche, the Dalai Lama's oldest brother, in Calcutta and how they thought of stopping him from going to the U.S. or informing the Chinese about this, but did not. Sambo describes the debate that took place in Yadong concerning whether the Dalai Lama should return to Lhasa or go into exile. He discusses how Ngabö explained the Agreement at a major meeting in Lhasa and about the rise and fall of the People's Association in 1952. Finally, he talks about the confrontation between the Chinese and the two sitsab in 1951-52.   

---  
### Tape 21  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_21/H_0205_21.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  The title of the document was written by Künsangtse in Duktsa [Tib. འབྲུ་ཙ] script. Though I had quite a good Duktsa script, Künsangtse was better than me. Künsangtse wrote the title of the document.   

**Q:**  There should be a preface, right?   

**A:**  The preface was written by the Chinese, so we never bothered to look into it. It was attached at the head of the 10 points.   

**Q:**  You didn't write the preface, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to write it, but it was already confirmed. It was copied out and they gave us a copy. We didn't make any comment on that.   

**Q:**  They thought that it was not important?   

**A:**  It was about 1 am at night when we finished writing the agreement. There were 2 Chinese copies and the paper was not that good. They could not erase the letters so they had to buy new books when they made mistakes.   

**Q:**  Did you check the Chinese to see whether it was translated correctly?   

**A:**  No, we thought it must be all right.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese check the Tibetan draft?   

**A:**  The Chinese must be checking, because they raised one objection against the word, "take the responsibility", (Tib. "ལྷུརླེན" [ལྷུར་ལེན]) in the second point which said the local government shall take responsibility to help [the Chinese]. They said this word would not do. We asked them "why?" [They said] This word, "lhurlen," gives the impression that Tibetan local government is higher than the Central Committee. So we told them that it is not so. The word "lhurlen" does not convey anything about higher or lower.   

**Q:**  So they changed the word?   

**A:**  No. We did not change it.   

**Q:**  Then you wrote all night, right?   

**A:**  Until midnight. Then I went to bed at about one. We reached the hall before the ceremony on the next day at around 4 p.m. I borrowed a chupa called Tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕུ་མ] from Sandu Rinchen. Then they took a photograph.   

**Q:**  At what time?   

**A:**  After four in the evening.   

**Q:**  On the 23rd?   

**A:**  On the 23rd. They reached before the 23rd of May, 1951. We reached just before the ceremony and stayed in separate rooms with direct access to the hall--the Chinese delegation as well as the Tibetan delegation. We were invited at a certain time and went and stood up in a line. Zhu De, the Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese army came and gave a speech.   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  Who knows, it was in Chinese.   

**Q:**  They didn't interpret it?   

**A:**  They didn't care whether it was translated or not. Then they made the seals.   

**Q:**  They made one for each person?   

**A:**  One for each person. A few days earlier they told us when we finish the talks, we have to sign and seal it. They asked us if we had a seal and we told them, "No, we have no seals." Then, they asked if they could make a seal for us, and we said yes. So they made a seal for the five representatives; five different seals with their names.   

**Q:**  Actually, Ngabö had the Kashag seal, but he didn't use it, right?   

**A:**  Ngabö told me that he had the seal of the Doji [Governor-General of Eastern Tibet] with him. He had it tied on his waist.   

**Q:**  People say I must be wrong and that the Chinese made a fake seal of the Kashag seal. Where does that story come from?   

**A:**  No, that's not true.   

**Q:**  They made a seal for each individual?   

**A:**  For each individual. Each individual's name was there. There was no rank at all in the seal. They said Ngabö Ngawang Jigme [Tib. ང་ཕོད་ངག་དབང་འཇིགས་མེད], Kheme Sonam Wangdü [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད་བསོད་ནམས་དབང་འདུས], Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན], Sambo Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ] and Thubden Tendar [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བསྟན་དར]. I know this Gyagpön Bu because I have seen him during World War II in Kalimpong and also later he came to Lhasa in 1943. In 1944 he came to Lhasa to see my father who told me that Gyagpön Bu was saying that the ear of the horse brought to Sambo for sale by the horse seller was very good. This was the time when people were trading in Sadam. Later he went to Reting and stayed a little while. He was close to Reting although probably he was not related to Reting. Then I heard that he was going to China or to his homeland. I don't know when he left.   

**Q:**  After Reting's troubles were over did you see him?   

**A:**  No. Probably he died.   

**Q:**  Did he die in China?  

**A:**  I didn't know.   

**Q:**  Did you know what he was doing in China?   

**A:**  He was doing something for Reting.   

**Q:**  The Khendrönlosum just sent a telegram. Otherwise, there was nothing, right? Is there anybody around who would know what he did in China?   

**A:**  [Gelek]: the Kapshö Trunyi [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་དྲུང་ཡིག] might know.   

**Q:**  What happened after the agreement was signed?   

**A:**  The signing ceremony was a big row of long tables with red table covers and all the copies of the agreement were on them. Then the speeches were given and the military band played music and then they put four chairs for the Chinese delegations headed by Li Weihan, Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Song Zhiyuan. And they put five chairs for the Tibetan delegation led by Ngabö. Each one of them signed and put their seals. Then the ceremony was over and we just relaxed till the evening when there was a banquet. On the way back they made arrangements for a lot of students to be around, shouting and demonstrating. When you listened to their words, they were shouting long life for Chairman Mao [Ch. mao zhuxi wan sui] and long life for the Tibetan delegation [Ch. xizang daibiao tuan wan sui]. Some were saying, "Long live the agreement [Tib. གྲོས་མཐུན་ཁྲི་ལོར་བརྟན་པ་ཤོག], etc. There were many of them there.   

**Q:**  Up to this time, they still had not informed Yadong, right?   

**A:**  They had not yet informed Yadong. After signing the 17-Point Agreement, only then did we inform Yadong--by telegram.   

**Q:**  Then the telegram would have been a long one, right?   

**A:**  It was written that we had signed the agreement but we didn't mention the articles one by one. We indicated that the content of the agreement was okay [Tib. ཨའུ་ཙམ].   

**Q:**  Did you send two, one to Yadong and one to Lhasa?   

**A:**  We just sent one to Yadong. None to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was it on the next day?   

**A:**  Three, four days later. After signing the 17-Point Agreement, whether it was the next day or the day after, we met Mao Zedong. Until then we had not met Mao Zedong.   

**Q:**  He shook hands with all of you, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and he said, "Now, you have signed the 17-Point Agreement and that is very good. We have accepted to be one big family, so now Beijing is yours, Shanghai is yours. Now the People's Liberation Army will go to Tibet, do you have any doubts?" Ngabö replied, "First when we met in Chamdo, we were doubtful, but now we trust [Tib. ཡིད་འཆེས] the People's Liberation Army." Mao told Ngabö, "Now, you will not have trust [the People's Liberation Army]. If you don't have doubts towards the People's Liberation Army, it would be very strange, so you will definitely have doubts even if we tell you that it is good. So your talk is a bit too early. But there will be one day when your doubts will be cleared away because you will be acquainted [Tib. འདྲིས་ཆེ་རུ] with the People's Liberation Army day by day. There should be a time to have the doubt and a time to have it cleared up."   

**Q:**  Weren't you worried that the Chinese might announce the agreement before you could inform Yadong?   

**A:**  We were doing it as quick as possible, and 3-4 days was not bad then.   

**Q:**  Why did it take 3-4 days? You could have sent the telegram after the agreement was signed.   

**A:**  It took time. First they had to draft the telegram to be translated into Chinese. Then it had to be translated into code, and only then was it ready.   

**Q:**  Couldn't the telegram be sent in English, not through code?   

**A:**  I don't know about that. But we were not very anxious about it [Tib. དངངས་སྐྲག].   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  Because it was not okay if we didn't confirm the agreement and we had done whatever we would in the best way and it was signed. Even Ngabö must have had similar thoughts. We could not have done anything better than that. That was that.   

**Q:**  Did you receive a telegram answer from Yadong?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. Then the time of the departure came. We wanted to go by India but the Chinese insisted and told Ngabö, "Now you are the most important person who signed this and it would be very dangerous if you go over foreign territory. So please go by the normal [land] route and whatever arrangements we have to arrange like horses, etc., we will cover the expenses.   

**Q:**  What about you?   

**A:**  As far as I was concerned, I told them that I had sent my horses back and I wanted to go via India. They told me I could go because I was not the main person.   

**Q:**  How about the dzasa and drönyerchemmo?   

**A:**  They were told that they could go through India because they had come through India.   

**Q:**  Everybody could go by India? Then what happened?   

**A:**  Then we asked what the nendrön would like to do. He said he would like to go with Ngabö. So he went with Ngabö.   

**Q:**  So three went by sea and two went by land?   

**A:**  We waited until Ngabö departed and then we went via Hong Kong.   

**Q:**  You went by train to Hong Kong?   

**A:**  We could only go to Jiulong and from there we went by ship.   

**Q:**  So how did Ngabö leave? Were there soldiers accompanying him?   

**A:**  Ngabö told me that he went from Beijing to Chongqing and stayed there for awhile. From there onwards he had a lot of bodyguards and security forces. They were extra careful and very suspicious about his security.   

**Q:**  Basically, he wasn't free to travel. They were afraid of letting him out so he could say, "No, I wanted to do like this and so on." I think Ngabö lost his personal freedom--he was under Chinese control, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it seemed like that.   

**Q:**  And then you left by sea?   

**A:**  No, we left by plane from Hong Kong. We had to stay in Guangzhou for about a month--getting the permits and passports ready.   

**Q:**  Who carried the copy of the agreement?   

**A:**  Ngabö.   

**Q:**  So when you went to India, you had nothing to show the people that you had signed the 17-Point Agreement and so on? You had no copy or notes to show?   

**A:**  No, we had no such things, but everybody could memorize it.   

**Q:**  Didn't they think that people going to India would reach Yadong first, and everybody would be very interested to hear and know about the 17-Point Agreement?   

**A:**  No. But we had almost memorized the whole agreement so we could give a verbal report.   

**Q:**  They went back from China and when you arrived in India, can you tell us about it?   

**A:**  We couldn't get tickets, so we had to stay about a month at Guangzhou which is the capital of Guangdong. At that time, Hong Kong was under the British.   

**Q:**  What was Guangzhou like then?   

**A:**  It was good and a big city.   

**Q:**  But it might not be happy?   

**A:**  Not really happy. It had just been liberated.   

**Q:**  Then how did you reach India?   

**A:**  We reached Calcutta via Hong Kong.   

**Q:**  Do you have anything to relate about Hong Kong?   

**A:**  Up to Hong Kong, we traveled by train and ship. Until Hong Kong, Zhang Jingwu was with us. So he told us that we are about to reach Hong Kong and there will be lots of foreign news reporters to ask you questions. What will you tell them? So Kheme, who was the senior-most official among us, asked Zhang Jingwu how we should respond to their questions? So after sometime, he said, "You could tell them that you are not well and can't talk." Kheme said, "That's fine." After some time, we realized that how can all three of us be sick? We were pushing the Chinese [Tib. ཕར་གཡོགས] about this. Then Zhang Jingwu said, "Wouldn't it be okay if you say that you were not permitted to speak." To this suggestion also Kheme said, "That's also fine." Normally Kheme is a person who does not speak his mind.   

**Q:**  Who was with you?   

**A:**  Kheme, Lhautara, myself and Zhang Jingwu.   

**Q:**  Was the Dalai Lama's brother-in-law also with you?   

**A:**  Yes, he was the interpreter. Sandu Rinchen was also with us. I thought that if the Chinese had asked us nicely to say something, we would have had to say something nice. We couldn't have said that the Chinese forced us to sign the 17-Point agreement because eventually we had to go back to Tibet, so we would have been in a fix. However when the Chinese were forced to advise us not to speak to the new reporters, we escaped from facing an embarrassing situation. So when we reached Hong Kong, the reporters came while we were having lunch. They told the reporters that we were a bit tired from the journey and were taking a rest. The reporters came again after some time, and then they told them that we were not permitted to speak to the press. So the next day there were some articles in the local paper saying that the Tibet Local Government representatives who had full power to negotiate were not being permitted to talk to the press. So we stayed 2-3 days in Hong Kong and then stayed one night in Singapore, and then on the next day we reached Calcutta by plane. There they had made arrangements for us to stay at the Chinese Consulate [Ch. ling shi guan]. They warned us that we should not go out unnecessarily, because there were a lot of dangers. They told the same thing to the two dzadrung.   

**Q:**  What dangers?   

**A:**  There was a danger to our life--people might try to kill us. In Calcutta we heard that Taktse Rimpoche was leaving for U.S.A. At first, we were astonished and we discussed whether we should try to stop him from going.   

**Q:**  Usually, was Sandu Rinchen there when you were discussing things?   

**A:**  Yes, but at that time he had to stay back in Hong Kong because they didn't get many airplane tickets. Later, after much discussion, we thought that we should inform the Chinese. Then again we realized that it is possible that he might be being sent [by the Tibetan government] for some kind of purpose [Tib. དགོངས་གཞི་དགོས་པ] and if this were so, we should neither stop him nor inform the Chinese. So lets pretend that we didn't know that. So we kept quiet and did not tell the Chinese about this.   

**Q:**  Did you meet Taktse Rimpoche?   

**A:**  Yes, met him at the East Court or East Square. We also received his hand-blessing.   

**Q:**  Did he tell you that he was going to the States?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did you know that he was going?   

**A:**  No. Later we came to know about it through other people.   

**Q:**  Was it through depön?   

**A:**  I don't remember how we heard that. Then we left for Bagdogra. There, Zhang Jingwu told us that the government had sent Shölkang Sey to receive us. He was there at the Teesta Bridge to receive us. There were about 40-50 cars to receive us. Then we reached Kalimpong. They had made arrangements for us to stay at Green Wood where the Trade Mission was. However, I told them that I will stay at Panda's house because my wife was a member of the Panda family. Similarly, Künsangtse also went to stay with Sandutsang and Lhautara went to stay with the Head of the Trade Mission, Tshongji Lobsang Tsewang [Tib. ཚོང་སྤྱི་བློ་བཟང་ཚེ་དབང]. Then the Trade Association gave us a dinner party. The Chinese stayed at Green Wood.   

**Q:**  The Chinese general was with them? How many people were with him?   

**A:**  There were about 6-7 people. Zhang Jingwu was the leader and then there was Alo Buzhang. We heard that the Tibetan people were saying that the 17-Point Agreement was no good and so on.   

**Q:**  Were the Tibetan people shocked?   

**A:**  People were saying that it was not good and they were still discussing it in Yadong. It was also not certain if the Dalai Lama was going to come to India or go back to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were you all surprised to hear about this?   

**A:**  Yes, we were worried. We were thinking what will happen? In Yadong there were two divisions--one faction wanted the Dalai Lama to return to Lhasa and the other wanted him to go to India. We heard that there was a meeting at Yadong for many days. One group led by Namseling, etc. wanted the Dalai Lama to go to India, but the group led by Gadrung Dumra [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར] wanted the Dalai Lama to go back to Lhasa. Finally, we heard that Namseling and Dumra argued face to face about this issue. I had cut off my [long] hair and I had taken leave. I told Kheme [Künsangtse] that since you two are going [to Yadong], there is no need for me to go with you. He said, "That's right--you write an application for leave and I will take it with me." So then the two dzadrung, Zhang Jingwu, and Alo Buzhang left for Gangtok on their way to Tibet. In Sikkim, they bought the necessary items like food supplies, horses, etc. for their journey. In the meantime, in Yadong, they had come to a decision. They settled the issue by the senriy lottery divination.   

**Q:**  When the dzadrung arrived, it had not been decided, right?   

**A:**  Probably it had just been decided about 1-2 days and several hours previously. Dumra won and so it was decided that the Dalai Lama would go back to Lhasa. Supposing if the other faction had won, the Dalai Lama now would have come to India. But they decided that the Chinese and dzadrung would go to Tibet via Nathula Pass and the Dalai Lama would take the Dzeleb La Pass route to India. That's what they had planned. Then I got a reply to my request from Yadong. They said that I should come as soon as possible when my hair grows in--so I stayed about 2 months in India and then went to Tibet. At that time, Ngabö had yet to arrive in Lhasa.   

**A:**  Normally it would take 5-6 months for one's hair to grow back, right?   

**A:**  It would take about 6-7 months.   

**Q:**  While you were in Kalimpong and the dzadrung had reached Tibet, what news did you hear about what the Dalai Lama and the Kashag told them?   

**A:**  I didn't ask about this and I don't remember what people said. I heard that while Ngabö was coming back through Kham, at one time Zhang Guohua asked Ngabö, "Did you receive any telegrams from your government saying that you did all right by signing the agreement?" Ngabö said he had not received any such telegram. Then again a few days later, he again replied that he had not received any reply. The Chinese said, "That's very strange, but anyhow, tonight let's have a good drink." So that night they had a good drink together. Then as they came up and reached Kongpo, Ngabö also found it strange that he had not received any official news. It worried him a little. Then from Kongpo he sent another telegram saying that, "All the Tibetan power remains in the hands of the Dalai Lama and I had to cut off my hair and now I should be permitted to stay in Kongpo till I grow my hair long." A reply came, saying that it is not important whether you have hair or not--come as quickly as you can. So when Ngabö reached Lhasa he had no hair. For about one month Ngabö attended the Kashag without hair, wearing a hat called Shangmao and a garment called Hrang Gozi, [Ch. shang gua zi] [semi-official Mongolian dress].   

**Q:**  Were you in India?   

**A:**  I had arrived in Lhasa then, but I hadn't officially reported my arrival [Tib. འབྱོར་ཕྱག]. Ngabö had also arrived Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese welcome him elaborately?   

**A:**  Yes hey did, though they didn't have soldiers then, but Zhang Jingwu was there. Then in Lhasa they had a meeting and there was a lot of discussion.   

**Q:**  Was the meeting the Tsondu gyendzom or the Tsondu hragdu?   

**A:**  It was the gyendzom [the Largest Assembly]. Some people said that it [the Agreement] was not good and we have been given less power than the British gave us when they came to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did anyone call Ngabö or anyone to explain what had happened?   

**A:**  I heard that one day Ngabö himself went to the meeting and said, "I heard that some of you want to make changes to the Agreement. That is not possible because the Agreement has already been signed and sealed. Now if we had not signed this Agreement, there is no doubt that the Chinese would have sent their soldiers to march right up to Lhasa. If they sent the soldiers, we would have been defenseless. As everyone knows, we have no outside nations to help us. So I thought that it was better to sign the agreement. If you think that it was a big mistake, then I am totally responsible for it and you can punish me in whatever manner you think I deserve." I was not at the meeting, but I heard it was like that. So after that the Tsondu decided that if that was what the situation was then, there was nothing we can do, so the meeting was adjourned.   

**Q:**  Was this at the end of the 1951?   

**A:**  It was in autumn in 1951, at the end of the 8th and beginning of the 9th month in the Tibetan calendar. So the agreement was accepted.   

**Q:**  What were the Chinese doing? The ones who came with Ngabö? Did they start their work?   

**A:**  I don't know what they were doing because I was not among the Chinese.   

**Q:**  What were Zhang Jingwu, etc. doing then? Did they start their work?   

**A:**  Zhang Jingwu and Alo were staying in Trimön House. They had no work. They couldn't go anywhere since they didn't know anyone and they were total strangers in a new land. So they were very low key [Tib. སྐྱོ་པོ]. Then, in 1952, the Tibetan people still were hoping for some change [in the Agreement].   

**Q:**  Up to this time, were there any Chinese soldiers. e.g., with Ngabö?   

**A:**  No, there were no soldiers. Then at the end of 1951--when the crops were already harvested--about the 10th of the 10th Tibetan month, the Chinese soldiers came.   

**Q:**  From where had they come?   

**A:**  They had come through the regular route from Kham.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers?   

**A:**  There were 2-3 thousand soldiers with Zhang Guohua.   

**Q:**  Didn't Zhang Guohua come with Ngabö?   

**A:**  No. Zhang Guohua came later.   

**Q:**  No Chinese officer came with Ngabö?   

**A:**  None.   

**Q:**  Then what about those Chinese who came with Ngabö and said tonight let's have a good drink and so on?   

**A:**  Zhang Guohua came with Ngabö only up to Dartsedo or Chamdo. Then in 1952 [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  So in Tibet everything went on as normal? The Dalai Lama came back from Yadong?   

**A:**  Yes, you could say it was more or less normal. In the beginning, the People's Liberation Army soldiers were very well disciplined. Sometimes the Tibetans would spit in their faces, throw stones or in few cases catch them and beat them, but they would never retaliate. The soldiers would just run away to avoid these angry citizens.   

**Q:**  This was after they arrived in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Where were they camped?   

**A:**  They were kept in the "New Regiment" (Magar Sarpa [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ]) which was near Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག]. Those who did not fit there stayed in tents. Zhang Jingwu stayed at Yuthok House which had been bought by the Chinese. Zhang Guohua was the commander of the Chinese soldiers but among themselves, Zhang Jingwu was more powerful. In 1952, the first Tibetan People's Association arose and one of the points that they requested was for the Chinese to pull back their soldiers who were stationed permanently in Tibet and to protect the monasteries and not implement reforms right away. They said that during the [Qing] empire period there never had been Chinese soldiers stationed permanently in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Was their meeting organized by the Chinese?   

**A:**  No, it was organized by the people of Tibet.   

**Q:**  Was it the same as the normal Tsondu?   

**A:**  No. This was organized by the people themselves - the meeting of the peoples' own representatives.   

**Q:**  How could this be a people's meeting? Was it organized by the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  No, the government had nothing to do with it. This was organized by the people themselves - on their own initiative.   

**Q:**  What year and month was it?   

**A:**  It was in 1952 - the 2nd or 3rd Tibetan month.   

**Q:**  After the agreement was signed, did the Chinese announce it on the radio on that day?   

**Q:**  I am not sure on that day or not, but they announced it on the radio.   

**Q:**  Anyway, let's get back to early 1952. When did Ngabö go to the Tsondu meeting and tell them that he had already signed the 17-Point Agreement?   

**A:**  It was in the 8th or 9th month.   

**Q:**  Until this time, the situation kind of didn't calm down, right?   

**A:**  Yes, people were kind of apprehensive [Tib. གཡང་བཀྱག].   

**Q:**  This meeting of the Tibetan people's representatives was held after the Chinese soldiers came to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, it was after the soldiers came.   

**Q:**  The Chinese soldiers came twice - at first about a few thousand came, and then after a few months, more soldiers arrived. So when was it?   

**A:**  This meeting was held in the second month of the Tibetan calendar. They made a joint appeal to the Tibetan government as well as to the Chinese. The Chinese big shot Zhang Jingwu scolded the representatives of the Tibetan people by saying how can you hold such a meeting and with whose permission did you convene such a meeting? They knew there would not be anything good in the petition. The appeal was sent separately - one to the Tibetan government and one to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Was Alo Chöndze and so forth among the representatives?   

**A:**  No. Probably Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] of Sera Jey was there and a few representatives were arrested.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there the fat jola called something Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག] and Shigatse Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག].   

**A:**  They were among the latter one [organization]. But Kamekang Chöndze [Tib. དཀར་མེ་ཁང] was there.   

**Q:**  What was the joint authority of the Tibetans and the Chinese?   

**A:**  This meant both the Tibetans and the Chinese. They probably submitted the petition to the Kashag and the Chinese. At that time, the Chinese were a bit frightened. They collected all their soldiers and made preparations to defend themselves. They put sand bags on the roof tops, near the windows and in front of the houses. They barricaded and kept guards in all their different houses and offices. Any place where the Chinese were staying like the Yuthok house, Magar Sarpa, Kyitöpa house, and so on.   

**Q:**  The Mönlam Festival was held regularly, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How could these [people's] representatives meet? Whose representatives were they?   

**A:**  In the beginning, they had a meeting, but these representatives were not elected in the normal sense. They would decide among themselves and say, "You come along and you come along." They were picked at random. I think they were people like the managers of the big families, monasteries, estates, big kudrak families and so on. They had nothing to do with the government. Then there was that first official meeting of the Chinese and Tibetans to investigate this matter. This was the first time that the two met together officially. This meeting was held most probably at the top of the Tsuglagang. They met to discuss this "People's Association." At that time, the two sitsab were the most powerful among the Tibetan government officials.   

**Q:**  This was the first joint meeting so were the two sitsab there?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They remained in office on all this time?   

**A:**  Yes, they stayed on.   

**Q:**  Until when did the sitsab stay?   

**A:**  They stayed on until the end of 1952, the time of the Tsongjö Prayer Festival.   

**Q:**  The first People's Association arose before the Tsongjö, right? Did you say it was in the 2nd month?   

**A:**  Yes, it was when the Tsongjö was just about to start or during the Tsongjö.   

**Q:**  The sitsab were not demoted. They stayed in office for one year, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they appoint the investigation committee separately?   

**A:**  Yes, they appointed an investigation committee to find out about these "People's Representatives." My late father and Trendong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] Khenjung were the two members from the Tibetan side. I don't know who the members from the Chinese side were.   

**Q:**  Was this the first joint Tibetan and Chinese investigation committee?   

**A:**  Yes. So finally they arrested these people's representatives and kept them in Tsuglagang for a few months.   

**Q:**  Why did they arrest them?   

**A:**  Because they submitted the petition. According to our system, they were allowed to make a direct face-to-face appeal [to the Dalai Lama] [Tib. གདོང་ཞུ], but they would arrest them.   

**Q:**  But they didn't make a direct appeal.   

**A:**  Yes, but it was not allowed for the people to meet like that. I heard that Zhang Jingwu asked Lukhangwa if the people were allowed to convene a meeting of their own accord and submit a petition to the government? Lukhangwa replied, "The Tibetan people have made an appeal to the Tibetan government so we have to listen. As far as the Zhongyang People's Government is concerned, when the people make a demand you have to listen to it." There was some chaos in Lhasa and the situation looked critical.   

**Q:**  [Gelek:] One incident I remember was that one day while I was at home, suddenly a lot of Chinese soldiers with guns walked into our house, pushing aside our protesting servants. I went and tried to talk to them, but they would not respond. They just went straight into our rooms upstairs. They occupied the rooms facing the east side and started pointing their guns through the windows--towards Lukhangwa's house. Down below, our courtyard was also occupied by the Chinese soldiers. They stayed like this for about 3 hours. We didn't know what was going on. After about 3 hours they left our house--just as they had arrived--without saying a word!   

**A:**  Later, we heard that the Chinese had said that they were making preparations for war--no ordinary and common citizens would be harmed at all. They further said that people who are pro-Chinese would be protected by the Chinese soldiers. In the 3rd or 4th month, things settled sown and everything returned to normal. I heard this from some people.   

**Q:**  What happened to the investigation committee and what were they investigating?   

**A:**  The investigation was still going on. They were asking questions like, "How did you convene this meeting, whose idea was it, who else was involved, and so on."   

**Q:**  They were not investigating the petition or the request?   

**A:**  No decision was taken about their request. The Chinese could not give a discussion since they had to inform Beijing and wait for an answer. The Tibetans could not decide because they had to forward it to the Dalai Lama and wait for his decision.   

**Q:**  The main point of the appeal submitted by the people's representative was about the Chinese soldiers staying permanently in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, it was. However, beside that there were 2 or 3 other points. I don't remember them. In the Fifth Selected Works of Mao Zedong, some of these points are mentioned and he taught them how to give the answers. In the 3rd and the 4th month, the situation was kind of called. ??? By the 7th or 8th month, the Chinese were running out of rations and firewood and they had to buy firewood so they approached the Tibetan government and wanted to borrow these commodities. The two sitsab stalled them and would not grant them their request and they couldn't buy such a large quantity of these commodities. There were many confrontations between the Chinese and the sitsab. The Tibetan government could not really do much since fuel and rations were scarce in Lhasa. By the 9th and 10th months, the situation became worse and in the 11th and 12th months, there were a lot of confrontations between the Chinese and the sitsab. We would often see the Chinese returning late at night with kerosene pressure lamps. When we asked people what they were doing, it was said that they were meeting with the two sitsab. They might be struggling with them. [laughter]   

