# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.23 : Tape 23  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses the Reting incident and particularly the correspondence between Reting and Nyungne Lama and how these letters were exhibited by the government in the Barkor Street. He mentions that not a single correspondence between Reting and China was found when they raided Reting Labrang and the only connection to China was through Gyagpön Bu. Sambo discusses some cases which dealt with aristocratic family fission such as Sandu, Shatra, Bönshö and Janglojen. And he explains in detail about how the Sambo family split. Finally, Sambo describes the system of collecting the mibo fees from miser.   

---  
### Tape 23  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_23/H_0205_23.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  After Reting got into trouble all the documents came into the hands of the government. Among these documents there were many letters between Reting and China. Did you have any ideas about this?   

**A:**  I haven't heard anything about any correspondence between Reting Labrang and China, but Reting definitely sent Gyagpön Bu to China to seek help. I am not aware of any correspondence between Reting and China when Reting's property was confiscated.   

**Q:**  Was there any correspondence with Gyagpön Bu?   

**A:**  Most probably. There must have been documents revealing some correspondence between Gyagpön Bu and Reting. That is more likely. However, I personally have not seen or heard about it. I believe that it was Nyungne Lama's [Tib. སྙུང་གནས] idea to contact China and send Gyagpön Bu there. Of course, the order was given by Reting himself. Later Reting's and Nyungne Lama's property were confiscated, but Gyagpön Bu was never arrested.   

**Q:**  When did Gyagpön Bu go to China?   

**A:**  Most probably he went in 1944-45. He was in Lhasa in 1943-44.   

**Q:**  What was he doing? Was he an official of Reting Labrang?   

**A:**  I doubt it. No, he was not an official.   

**Q:**  Do you know anything about Gyagpön Bu?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did he come back to Tibet before the Chinese came to Tibet?   

**A:**  No, he never returned to Tibet. He stayed in Horkhok near Ganzi.   

**Q:**  Do you remember what other documents they found among Reting's property?   

**A:**  Another letter which I remember went like this: "Though the stupa might be upside down, the middle is still at the center." [Tib. མཆོད་རྟེན་མགོ་མཇུག་ལོག་ཀྱང། བང་རིམ་སྐེད་པར་གནས] I remember this quotation. This correspondence [of Reting] could have been with Nyungne.   

**A:**  [Gelek:] I heard that this was written to Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ].   

**A:**  Whoever it might be, these people were the ones who gave the ideas to Reting.   

**Q:**  Reting was saying not to do such things, but they carried on doing it. I don't understand it. Does it mean that Reting really didn't mean it? If he really did not want it he could have stopped them.   

**A:**  I think at first he really didn't want to do it, but later he changed his mind and went along with them. These letters were exhibited in Lhasa near the Kaling Gobshi [Tib. ཀར་ནེ་སྒོ་བཞི] stupa. They were put between two pieces of glass so that people could have a look at them. This was displayed in the market area probably for about 1-2 weeks. The Regent's writing style was like that of an uneducated person [Tib. རྩལ་ཡིག]. Nobody could write like that.   

**Q:**  Do you mean because it was too good or what?   

**A:**  Because it was too bad. You just have to read it by the meaning of the context. Otherwise, you can't read it by the writing itself.   

**Q:**  Which letters?   

**A:**  Probably, all the letters. About how he lost his monk's celibacy, the plans with Nyungne Lama and so forth.   

**Q:**  All the letters showing Reting's faults, right? Was this before or after Reting's death? It must be after the investigation, right?   

**A:**  I am not sure about that. The reason was that the incident happened all of a sudden so the government exhibited these letters because there was a lot of criticism against the government. They were accused of bullying Reting and it was disgraceful [Tib. མཚན་ཤས] for the government [to act like that].   

**Q:**  How many people were killed at Reting's place? I mean the soldiers who were kept there to guard Reting Labrang after it was officially sealed. Those soldiers were killed. Can you tell us something about it?   

**A:**  There were about 20 soldiers left behind to guard Reting Labrang. Reting's people planned to kill them so they gave them chang to drink. The Tibetan soldiers love to drink chang. After that, they were attacked. Out of the 20 soldiers, only one managed to escape. This was what I heard.   

**Q:**  How were they killed? Did they use swords or guns?   

**A:**  They must have been killed with guns and swords.   

**Q:**  Can you give us some examples about court cases, internal splits in families concerning property? For example, Sambo divided their estates, right?   

**A:**  This was done internally later on. There were many instances of the [family dividing into] a main and a branch [Tib. མ་ཟུར] family. The ones who didn't bring a law case settled it internally. Take the case of Sandu. Sandu's family was divided into Gyurme la [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་ལགས] and Sichö la [Tib. སྲི་ཆོད་ལགས] on one side, and Lo Gendün [Tib. བློ་དགེ་འདུན], Lo Nyendra [Tib. བློ་སྙན་གྲགས] and Rinchen [Tib. རིན་ཆེན] on the other side.   

**Q:**  Which was the main Sandu?   

**A:**  Gyurme and Sichö were the main Sandu's because they were the two oldest sons. These two were real brothers with the same father and mother. The others were half brothers, having the same father but different mothers. Moreover, I talked with Sichö la when I was in jail and he told me that the actual Sandu home base was in the Hor area just below Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒུཨས་དགོན་པ] and a short distance towards Tibet from Ganzi Monastery. There was a big house near the mountainside. When I went there, they were building a new house, it was still under construction, and not yet complete. The actual main house of Sandu was the one near the mountainside. Sichö and Gyurme used to live here. The houses in Phari and Kampulung were given to Lo Nyendra, Rinchen and Lo Gendün. They probably split into two sides like this. They said that they would return the capital cash they had borrowed from the Tibetan government. When they were returning these loans to the government, their half-brother said that they needed the cash, so instead of returning it to the government, they paid the interest for the loan to the government. Internally such a division existed in the family, but to the outside world they presented a united front, one big family. For example there was one son known as Tsetop la [Tib. ཚེ་སྟོབས་ལགས], Sichö's son. They arranged a bride for him, Pema la, Ngabö's daughter. Before they could really settle the matter and finalize the marriage, the 1959 trouble started. Sichö la was in Tibet and he was a religious person and didn't take responsibility for the family. He was in retreat doing the Yamantaka [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད]. He was supposed to leave after that was completed, but before he left the revolt took place and he couldn't get out or come in. Pema la was in India and at the same time Tsetop la, her husband to be, became crazy and died. So she married one of the half-brothers, Wangdor [Tib. དབང་རྡོར], and this cemented the relationship among the brothers and because of that the question of separation did not arise.   

**Q:**  What did they do with the land? Did they have any land?   

**A:**  The main house and the land under it belonged to Sichö and Gyurme. The house and land in Phari and Kampulung belong to the other brothers.   

**A:**  [Gelek:] The things in India were given to Gyurme la.   

**A:**  [Sambo]: I don't think so.   

**A:**  [Gelek:] I definitely know that Gyurme la was the one who was in India.   

**Q:**  [Gelek]: What else did they get? Probably, they got the things in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Because they used to stay separate in Lhasa, the house in Lhasa was given to the other brothers and they sold it to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  What about Shatra [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ], the main family and Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར], the branch?   

**A:**  I heard that the Prime Minister, Shatra Lönchen [Tib. བློན་ཆེན], the one who signed the Simla Convention, had 2 wives. Those wives didn't get along well together and one wife remained in Shatra with her children and one of them went away and lived separately with her children. I remember her when I was a child. One of her children was Shasur, who later became the kalön. They got nothing much [as a share] except Lhadong Shenka [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ], the ferry site. They did not have any land as such, but they got a regular income from the river which was almost better than an estate. The boats and ferries crossing the river had to pay a certain amount of money as a fee. That was the only thing they got.   

**Q:**  But they got some land?   

**A:**  Yes, they had a small estate, but there was not much arable land.   

**Q:**  Who was Shasur's father?   

**A:**  Probably his father was the Prime Minister. I am not sure.   

**Q:**  So that estate was his estate for serving the government [Tib. ཞབ་རྟེན་ཕ་གཞིས]?   

**A:**  Yes, so he was known as Sawang Shenka.   

**Q:**  Didn't they submit a petition and the verdict was issued when Shasur was separated?   

**A:**  I don't think so. They just talked internally and settled the matter.   

**Q:**  What about your own family?   

**A:**  My late father and mother had six children. Later he took another wife and she bore him 7 children. When we were growing up, my father realized that while he was alive everything was going smoothly, people respected us and there were no problems. After my death [he thought], it would be okay if the younger ones listened to the elder ones, but there was bound to be some trouble among my family since there are 2 mothers, each of them with a lot of children and each of the sons would take a wife. So [he thought] it would be better to divide things now and make everything clear. Therefore he said that the 2 senior sons: me from the first wife and Samdru Norbu [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ནོར་བུ] from the second wife, will together look after and take care of the family land, properties and assume the title of the family and so on. Bahadur and the fatty [Tib. རྒྱགས་པ་ལགས] were yet to be born. The two junior sons, Jigmela [Tib. འཇིགས་མེད་ལགས] who was the son of my late mother, and Tsewang Sampel [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་བསམ་འཕེལ] from the second wife, would be put into another unit. There were only four sons. The girls didn't count since they would leave the family when they get married. My father himself took one small estate in Sangri [Tib. ཟངས་རི] which was quite a good one and would stay there with his wife and daughters as long as he lived. After that he said that he will return the estate us.   

**Q:**  After his death it would go to the 2 senior sons who would bear the expenditures of the daughters?   

**A:**  Our father would bear the expenses. He had already set aside a large sum of private money to handle such a situation. Furthermore, he had also set aside a certain amount of share for his daughters when they got married.   

**Q:**  What about the two younger sons? Did he give them estates? Did they divide the estates equally between the two seniors and the two juniors?   

**A:**  It was divided almost kind of equal in terms of the income. To the two junior ones he gave two estates: Biru and Khadag [Tib. ?]. The idea was that all the income would be divided among the brothers. According to the gross share, the 2 elder sons received a much larger share of the income. However, as far as the net share was concerned, the senior sons got only a little bit more than the junior ones. This was because the senior sons had to pay all the taxes, spend money on monks and make offerings and perform rituals and meet the other social obligations and all these things involved spending money. Therefore, we two older siblings received much more than our younger brothers, but after deducting all the expenses, there was not much difference.   

**Q:**  What about you two?   

**A:**  We got the main estate in Tranag [Tib. གྲ་ནང] which was the estate for being the family of the Dalai Lama [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་འཁྱོངས་ཐེབས]. Also the one in Trango [Tib. ཕྲེང་འགོ], and in Kyishong [Tib. སྐྱིད་གཤོང] in Tsöna, and the Khathog [Tib. ?] Estate in Yarlung. Then there was a small estate with an animal herd in the upper valley of Shenka known as Kampulung.   

**Q:**  Was this small estate just to providing tsamba and flour for you?   

**A:**  We had other sources for the tsamba and flour. This place was for going on pleasure trips [Tib. སྤྲོ་གསེང]. Another small one in Gyarpo [Tib. སྐྱར་པོ] was known as the Thangchen [Tib. ཐང་ཆེན] Estate.   

**Q:**  The junior ones, if they joined the government service were they entitled to the senampa rank [Tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ]?   

**A:**  Yes. I am telling you the internal things. To the outsiders, we were all one and the same family, so they enjoyed the rank of senampa.   

**Q:**  Supposing that there was a real split, internal as well as external, then what happened? What if one of the brothers really lived separately?   

**A:**  In such a case, unless the government said something, we would remain like that.   

**Q:**  [Gelek:] It depends on the private individual. If you are bold and thick-skinned, you would take the senampa rank, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What about Shasur? Was he a senampa?   

**A:**  No. At first he was a tsidrung, then he became a depön.   

**Q:**  So, this was arranged internally. Was there any written document?   

**A:**  Yes, we had written documents about the division of our property. When we divided the property, we invited Ngabö Sawang, Tsögo, and Panda Yamphel [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཡར་འཕེལ]. There was a ceremony and these three acted as the witnesses. Then they put their seal as witnesses of the agreement.   

**Q:**  Was there only one copy?   

**A:**  No there were three copies made. One for each of us and one for our parents.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, when the property was divided and parents and children lived separately, they took a different name. Are there any such cases?   

**A:**  In our family there was no such practice. I don't recollect anything about such a case.   

**Q:**  Did the two of you, the senior sons, plan to separate? And was it at the same time that you first made the internal settlement?   

**A:**  Yes. In 1954, we planned to split up the land and property between ourselves. The main reason was that I was married and had a wife. Sooner or later Samdru Norbu would also get married, so we decided to split the property and the land. There were no problems dividing the movable property, but as far as the land was concerned, it was impossible.   

**Q:**  When you were married and your half-brother was still single, wasn't there any talk or idea about sharing one wife?   

**A:**  No, we did not have any such talks.   

**Q:**  Maybe you wouldn't tolerate this, right?   

**A:**  [laughs].   

**Q:**  When your father made the two of you to live together, didn't he have any thought of taking one bride for two of you?   

**A:**  He didn't say anything about this, but when I separated from my first wife, my father must have thought that it would be good if my second wife would be one who is not capable of bearing a child. Another thought which might have occurred was that now maybe I and my half-brother might marry a common wife. This thought possibly occurred to him but he didn't say or suggest anything.   

**Q:**  What was the main reason that you and your half-brother decided to split?   

**A:**  The reason that we decided to split was that in the winter of 1954 when I went to Tranang, I received a letter from our father in which he suggested that it might be better if we split the land and property between the two of us.   

**Q:**  Samdru Norbu was not married, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was just a child probably 14-15-16 years old. I called our senior servants, the chandzö and the estate managers, and we had a meeting. I told them about our father's suggestion. Then I asked them to work out a plan as to how the property should be divided, which would meet our father's approval. They tried to work out a plan but it proved to be impossible. Whichever way we planned, there were some problem because the land, the revenue, income, expenditures, etc. were so intermingled that we could not find a solution agreeable to everyone. I went back to Lhasa and told my father about everything, how we tried and how it proved to be impossible. My father said, "Let it be as before, but divide the net income between us, each of us taking one half." In 1956 we sold our house in Lhasa, Samdru Phodrang [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང], and the money was divided equally between the two of us.   

**Q:**  You didn't share it with the younger ones?   

**A:**  Our younger brothers had their own share of houses which they could sell if they wanted.   

**Q:**  Suppose that you and your brother couldn't get along well and you couldn't settle the matter amicably internally. Then the issue would become public or you would dispute openly. In such a situation, you, being the senior, with much more knowledge and contacts, what would you think your share or your rights would be?   

**A:**  If that happened, since I am the senior son, they would have to give the family name to me. Therefore I think I would get a larger share.   

**Q:**  Let's take another assumption. Let's say that you have three real younger brothers and your father has passed away. You would be the head of the family. Then you decide that your younger brothers are useless and you kick them out without giving them any share. Was that possible?   

**A:**  This happens. If one of these brothers is given away or he goes as a magpa, he has nothing to carry with him, except for whatever the older brother gives him. He has no land or wealth to carry with him. For example, Rindor la [Tib. རིན་རྡོར་ལགས] came from Kyibu [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྦུག] as a magpa to Künsangtse. Künsangtse Sonam Wangdü [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་དབང་འདུས] came from Surkhang. Both of them came without bringing any land, house or estate. When they were sent as a magpa while the parents were alive, it was done something like this.   

**Q:**  Why did they want two magpa?   

**A:**  Sonam Wangdü came as a magpa. Then he and his wife had a daughter and they brought Rindor la as a magpa for their daughter Kelsang Dekyi [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་བདེ་སྐྱིད].   

**Q:**  Suppose there were no parents. That the parents had passed away and the older brother kicks out the younger brother. Then what happens?   

**A:**  In such a case it becomes very bad, like in Shatra's case. When the parents were there, the contradiction would not be open. After the parent's death, the contradiction became open and they would not tolerate each other. Then it depends totally on the verdict issued by the government. It depends upon how capable you are and how much back door influence you wielded.   

**Q:**  In Shatra's case was it between 2 brothers?   

**A:**  No. It was between a brother and a sister. The son's father was the Shatra Tsipön. The girl, Lhayön [Tib. ལྷ་ཡོན], was the younger daughter of Shatra Paljor Dorje [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་རྡོ་རྗེ], the Prime Minister. Then both the Shatras, the Tsipön as well as the Prime Minister died. The son, the present Shatra and his mother were on one side, and on the other side there was the daughter of Shatra Lönchen who didn't have any parents. They did not get along well so this case went to the government. The case went on quietly for some time. Probably, in the plan that was submitted to the Regent, it was written that Lhayön would be the main Shatra. But finally the verdict was that the boy would get the family name and the girl had to leave the family. However, she got the Cha [Tib. ཆ] Estate along with the Shatra's summer house near the river. The case was decided by the Regent.   

**Q:**  [Gelek:] Since Lhayön was a girl, what right did she have to claim land or property?   

**A:**  It must be as you Rimpoche said, there were two lay officials then in Shatra and one became an official in the name of the Chapa estate.   

**Q:**  But the daughter actually didn't have the right.   

**A:**  From the beginning, they had asked to become a lay official on the name of Chapa. For example, Surkhang Jedrung [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] got the name of Nangkhor [Tib. ?]. The Shatra family came into being in the 13th century, below the Ganden Monastery. Ever since then, the mother had been carrying on all the activities of the family, so their main argument was that the Shatra family-estate had been passed down from mother to daughter. So the Shatra estate was not a fathers' estate [Tib. ཕཤི] but a mothers' estate [Tib. མཤི]. Another reason was that Bönshö was very close to Lhayön. That was one reason why the Kashag was favorably inclined to her. It was during Reting's regency. It was on the last day of his regency, just before he handed over the power, that he gave this final judgment against Lhayön. The actual reason why Reting gave the decision in favor of the son's side was that they gave a lot of land, money, wool, and butter to him. They paid these on an annual installment basis and kept on giving these things to Reting until his trouble started. There was one estate that they had given to Reting, but he could not take it because of the land tenure document which clearly stated that the ownership of the land could not be transferred to anyone, including the government. This was found out only at the last moment, so instead they gave him more money, wool and butter, in any case, Reting gave a judgment in favor of the son and the mother. When Taktra became the next Regent, the daughter again filed a case and went to court, but finally Taktra gave the decision in favor of the son, Shatra. It was Taktra's decision that the title should be given to the son and the Chapa estate should be given to the daughter and so on.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us something about Bönshö?   

**A:**  Bönshö Shape had only one son, the Payroll Office Head (Tib. Bönshö Phogpön [ཕོགས་དཔོན]). He married twice, first to the daughter of Danyül Lhünpo [Tib. ལྡན་ཡུལ་ལྷུན་པོ] of Tashilhunpo. They had 2 boys, Tenzin [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན] who went as a magpa to Kyime [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྨད] and died early and Phünwang [Tib. ཕུན་དབང ] the younger one. After his [Phogpön's] wife died, he remarried to the daughter of Ringang [Tib. རིན་སྒང] called Nandrön [Tib. ?] who bore many children. By that time, Phünwang and Tenzin were grown up and Tenzin went as a magpa to Kyime. Phünwang came of age and then we heard that he was sharing his father's wife, his stepmother. Probably his father told him that he could share his wife. After some time, the father and son did not get along well and the step-mother also had some trouble with him and his father told him to live separately. They did not give him any estate or house, but he gave him some cash and a few other things. Then Phünwang married the daughter of Thöndrub Khangsar [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་ཁང་གསར] of Shigatse according to his own wish. For a few years he had some financial problems and then Phogpön died. A year later, the senior son (Phünwang) filed a case against the Bönshö family. The decision came in 1954 or 1955. The case had been filed 2 years earlier. This decision granted him a house and 1-2 estates.   

**Q:**  He got this because he was the elder son, right?   

**A:**  He was indeed Bönshö's son.   

**Q:**  Who became the lay official in the name of Bönshö?   

**A:**  One of the Bönshö's sons from his second wife was given the right to join the government service.   

**Q:**  At the time of the Reting incident, there was talk about issuing the verdict to him like they did to Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང]. Once the case came before the government, did you have to accept its decision whatever the verdict may be? Couldn't you say that so and so was decided in that way and I also want that?   

**A:**  No. There was no way to say that. The judgment was based entirely on how the case was presented, defended, as well as the circumstances and situation. Whoever got the main house, the estate or the official title, he got a bit larger share because he has to pay all the taxes and the expenditures incurred for the social obligations of the family name.   

**Q:**  Imagine that one of the brothers did not get the family name or the main family estate, but he got one of the lesser estates. Then would he have to pay the taxes of this smaller estate or was that paid by the main family.   

**A:**  He paid the taxes for his own estate.   

**Q:**  Some in the highest stratum of the kudrak [Tib. སྡེ་དཔོན་མི་དྲག] like the Sambo family, had to pay certain extra taxes in the form of services like horses, laborers and so forth, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many taxes did they have to pay?   

**A:**  Not much. And there were no taxes in cash. They just had to send some horses. Then they had to pay voluntary taxes for religious ceremonies like the Butter Sculpture Festival [Tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ]. For that, the Sambo family had to give about 30 kilos of butter every year.   

**Q:**  Were there any other cases?   

**A:**  Well it depends on each individual person. Another case concerned Singma Khangchung [Tib. སིང་མ་ཁང་ཆུང], the elder brother of Janglojen Gung who was kind of mischievous and liked gambling. It was said that his mother stopped him from doing that, but he didn't listen and also he ran about after women. Later, he was sent as the magpa of Singma Khangchung. They gave him a small estate known as Singma Khangchung. Sometimes it depended on the wish of the parents as well as that of the individuals. Janglojen Gung was first married to Kyibu's daughter, Palden Chokyi [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ཆོས་ཀྱིད]. They had one child. Later they separated and he remarried to another woman, known as Janglojen Lhajam. They had several children. When later he was exiled to Kongpo at the time of the Lungshar incident, his wife started living with Wangdü Dorje [Tib. དབང་འདུས་རྡོ་རྗེ] his son from the first wife. Wangdü Dorje was also very fond of gambling and drinking, so he and his wife (stepmother) did not get along very well. They separated and he was given a small estate and a few things and was sent away. All this was settled internally.   

**Q:**  None of the children filed a case?   

**A:**  You mean Wangdü Dorje? No, he did not fight it. When Janglojen died, the official rank or status was assumed by one of the sons from his second wife. He was known as Wangchuk Tsering [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག་ཚེ་རིང]. So far I have been telling you about the negative points of feudalism, such as the mibo and so on. On the other hand, we have a saying: "It is the servants [fault] if they don't serve and it is the [fault] of the lord if they do not take care of the servant" [Tib. གཡོག་མི་རུག་གཡོག་པོ་དང། འགོ་མི་འདོན་དཔོན་པོ]. So when the servants ask for help, the lord would have to take care of them. Similarly we have a saying "The lord is the parent and the servants are the children." [Tib. དཔོན་ཕ་མ། གཡོག་བུ་རྩ] It was not very easy to have miser. If any of these misers got into trouble, then we were responsible for them. In such cases, other people could not bully them because they were our people. If they mistreated our people, then they had to face us. Whenever our people got into trouble or had problems, the serf owner, midag [Tib. མི་བདག] negotiated and bailed them out. In one way having a miser was not such a big thing, in another it involved a lot of responsibilities and headaches. Sometimes you got a lot of problems and one tended to feel that it was not worth the amount of mibo you received from them compared to the problems you had to face, but that was part of the game.   

**Q:**  When you had a large amount of people paying mibo to you, wasn't it very profitable?   

**A:**  No, the payment was just 1-2 sang. However, the monasteries would collect about 10-15-20 dotse for the mibo fee, but such a thing was never heard of among the aristocrats. I used to ask people why do you collect this mibo? But the elders would say that the purpose is not to gain money or to make a profit. The idea was to accept a little mibo so that one's people would stay and not get lost [cease to belong to the family]. If you don't collect the mibo, one's people would get lost. The main purpose was to keep the one's people together and keep count of them. [Sambo changes the topic completely] In the end of 1952-53, the Americans were accidentally shot in the Kham area. The person responsible for this incident was made to resign. They were looking for a substitute to take over his post. They asked the Dalai Lama for the advice and he told them to collect votes and the person with the most votes would be appointed as the substitute.   

