# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0205.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Sambo, Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ, བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 56  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Sambo [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ] was an important aristocratic official in the Tibetan government who was the Co-Commander of the Trapchi Regiment in 1959. His father was a kalön at that time. In this interview, he discusses the rivalry between Lungshar and Künphel and about Lunghsar's new babshi tax. He also discusses the motives behind the creation of the Tibetan army by the 13th Dalai Lama, the recruitment of soldiers and the changes in the military after 1912. He describes the motivations for change during the 13th Dalai Lama's era, and the lack of it after he died during the Reting era. The interviewee gives frank assessments of all the key players during this period including Reting, Langdün, Lungshar and Taktra, as well as relations between the government, the monasteries and the Labrang. He discusses Reting and Taktra, their relationships, and the differences in their work, skills, and knowledge.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0205_04/H_0205_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Anyway, Kujar didn't like what Lungshar did and he was always looking for faults in Lungshar. I saw that kind of attitude, but I don't have anything to tell you about what Lungshar did. I just thought that Kujar might have caused Lungshar to get demoted from the post of magji. When you asked me who pushed Lungshar out, if someone had pushed him, it might be Kujar because I saw that they did not like each other.   

**Q:**  When did that happen?   

**A:**  Do you mean when did Lungshar submit the accounting?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  It probably was around 1930-31. The two of us talked about that in 1948-49.   

**Q:**  What kind of things did Lungshar do for the development of the country, the economical and social uplifting of society, the country and the people.   

**A:**  His main work was being a tsipön.   

**Q:**  What kind of accomplishments did he have?   

**A:**  He introduced the babshi land settlement/tax.   

**Q:**  What does babshi mean?   

**A:**  It means investigating how much revenue individuals owe to the government from the land they held. When I say 'individuals,' I mean the individuals in the households and the big families, monasteries, etc. They owed revenue taxes to the government. When you had to recruit quite a large number of soldiers, the soldiers had to be fed, paid and clothed, but the government had no revenue. Therefore, it was necessary to reexamine the government's income. For example, in Tsarong's period, they were building up the military. When Lungshar looked into the economic situation, he wondered how they could pay for these soldiers. So he introduced the babshi tax. Take me for example. Before that I didn't pay any taxes at all. However after Lungshar started collecting the government's revenue (babshi), I had to pay five thousand khe of barley to the government. Just one tax of five thousand would not help the government at all, but there were many people paying taxes of this type, so when they were all put together, it was quite helpful. I had to pay one of the highest babshi taxes. The only ones with higher taxes than me was Tashilhunpo/the Panchen Lama. He had to pay something like five thousand five hundred khe per year.   

**Q:**  Wasn't he supposed to pay one fourth of all military expenditures?   

**A:**  That was just rubbish talk. Leave aside paying one fourth, it wasn't even one hundredth or one thousandth of the military expenditures. Maybe it was one thousandth of the expenditures, but not one hundredth. Tashilhunpo had to pay five thousand five hundred khe and I, Samdru Phodrang [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་ཕོ་བྲང] had to pay five hundred less. We had to pay the same amount every year.   

**Q:**  Did you have to pay taxes in meat and butter and so on?   

**A:**  No, the babshi was levied on barley only. Our old government was a feudal government. Since you have never lived under a feudal government it looks very, very funny. The soldiers had to be sent according to the size of the land, so a certain amount of soldiers had to be produced from one gang, and some soldiers had to be produced from one gang or two or three gang. For these soldiers you had to give grain as the yearly salary grain or the wage for serving, and a little tea and also clothing. When you had to give different people a little bit of this and that it became quite inconvenient, so we converted these into money. Just before 1959, we paid about 175 dotse for each soldier per year. This had to be paid by the [holder of the] gang [of land] who hired the soldier. From the government side, they gave [the soldier] two khe of barley and one tea ball per month. And to buy firewood, salt and butter, they gave 45 sang.   

**Q:**  For how long did they pay the salary?   

**A:**  The salary was paid until 1959.   

**Q:**  When did they start paying such salaries?   

**A:**  If a soldier died, they would send a notice [to the holder of the gang of land] to send another soldier. If a soldier fled, they also had to send a replacement. When the soldier was sent, they would pay the salary.   

**Q:**  In what year did they start to pay salaries to the soldiers?   

**A:**  The barley salary was paid from early times. The money for buying butter, salt and firewood was paid starting in 1950. Before that, it was not that much. It was about 15 or 20 sang, something like that. In 1950 they increased it to 45 sang.   

**Q:**  In the 1800s, there were the Gyajong soldiers. Did the government pay their salary or did the miser [the holders of the gang of land] pay them?   

**A:**  The 3,000 Gyajong soldiers were there from early times and each one gang [of land] was obliged to send a soldier. There were 3,000 gang and there were 3,000 soldiers. This was called the soldiers with a [land] basis. If these households had 2-3 sons, they had to send one to be the soldier. Since the soldier was from one's own family, they would send whatever amount of food he needed. They didn't have a fixed amount of salary and they wouldn't run away. These soldiers remained in the regiment unless they died. They had the salary from the government. Sometimes, when the sons of the family didn't want to become a soldier, they would just send one of their servants. So he would cause more trouble because he was not a family member. He would say that he wants clothes, tea, butter and tsamba. At the time of the revolt, they would usually pay between 150-160 dotse for these things.   

**Q:**  When I investigated this, before the Dalai Lama went back to Tibet in 1912 it seems that the government of Tibet had little to do. But after 1912, after the Dalai Lama returned to Tibet, the government developed and used its power. There were people like Tsarong, Lungshar and Künphel who were trying to build up the military and the economic power of the central government, and increase the government's income and make the laws more strict. For example, they were trying to tell the big entities like Tashilhunpo that they belonged to the government and that they had to pay taxes since they were under the government. They were putting a lot of pressure on them and hence were making the central government stronger. What do you think about that?   

**A:**  That is definitely true. Before 1912, the government officials could be controlled by the Dalai Lama, but the monasteries could not really be controlled, even by the Dalai Lama. The monks didn't listen. For example, sometimes when the government issued certain verdicts which were against the interest of the big labrangs like Kundeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] and Detrug [Tib. སྡེ་དྲུག] in Drepung, the monasteries would request that the government not do that. If the government listened to them, then there was no problem. Otherwise, the [thousands of] monks would burst out [of the monastery] and would come to the government. They would prostrate as tradition demands [Tib. ཕྱག་འཚལ] and plead formally to withdraw these verdicts. This would make the government unable to do anything. The same procedure was repeated if the government found certain powerful monks, monasteries or labrangs guilty of a crime and decided to punish them. The Thirteenth Dalai Lama had many experiences like this during his reign. In 1912, we had the "Water-Mouse [Year] Chinese war" [Tib. ཆུ་བྱི་རྒྱ་དམག]. The Dalai Lama realized that in order to keep the government in tact it was very important to have military power. Externally, to drive the Chinese out you needed soldiers and internally, to keep the government functioning smoothly, you had to be able to control the big institutions and keep them in check. For these it was necessary to have a military too. This is how the Dalai Lama was working. Soon he was able to establish a proper military and experiment with his theory. Then there was the Drepung Tshaja [Tib. ཚ་ཕྱག] and Kongcha [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྱག] incident. During that incident the government issued certain verdicts, but the monks refused to accept these verdicts and all the monks burst into the Norbulinga Palace. The Dalai Lama was very angry, but he had fully calculated for this and had confidence like the proverb, "The hip had the confidence that the trousers won't fall off." [Tib. གུ་ཐུང་མ་བུད་པ་དཔྱི་འགོའི་གདེངས་ཚོད]. He knew what to do. He told the monks, "You need to go back today and tomorrow I will think it over and we will have negotiations." But that night he ordered the four regiments led by the depöns like Tsögo to march towards Drepung Monastery and place their canons and machine guns facing the monastery. I think there was a monk by the nickname, "Ajam Naleb" [Tib. ཨ་འཇམ་སྣ་ལེབ], who [was involved and] fled but he was arrested somewhere behind Drepung Monastery. He was caught in one of the caves by Trendong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང], who was the former late kalön and maybe at that time a military officer. Such an incident took place. The army surrounded Drepung Monastery and asked Drepung to hand over those who were responsible. Then they arrested quite a number of monks and banished a few ringleaders. In this way, he [the Dalai Lama] was able to control Drepung. This was the first incident where military power was applied against the monasteries, against a lot of monks.   

**Q:**  Why did the Dalai Lama give the order to punish the Tshaja and Kongja?   

**A:**  I don't know what they did and why they were punished, but the Dalai Lama probably punished them. So some monks said that the punishment was very severe, so we can't accept it and they might have incited the monks to go to prostrate and make an appeal. The abbots rode horses and went ahead. They went through the motions of requesting the monks not to prostrate but the monks didn't listen and burst through the gate of Norbulinga. Before that, they had been doing that all the time and they could get through because in those times the government didn't have soldiers. When the Dalai Lama was in India, he realized the importance of the military and saw how it functioned in India in 1912. He thought that if we didn't have a military, we would be in trouble when we went against tough adversaries. So he started to build up the military. When the Dalai Lama said, "You go and we will negotiate tomorrow", they thought that it was as usual and they would start negotiations, but instead of negotiations, they got four regiments who set up the cannons and implied that they were going to fire, but probably they wouldn't have fired. This was repeated once more, during the Sera Lhundrup Dzong [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང] incident at the time of [the Regent] Reting. When the monks were told to hand over the ringleaders, they didn't. The difference this time was that during the Sera trouble they actually had to shoot and few of the monks were wounded and a little bit of damage was done to the monastery. After that incident, the monastery was repaired by the government. It became necessary to keep control over the monks and lay people, so military power was absolutely necessary. When such big monasteries like Drepung and Sera with large numbers of monks were under control, it was easy to control the small labrangs and a few aristocratic officials and you had law and order in the country [laughter].   

**Q:**  According to my observation, Tsarong, Lungshar and Künphel came to office one after another and continued to do the same kind of work. Why was that?   

**A:**  The work was the same. Among them, Künphel was the most capable, as I already told you before. He introduced registering the guns and started putting numbers on the guns. Otherwise, they all did the same sort of work. However, whatever orders the Dalai Lama gave, they had to follow; like wherever the torch was shown they had to go there and work.   

**Q:**  I think the Dalai Lama did not personally bear the torch and lead them to do specific work.   

**A:**  What?   

**Q:**  The previous Dalai Lama did not take a torch and guide them to do everything. I refuse to believe it.   

**A:**  Then?   

**Q:**  The previous Dalai Lama must have told them we must do whatever is best for our country. The people working under him must have said, "We must improve our military strength." Someone else must have said, "We must improve the facilities in the country". Then again someone else might have said, "We must start learning English." Then things like, "we must keep gold" and "we must print and issue our own currency" and so on [were suggested]. And when they put forward such suggestions, the Dalai Lama must have said, "Okay, I agree with you." but I am sure he could not have told them each suggestion saying that you must do it like this, you must do it like that.   

**A:**  Was it [like that]?   

**Q:**  I can never picture him doing everything personally. He must have given broad general orders saying that we must improve the country and we must spend so much expenditures, we must have so much facilities and the work must be carried out like this. Then they must have made suggestions to him and then just carried out the work according to their wishes and their ability.   

**A:**  I don't think so. When the Thirteenth Dalai Lama went to India, in Darjeeling, he saw the usefulness and power of military force. At that time, India was under British rule. Seeing how efficiently the British were running India with the help of military force, he must have realized that if we have a strong military force in Tibet to back us up, then our orders can be carried out efficiently. Another example was that of the gold coins [Tib. གསེར་ཏྲམ]. The Dalai Lama had issued orders to mint gold coins. He did not do it personally, but he issued the order to Tsarong and Tsarong carried it out. Lungshar was different. He had traveled to foreign countries and he had different ideas. For example, he knew about the long struggle between the people who wanted democracy and those who wanted a monarchy or the feudal government in France. The long struggle where the revolutionaries finally overpowered the feudal government. The king, queen, their children and faithful ministers were all massacred. The same things also happened in Germany. Therefore, he realized that a big change or revolution must come, and only then can the government become better. Such an idea was already in his mind. Tsarong, Lungshar and Kujar Künphel were the more famous people who were in power. Tsarong had introduced the mint which produced the currency notes and gold and silver coins.   

**Q:**  He introduced the military also?   

**A:**  I still believe that starting the military was the Dalai Lama's idea. He saw the need of [military] force. Previously, Drepung had rebelled against the government and so had Ganden. The Dalai Lama realized that if Sera later started to do the same thing, then it would be necessary to have a military force. If he would be able to conquer these big monasteries with the help of a military force, then he could run the country more efficiently. I believe that the root idea to introduce the military originally came from the Dalai Lama and they might have just made the branches of it.   

**Q:**  It is true that the Dalai Lama must have seen the need to have a military force, but he would not have gone into details like the soldiers must have arms and ammunition, there must be cannons and so on. The Dalai Lama would not say such things.   

**A:**  That is true.   

**Q:**  Take for example Lungshar. He saw the need to introduce the babshi tax and hence he went to the Dalai Lama, made this suggestion and the Dalai Lama agreed. It was not the Dalai Lama who said, "You must introduce babshi" and so on. Likewise, in all the other fields, the Dalai Lama was no doubt the head of state, but most of the main work was carried out by his subordinates. I am sure he couldn't have done everything by himself.   

**A:**  Even if he had to do it, it would be impossible. Physically, one man cannot do everything. When the Dalai Lama had the idea that there should be a military force, the next thing was that you need soldiers. When you have soldiers, then you need to pay, feed and clothe them. So everything follows one after another. That is natural. Another example was when Lungshar introduced the babshi. The Dalai Lama would not go round collecting all the taxes, that was impossible.   

**Q:**  Was the babshi really introduced by Lungshar himself?   

**A:**  When they started maintaining a [standing] military they realized that the soldiers had to be paid and they wondered how they should be paid. Some suggested they should be paid with grain, others suggested they should be paid with money. The question arose how to get the grain and the money. They called a meeting and asked what was the best course of action. There were lot of suggestions. Some said it should be done like this, while others said it should be done like that, and so on. Finally Lungshar came up with the solution: babshi.   

**Q:**  When we look back, the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, Lungshar was blinded, Künphel was exiled, and Tsarong was made to resign. There was actually no one to look after the country. The situation remained like that from 1934 to 1950.   

**A:**  Yes, the situation remained like that. In 1933, the Dalai Lama passed away. In the tenth month of the Water-Bird year, i.e., 1934, at the end of first and the beginning of the second month, Reting was appointed as the Regent. He served as a Regent for about seven years. What did Reting do during that time? He did nothing. He would just ride trotting horses, fly kites and keep boys [for sex]. That was all. When the government had any papers to be signed by him he would put his seal on the papers, and write the date and month. Besides this he had nothing to do. He did nothing concrete and beneficial for the people. While he was in power, he improved and enlarged his private Labrang, that was natural. Besides this, as a leader, he contributed nothing. If you look at the things he had contributed to the country you would just find a piece of blank paper.   

**Q:**  Besides Reting, had the shape also done nothing?   

**A:**  Yes, the shape also contributed nothing, but then they worked under the Regent. If a shape came up with a very good suggestion, then he must forward it to the Regent and obtain his permission. Without the Regent's permission they could not do anything.   

**Q:**  Were there any instances in which a shape asked the permission of the Regent and the Regent did not grant them permission to carry out the work?   

**A:**  There were no cases like that.   

**Q:**  Was Trimön there [as Shape]?   

**A:**  Trimön was there.   

**Q:**  Was Bönshö [Tib. བོན་ཤོད] also there?   

**A:**  Bönshö was also there. All these people were involved in making the property of their own home better, nicer and things like that. Their second pre-occupation was to try and get rid of their enemies and bring up their relatives. Their sole motives and ambitions were private and personal. The thought of being beneficial for Buddhism, the government and the common citizens did not ever enter their minds. There was no one to put forward any suggestions. Even if they did, there was no one to examine it, reject it or anything like that.   

**Q:**  What did Langdün [Tib. གླང་མདུན] do? Didn't he do anything?   

**A:**  Langdün didn't have any chance to do anything. Reting expelled him. Langdün was kicked out. Actually, he [Reting] shouldn't have worried about Langdün putting forward his opinions because he was just stupid and foolish. That is a fact. I apologize to you [Gelek Rimpoche] because he is your paternal uncle. [laughter] I am talking to you like a friend, but these are the facts and we are like close friends. Since you asked me, I am telling you all this frankly. Langdün was the Prime Minister and he was very good. Whatever you tell him he would always say, "Yes, yes, Yes sir" and he would neither scold you nor say, "It is alright." There are no instances in which he thought and made any independent decisions or suggestions. Whatever Reting would say, he would agree. He was a person who could not think for himself so he did not pose any threat to Reting's position. Still Reting didn't like to have him because he had to consult the Prime Minister in whatever he did. Although the Prime Minister would agree with him, still he had to consult him and Reting felt this was kind of inconvenient. Reting must have thought it would be better if he was not there. He called a meeting of all the abbots of Sera and Drepung monasteries and told them that Langdün did not agree with him on the selection of the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama. The abbots went to Langdün and asked him to resign voluntarily. Without making any objection, he resigned. Basically, as a person, he was very nice. If you lived with him as a friend, whatever you told him he would always agree and you wouldn't need to worry that he would harm you. He would always laugh and smile and make jokes.   

**Q:**  Even if he was a good person, if he was not capable and lacked ability, then he was useless.   

**A:**  I agree with you. He was a person who did not have any ability or force of character.   

**Q:**  So Reting spent his days like that. Then how was Taktra? Nothing happened either, right?   

**A:**  Taktra was a person who did not have any experience in political affairs and had never been to India or China. He was proud and he could only boast that he was learned about religion and had passed the geshe exam and he was kind of a lama. He didn't know anything about politics. The shape of that time also didn't make suggestions to him telling him to do this and that. They would just watch the Regent and try to stay in his favor. They tried to put down the people that the Regent didn't like and pull up the people that the Regent liked. They spent their days mostly like that. None of them really paid any serious attention to the country's affairs and to the benefit of the miser. None of them thought about the country's future. Among them, Surkhang was the only person who knew about things. He was a very intelligent person. But he too never made any constructive suggestions. If someone asked his opinion about certain matters, he would not make any comments. He would only grunt and say nothing.   

**Q:**  You said that Taktra didn't have experience in politics but he knew how to collect bribes and he could appoint people like Surkhang and Kapshöba who didn't like Reting and put them in important positions. He organized the people who didn't like Reting and who bore grudges against him, and gave them government posts. Therefore, Taktra was not an inexperienced politician, but was a shrewd politician. He gave high posts to people like Surkhang, Kapshöba, Lhalu, Shakabpa and so on.   

**A:**  It was just like that. If you ask me how these things first started, they didn't do that with the thought that they wanted to destroy Reting Labrang.   

**Q:**  They had that idea and they wanted to destroy Reting Labrang, no?   

**A:**  No, no, it was not like that. At first they did not have such thoughts. Gradually, the people who did not like Reting bought their way to government posts, like someone offered fifty thousand rupees and then someone offered a hundred thousand and so on. So it became like this. Three or four years before they destroyed Reting, Taktra most probably had that kind of idea, thinking that if we didn't appoint only the people who didn't like Reting, they [Reting] might do something. In the beginning, he did not have those kind of thoughts and he was just a real lama.   

**Q:**  If he was a real Lama then even after two or three years his thoughts should not change. Therefore, I feel that even in the beginning he had this thought of getting rid of Reting.   

**A:**  In the beginning, Taktra really and truly wanted to hand over the regency to Reting after three years.   

**Q:**  What proof was there that after three years he really wanted to hand over the regency to Reting. What are the reasons for saying that?   

**A:**  When Taktra accepted the regency, he made it clear that he would be the Regent for three years only. He had said this in the meeting. All the shape insisted that there was no one else except him to assume the role of regency. They further told him that he must accept the regency because Reting Rimpoche told us to ask you. Taktra replied, "I am a very old man, how can I be the Regent for more that three years!" He made this very clear in the meeting. In the beginning he really did not have any other ideas.   

**Q:**  Was it, Was it? There was no record that Taktra said that he would be the Regent for only three years.   

**A:**  I heard talk that in the beginning he announced this in the meeting.   

**Q:**  There was no talk whatsoever that he announced this in the meeting.   

**A:**  There was an agreement that he would be the Regent for only three years. Reting's meditation retreat was for a period of three years and they had agreed that Taktra would be the Regent for that period only.   

**Q:** There wasn't any talk that he would hand over the regency in three years in the meeting.   

**A:**  Reting had said that it was imperative that he be given permission to resign for three years to enable him to go into retreat because those years were going to be astrological years when personal misfortune will befall him [Tib. དགུང་སྐག].   

**Q:**  There are no records stating that Reting asked to leave for three years. The record shows that he asked to leave for a short period.   

**A:**  No. I swear by the three jewels that he asked to leave for three years   

**Q:**  Let's not argue about this.   

**A:**  People were saying this was "rabyö" [Tib. བར་གཡོལ] which means Reting did this to avoid having to give the Dalai Lama his monk's vows.   

**Q:**  That is correct.   

**A:**  Yes. Later when we were talking about this, we realized that this was true. Previously, no one knew exactly the reason why he asked to leave for three years. Later, we realized that it was because the Water-Horse Year was the middle of three years. Therefore, it was really true that he asked to leave for three years. The reason he gave was that there would be some misfortune to his life [Tib. ཚེ་གེགས]. When Taktra assumed the post of Regent, he said that he would only take this responsibility for a period of three years. Then one, two years passed, and when the third year came, maybe his chandzö, or his servants might have told him that it would not be good to resign. Maybe due to their insistence he changed his mind and did not want to hand over the regency to Reting after the three year term was finished. Everyone must have told him that it was not good to resign, and maybe due to their insistence he changed his mind. Reting also started giving him hints from a distance that the time had come and he must hand over the regency to him. Taktra decided that whatever the consequences might be, he would not return the regency to Reting even if it made Reting very unhappy. Maybe, internally, they didn't let him resign. Anyway, he didn't resign. Therefore, Reting became angry and he might have shown his attitude. Therefore, whatever were the reasons, Taktra did not think it was very safe to remain inactive, so he decided to do something to Reting to change the direction of Reting [Tib. ཁ་ཕྱོགས་སྒྱུར].   

**Q:**  What were the accomplishments of Taktra when he was Regent? What did he do for the country? Was there any difference between Taktra and Reting?   

**A:**  During Reting's Regency, they did some business. They collected wool and traded in India.   

**Q:**  Was this wool trade done by the government?   

**A:**  No, no, it was under the name of Reting Labrang. Those people would take a lot of wool and go to India to trade it. They didn't have to use the government's name. They would say that they are the traders from Reting Labrang. Since Reting was the Regent and the main person in the government, there were no problems. Still his miser became very poor. That was the difference. Taktra did not do any trade or anything like that to his miser.   

**Q:**  When they did so much trade, so much business, what was the reason that his miser remained so poor or rather became poorer? Normally, when you do business you expect to become more rich or earn some profit.   

**A:**  It was like this, suppose I am the trader and I get 100 dotse from the Labrang. From these 100 dotse, I buy certain amount of tea bricks, butter, clothes, and so on. Then I barter this to the miser for wool. I give them tea, butter, clothes, etc. and in return I collect wool from them. Maybe for one brick of tea I ask them to give me one load of wool and those people might agree. Sometimes, maybe you give me two, three, four loads of wool for one brick of tea and so on. It was like a barter system. When I give you the tea, we have already made a deal. Then later on, when I come to collect the wool, people had to give the wool according to the bargain that was made. When they come to collect the wool,they would collect five loads of wool for one brick of tea. You cannot say,"For your one brick of tea you are collecting five loads of wool from me." They are not in a position to object. So they have to give the wool.   

**Q:**  At the time of Taktra, didn't they open a new office that took possession of people who didn't have a lord [Tib. དཔོན་ཁུངས] Was that office called, the Agriculture Office (Tib. སོནམ་ལེགུང [སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུངས]) or something like that?   

**A:**  The Sonam Legung was established a long time back. It wasn't during Taktra's period.   

**Q:**  It was not the Sonam Legung. I heard that they opened some new office, something to do with empty fields and so on.   

**A:**  There was something like that. Supposing if someone ploughed virgin land and made it into farm land, then for three or five years they didn't have to pay any taxes.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  Most probably in 1947 or 1948.   

**Q:**  It was during Taktra's period?   

**A:**  Yes, it was during his reign.   

**Q:**  Whose suggestion was this? Was it the Kashag or the tsikhang?   

**A:**  Most likely it was the Kashag or the Regent told that and probably not the tsikhang.   

**Q:**  Or was it suggested by the Regent?   

**A:**  It could have been from the Kashag, but I am sure it wasn't from the tsikhang. It could have been from the Kashag or it could have been suggested by the Regent himself. I am not very sure about this. Anyway, there was some talk like that. For three or five years you didn't have to pay any taxes, and after that they had to pay about five percent [of the yield].   

**Q:**  You mean land revenue?   

**A:**  Yes, revenue tax. Definitely there was something like that. They issued some edict. It was broadcast and so forth. It was very difficult to plough empty lands because we were ploughing the fields only with dzo. We had no machinery as in the West where they had machines and so on. Our ploughs were still pulled by dzo.   

**Q:**  Besides this, there were a lot of other problems. For example, the Lhundrup Dzong incident. The cause for the Lhundrup Dzong problem was that from many of the neighboring dzongs like Phembo, Jagsam [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ], and Chushul, a combined petition was sent to the government stating that the people were facing a lot of problems concerning old loans. The Kashag discussed this in their meeting and came to a decision. The decision stated that any loans which had been made twenty years before were all annulled. The loans which had been made in the last 15 years, would be reduced ten percent. This was known as Gamja Jusur [Tib. སྐམ་ཆག་བཅུ་ཟུར], which means: ten percent is reduced because the grains have dried up. From then onwards, a certain percentage was reduced accordingly.   

**A:**  Yes. This ordinance was known as the "printed edict," Gagya Parma [Tib. བཀའ་རྒྱ་པར་མ].   

**Q:**  Was that an accomplishment?   

**A:**  This was not accomplished during Taktra's reign.   

**Q:**  If this was not accomplished during Taktra, then during whose reign was it accomplished?   

**A:**  No, no. When the printed edict, Gagya Parma [Tib. བཀའ་རྒྱ་པར་མ], was introduced by Ngabö, he was working on economical affairs [Tib. འདུ་འགོད].   

**Q:**  No, that was not the one. That was much later.   

**A:**  I am definite that it was after 1950 or 1951. It was after 1952.   

**Q:**  No that is not true. There was some talk that it was introduced much before that. And there was the Lhundrup Dzong war. The two Regents ruled over Tibet for a long time. Reting took the regency for just 6-7 years and Taktra remained for many years. Can you tell me what the achievements were during the reign of these two Regents?   

**A:**  Reting was the first Regent, so during his reign were there any achievements?   

**Q:**  Reting successfully found the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama.   

**A:**  Yes, that was about all. All those people who were working for Reting or who were close to him will always boast about this achievement. Besides this, did he have any achievements? Probably, he did not. During that time, there were many bad things that happened.   

**Q:**  Did he not renovate the Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] monastery?   

**A:**  [laughter] Yes, besides that, he must have renovated a few monasteries and temples.   

**Q:**  You said that during Reting's reign a lot of bad things took place. What were these bad things?   

**A:**  A lot of bad things took place. During the 13th Dalai Lama's reign the government put huge boxes of gold bricks at Trapchi. Likewise, a lot of silver bricks in huge boxes were put in Trapchi. After the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, after one or two years I heard that those boxes just disappeared.   

**Q:**  Someone must have stolen them.   

**A:**  Yes. I don't know exactly who stole them, but they just disappeared. I don't think Reting alone could have taken it. I am not sure how they shared or borrowed them. Whatever way it was done, the gold just vanished. Later, I heard that the sweepers of Trapchi would put their blankets inside the [empty] boxes and would sleep in them. The boxes were such huge things.   

**Q:**  Then?   

**A:**  After one or two years, all these boxes became empty.   

**Q:**  Who came to know first that the gold and silver were missing?   

**A:**  A huge quantity of gold was given on loan or whatever to Reting and Labrang and they took it. They borrowed the gold from the government. They had taken the gold on loan but actually that was just a formality. Likewise the silver was also given on loan. Some people said that later the silver was returned, after having been given as a loan. Whatever they did I don't know, but the gold just vanished.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Trapchi's gold and silver were merged into the Treasury in the Potala (the Namse Gandzö [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གན་མཛོད]), right?   

**A:**  No, no, the silver and gold were in Trapchi itself.   

**Q:**  I heard that they were in the Trapchi office, but they were kept in Namse Gandzö.   

**A:**  Then the gold and silver should have been found at Namse Gandzö, but they were not there.   

**Q:**  The gold and silver were not at Namse Gandzö?   

**A:**  No. I just saw that there were a few trangga garpo coins.   

**Q:**  That is not true. Shakabpa has said that there was a lot of gold at Namse Gandzö.   

**A:**  Shakabpa got a lot of gold from America.   

**Q:**  No, no we are not talking about the gold which he brought later, we are talking about before that time. Shakabpa has said that there was a lot of gold at Namse Gandzö.   

**A:**  I have not visited the place where they kept the gold. I did not go there and I have not seen it.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  There must have been some silver, but I have not seen it. What I have seen was at Namse Gandzö. I went there once and there was a lot of trangga garpo and ten srang coins [Tib. བཅུ་སྒོར]. There must have been thousands and millions of coins. All the silver coins were put in leather pouches and there were many pouches piled up. Each pouch containing about 25 dotse as one coin was counted as one trangga and they were just piled up, one on top of the other. The rats had eaten some of the pouches and some of the pouches had opened and the coins had spilled out and had fallen on the ground in the room. There were a lot of these trangga garpo.   

**Q:**  In what year was this?   

**A:**  I saw it probably in 1949 or 1950. During that time I went there once to get some money.   

**Q:**  Was it during the time that the Dalai Lama went to Yadong?   

**A:**  No, it was before that. Most probably it was in May or June in 1950, the Tibetan month was the third or fourth.   

**Q:**  You mean in 1950?   

**A:**  Yes, as I told you, Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] and I minted the coin called Dungö Gormo [Tib. འདུ་འགོད་སྒོར་མོ]. To bring out a new coin you need certain capital. For that reason we went to collect the trangga garpo and at that time I saw this huge amount of trangga garpo coins.   

**Q:**  What did the Dungö Gormo look like?   

**A:**  It was a coin on which it was written, "happy flourishing of economic affairs" [Tib. འདུ་འགོད་བདེ་སྐྱིད་འདོད་རྒུ་འཁྱིལ].   

**Q:**  Was it the coin worth ten sang [Tib. བཅུ་སྒོར]?   

**A:**  It looked very similar to the previous ten sang coin. At that time, Sawang Surkhang was the official in overall charge [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].   

**Q:**  When was this coin printed?   

**A:**  In 1950.   

**Q:**  How does anyone know that the gold and silver went missing during Reting's time? How do you know this?   

**A:**  A lot of people had taken the gold and silver as loans, probably Surkhang had taken some, but at that time Surkhang was not a Shape and Langdün, Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག], Trendong [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང], Gyentsen Yönten [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཡོནཏེན] [Sumdo], and many, many other families took loans. Then there was Panda [Tib. སྤོ་མདའ] and Sandu [Tib. ས་འདུ] and Phala [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ] who had also taken loans.   

**Q:**  They borrowed the gold and silver, asked for a loan isn't it?   

**A:**  They asked Reting to give them loans. We say Reting, but actually it was the government. For each silver brick they had to pay certain amount of money as interest. I don't remember the percentage. Panda and Sandu were traders, so with this money they did some business and got a little profit and eventually they returned the silver.   

**Q:**  They returned the silver?   

**A:**  Yes, they returned it. But people like Phala, Surkhang, Yuthok, Trendong, and Gyentsen Yönten took the loan but were unable to make any profit with it. So they were unable to pay the loan [principal], let alone the interest on the loan. They could not return it for many years.   

