# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0057.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Hong Kong, China  
**Date of Interview:** 14 April 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted, recorded, and transcribed in English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 67  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ] is an older brother of the Dalai Lama. In this interview he discusses some issues in the modern political history of Tibet. He also discusses his disappointed with the Chinese leadership in Lhasa in 1952 regarding the way that they behaved and their policies. He then describes his attempts at getting India to help by letting the Dalai Lama come to India and by helping to publicize the events occurring in Tibet. Additionally, he discusses Taiwan’s role in Tibet and the training given by the U.S., the arms that they dropped and their thoughts about providing more aid. Finally, he talks about some of the current political issues between China and Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0057_02/H_0057_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I've seen a lot of Indian documents through various sources, not complete, though, and I know that you and Shakabpa and khenjung were working, talking to the Indians. And I understand the reason why you came out from Lhasa back to India to bring the Tibetan issue up and try to get help from the various governments. But it seems to me that the Indians were being very cooperative. There was the Sikkim Political Officer, Aba Pant, and then the C.I.D., there was Mr. Bose Kaul and some people like that, and there was... I've seen all kinds of documents talking about giving wireless training for people and this is not the U.S., I'm saying the Indians. And giving so much money every month, not much, a thousand, five hundred rupees for some of these training. But I only have individual things, I don't have the whole picture. So up until the Dalai Lama came in 56-57, it sounds like there was a lot of progress and that you had a plan as to what to do, and the Dalai Lama to come, and there was cooperation with the Indians, and then of course Nehru changed his mind. If you could tell me a little bit in detail as to what went on, how it proceeded, and what the goals were, or if I'm wrong?  

**A:**  [Editor's note: the interviewee's English has not been corrected] I see. No, I think you're right But about what you call... my purpose coming out from Lhasa in 1952 to India was mainly because I was very much disappointed with the behavior and the policies of the Chinese leadership in Lhasa. The General Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua, and Tan Guansan. It was shocking, I mean the excuses during my stay in 1952. Which I returned from the United States anticipating maybe that the communist government would be treating the Tibetans in a reasonable manner. But during my stay in those months I was really shocked and disappointed. And then the situation deteriorated because you probably also heard of the so-called, the People's Association, "Mimang Movement." Of course people called it "mimang," I mean "mimang" means just "people." Those days hundreds and hundreds of petitions were coming from all over Tibet to the Tibetan government, that means the Sitsab Lukhangwa, [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] and Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] was there, and then of course Kashag, and then on the other side the Chinese authorities, the military authorities. Petitions appealing for withdrawing Chinese troops, and complaining about the inflation. The food prices really very much terribly increased compared to... I'll just give you some instances: like normally we buy one, say, for meat, for the whole sheep, to butcher the sheep, I think we paid at that time, before the Chinese came in, we paid about, say 30-40 sang. The sang is the equivalent of about five rupees or something like that. After the Chinese reached Lhasa, and waited a few months it went up to 200-300 sang. That means about 40-50 rupees. 30-40-50 rupees, like that. And then of course grain, like tsampa is also just flying up. So I think because of that reason the majority of the Tibetan population was very much against so many troops. And then, that's the one main reason for the inflation. The second reason, the Chinese troops were treating the Tibetans like their enemies. They move and travel with sten guns and with rifles. I mean even in the day time, even when there is a very peaceful manner everywhere, and they just ran, or occupied, like occupation, military occupation and sometimes during my travel between India to Lhasa, and I experienced some of those Chinese troops coming in the middle of the night. For instance, the doors are closed and locked, and they just kicked in and came in with guns. We are lying and sleeping in the rooms. And then since I know the language of the Chinese, I asked the troops, "What are you doing?" They said that they searched in the order that they normally go in everywhere in the night, like that. So I was passing through Ralung [Tib. ར་ལུང] near between the Nankartse, [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] and Gyantse, my mother and my sister were travelling together towards Lhasa. And in that kind of situation the behavior of the troops also frightened the Tibetans because Tibetans never experienced such an occupation by military rule like that. So that also created a very bad impression among the Tibetans. And then of course they feared, since at that time the Chinese were using their money, their dayan (silver coins). All the Tibetan government officials except the Dalai Lama and maybe one or two sitsab, they didn't accept Chinese payrolls. And the rest, everyone, in 52 was under the payroll. Even my sister and my sister's husband were on the payroll. Tibetan government officials were very busy collecting the dayan. Many of them were getting 100 or 200 or 300 or 600 each month. So the Chinese were more or less bribing. So that was a terrible situation and I never anticipated that the Chinese government would do such things, particularly the communist government. And so they had a big gap between the nobility. The government officials were collaborating, completely drowned with money, with the Chinese dayan. And the parties going on like that. And then the people were shouting and complaining. And the Dalai Lama and the two sitsab were there. Of course the Dalai Lama was still young, but then mainly the government was still ran by the sitsab and the Kashag. And the Kashag and the sitsab was also divided because two sitsab cannot trust the Kashag because the Kashag members, everyone, were busy with the Chinese, collaborating more or less, everybody is collaborating. So the two sitsab advised me, "don't speak the truth to the Kashag or to anybody" except the two of them. Because my suggestion to the sitsab at that particular time was that it was very important for the sitsab and the Dalai Lama to adopt a policy to bring quick land reforms in Tibet. Because I knew in 49-50-51 what was going on in China because so-called "land-reforms" in the various parts of China and the so-called "land laws," liquidation, trials, you know, all these kinds of stories. Of course I never eye-witnessed, but then since I'm always reading and studying developments after 49 in China during my stay in Taiwan and India and the United States. So my preliminary aim was to try to persuade and suggest, advise the two sitsab, that it was very important, they must bring a land reform. Because in the land system in Tibet, generations are never changed, I mean the ownership of properties by the monasteries, by the nobility. Even in my family we had lots of land. Because after the selection of the Dalai Lama, after the installation of the Dalai Lama, being the Dalai Lama's family, the Tibetan government gave us a lot of land. And then so many people who were working on that land belonged to our family. So this kind of system and tradition goes back many hundreds of years. You know this better than I do. So I told the Dalai Lama too, I particularly suggested to the two sitsab, that it was very dangerous. Because if this old tradition, the land system, continues, the Chinese communists are going to take advantage eventually, and are going to create a gap between the population and the Tibetan government and Dalai Lama, or the government of Tibet. Because eventually they were definitely going to try to do what we call trugshing [Tib. དཀྲུག་ཤིང] in Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Stir-up, instigate.   

**A:**  Yeah, instigate. Stir-up.   

**Q:**  I think you're absolutely right.   

**A:**  So I told what's happening in China in 1950-51 and I was there in the months of April, May of 1952. So definitely and eventually there is going to be lot of trouble with the particularly the land tradition of the monasteries and the nobilities had a lot of properties. This must bring a very amicable and peaceful change and I suggested that my family and I don't need that lot of land. I am going to give up the land completely to the government and the government should fairly distribute it to the peasants. And the monasteries and all the nobilities must give up. If that happened and if the Tibetan Government, the Dalai Lama and two sitsab could do a fair land distribution and then it will probably going to solve some problem on in inflation as well as the future danger of Chinese exploitation between the ruling class and the people. This is very important, if they don't do that, then I think there is going to be a disaster because I told them what happened in China was terrible. The landlords have been killed, tortured and the Chinese were stirring up every village and peasants to go against the landlords. I told the Dalai Lama and I also told the two sitsab, but they advised me not to disclose my mind to the rest of our people saying it is very dangerous because nobody will agree.   

**Q:**  You know Chinese very well because you were educated in those years. It seems to me that Lukhangwa made a very bad mistake by showing a angry hostile attitude towards the Chinese when the Chinese first came. The war was lost and the there is no troops and in the side document, [Tib. ཟུར་ཡིག] of the 17 Point Agreement it said that one Army [Ch. jun] could come to Tibet. So instead of trying to be more friendly, they were saying that we are going to do the things by ourselves and they made the Chinese like an enemy. I don't understand what his strategy was. Why not try to be more friendly whatever you really think, rather than being hostile?   

**A:**  I think it was most unfortunate. You are quite right. The condition and the situation of the minds of those people of Tibet, they don't know the knowledge about China and what is going to happen. Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi didn't have a slightest idea; they were just expressing their resentment of the Chinese behavior.Chinese were behaving very badly and Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan were openly telling me, "It is very good you have returned and we will support you and the Dalai Lama and try to finish all these nobilities." On one side, they were telling me these things.   

**Q:**  All the nobility or just the sitsab?   

**A:**  They said nobility. They said, "We will support you two and try to give you two the complete power." I suppose that they were trying to encourage me, the Chinese maybe thinking in that way. Then I had a very bad feeling because I saw on one side, the population was suffering so much, the traditional land system and then inflation and behavior of the Chinese communist and the troops, and on one side all the Tibetan nobilities were collaborating with the Chinese except the two sitsab. The two sitsab are very backward and they don't know anything what happened in China and they don't know what the consequences is going to be. They were only expressing their resentment and the Chinese suspected two sitsab as American agent. I am trying very hard to persuade the Chinese because the Dalai Lama and two sitsab told me, "You know Chinese, so you go and keep in touch with the Chinese and find what the Chinese are thinking and what they are saying. So I would often go to the office of Zhang Jingwu and get together and sometimes for lunch and sometimes tea. They also often come to my family and my house. I tried to persuade Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua telling them not to fight and be harsh and emotional. They were saying the movement of the mimang, the People's Association is instigated by the Americans and they say that American imperialist spies are working very actively and two sitsab are the American agent or the imperialist agent. I told General Zhang Jingwu that it is very wrong to take that kind of extreme attitude. It is very important to take a very calm and brotherly attitude because Tibet and China had so many thousand years of relationship and the Tibetan people will have every good will to China and the Chinese people, to the Han people. If you take such a harsh and irrational attitude, you are going to destroy this relationship between Tibet and the Han people. Because what we are always thinking is that China is a very nice country, Hans are nice people and we have lived together for generations, and we don't have hatred between the Chinese and the Tibetans. So therefore you must act as an elder brother. You treat the Tibetans as your younger brother. Younger brother is no good, he is behaving something very abnormal, you should be patient and advise him, and tolerate him, and try to pursue a policy of persuading him peacefully, let him change. If you take a drastic action, this is going to have very bad effects. Of course you can manage to do so because you have the troops, you have the guns, you can do it. But then I think it is wrong for you to do it like that. I said it's not going to pay off in the long run. And they are saying they are agents. I say, leave aside Lhukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi acting as American agents, if we all ask Lhukhangwa and Losang Tashi to come here and talk, and find out, ask him where is America located, which side of Tibet? Whether east side, or west side, or south, or north? Even they don't know, instead they would ask "American agents?" Even they don't know where America is located in this particular earth. The situation is such, I told General Zhang Jingwu. So therefore it is very wrong. They say they are going to arrest him, they are going to kill him and this and that. And they are saying, I think they said, "very wrong, you shouldn't pursue it" [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  But the U.S. was, in 1951, trying to obstruct the 17-Point Agreement. I mean, I have the documents. They even sent the Dalai Lama a letter in September.   

**A:**  That was different people.   

**Q:**  No. It's different. But from the Chinese point of view, I think it's complicated because the U.S. was from their side, you know, instigating, right? So that, I mean, if I were a Chinese general, I'd try to think-since I have no side, you know, I'm neither... what were the Chinese thinking? And you could think that the imperialist, that some of the Tibetan leaders were kind of sympathetic to not making this Agreement work well.   

**A:**  That's, I think, different people. Lhukhang Wa and Lobsang Tashi were not very much involved with Americans at all.   

**Q:**  Oh, I don't think they were involved, no.   

**A:**  You see, in 1950, during the Dalai Lama's stay in Yadong period, I think, yes, the United States government and some of the Tibetan officials were very much contacting and dealing with things. And before that, even in, say, 1949, when I was in India, also I learned quite a lot of things about the American attitude. For instance, I think in 1949 I visited Delhi during that period. Mr. Roy Henderson, the United States ambassador, I think he has a Polish wife, I think. I met them. They were very sympathetic about Tibet and this and that. So I think, yes, it's true, I mean, some involvement like that, and the Chinese authorities must be thinking like that, believing everybody who is against them is an American agent. But then, in that particular time in 52, I told the Chinese these two are definitely not, but then you should have some kind of calm approach about these things. So the Chinese are in no mood. Very much angry when we were discussing this kind of situation. And Zhang Jingwu is notorious because he is very hot tempered, jumping and doing these things on the table and shaking this and that, you know, like that. So, you see, my position, I found it very difficult to do anything because on one side I know the Tibetan situation 100 percent is going to lead to a definite clash because of the sentiment of the population, and the system of the government, and the land system. And then the system of the Chinese communist thought, and the Chinese communist ideology, and the land reforms in China. And they were definitely going to have some kind of clash, eventually. I don't know when and how. And then also I felt very strongly because they were urging me to collaborate with them. So they were urging me to collaborate with them. And that's also impossible for me because... Me, you see my family, I come from Qinghai and because of the selection of the Dalai Lama from my family to Lhasa. And Tibetan people and the Tibetan government, they treated us very very well. And my purpose going to China to study because of the... At that time the Reting Regent and my father, they thought China was very important for me to go and to study, to learn and maybe eventually it can be useful for the Tibetan population and for the government of Tibet, and in particular for the Dalai Lama. So my conscience did not allow me to collaborate, betray. Even Tibetans are very backward, even Tibetans are doing the wrong things. I can persuade Tibetans not to do and give my honest suggestions and my opinion. But I cannot betray the Tibetan population. And even the Tibetan officials are doing very badly because, you see, for instance, at that time Zhang Jingwu was telling me "you don't believe, Mr. Thondup, what I am saying." He says "your own shape Surkhang, last night 8 o'clock, coming to my place is telling me "General Zhang! why are you so angry with the masses of the People's Association [the mimang]? Mimang is nobody, you should find... they are like a movie who is acting. You should find the person who is making that movie and showing that movie, that person.'" Then Zhang Jingwu asked Surkhang Kalön Wangchen Geleg, [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས], "Then who are they? Who are the people who are organizing? Of course Lhukhangwa and Sitsab Lama. See, your own Kashag members are telling me last night like that." So, you see... and I thought, what a terrible pain to see that the officials are like that. And then Lukhangwa and Sitsab Lama are so old and so conservative and they don't know anything about how to handle problem. And the Chinese side, General Zhang Jingwu and Tan Guansan, Fan Ming, Wang Qimei and Zhang Guohua of course is a little bit moderate. And the rest, all of them are like very... wants to shoot and wants to kill!   

**Q:**  You think Zhang Guohua was more moderate than [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yeah. At least the attitude was a little bit calm, not so rough. The rest are like rascals, like bandits. I mean, if I speak my true feelings, Zhang Jingwu was nobody. He may be a very good guerilla-warfare general and Tan Guansan and all these people may be good commissar or something. But then, as people, as educated or culturally... they are nothing. They are just like bandits, doing reckless things, [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང]. Zhang Guohua is much more cultured and also, you know... his behavior at least is not that irrational. So all these situations-I can't persuade the Tibetan government, because Sitsab Lama and Sitsab Lukhangwa, cannot persuade the Kashag to do these things, and they also do not believe in that. You see, I told some of the Kashag members, like Shasur, [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] and Dombo, [Tib. གདོང་པོར] because they are... these two are our family's guide, looking out after our family interest, guidance of our properties. I told them, I don't want these properties. If the Tibetan government is not going to do the land reforms, I myself, I would go and give up all these things to the peasants. And particularly, in each shiga we have lots of granaries for generations kept, I mean, they're of no use. What is the use of keeping these things there? It's better to distribute to them. And then, also each estate they have this document, the people are borrowing, the peasants borrowed from the ownership, owners of the estate. And so many... this borrowing for generations and interest by interest and so much... I said this is very bad. I will go and burn and these things and give it to them. And I don't want the Tibetan population... My family stayed to run such things. And Dombo and Shasur is telling me, "Mr. Thöndrup, if you don't think of yourself, you must think of your sons and your daughters." They were very much angry. Saying these things, you're mad, you're mad, they are saying you're mad, you're doing these things. And I did certain things before my departure. So I was in a very difficult situation. On one side the Dalai Lama is young. And then the Tibetan government is in such a strange situation: everybody is collaborating with the Chinese and without knowing the consequences, what the Chinese will do eventually. And then the people, the masses are suffering, and then the masses have an emotional work-up because Tibetans are not used to the Hans running the country. Because the Chinese Hans are coming to... I mean they're ruling and running. That's also quite a new thing, because since 1911 or 1912-13, after the driving away of the Amban influence, I think, say, 1913-1914 to 1950-until the Chinese Communists came into Tibet-the Tibetans never experienced the real Chinese power or Chinese rule. And particularly with the guns and the military like that. So I thought maybe it was very difficult for me to remain, because my conscience was not going to allow me to collaborate with the Chinese and then also very difficult for me to persuade the Tibetan Government and the Dalai Lama, because the Dalai Lama is alone. I mean the Sitsab Lama and Lhukhangwa were the only two officials working with him. The rest are all not reliable and not trustworthy. So, the Dalai Lama is young, so the Chinese are urging me to go to China. They want me to lead a youth delegation. I think that was in 52, because the central government had asked the Zhang Jingwu to convey these things to me and request me to lead a Tibetan Youth Delegation to come and to join the Chinese Youth Conference in 1952 in Beijing. And from there they said they want to select a Chinese Youth Delegation to go to somewhere in the world, World Youth Federation, somewhere in Vienna, somewhere. I think in 52 they wanted me to go join the Chinese Youth Delegation. I promised yes, I would go and all these things, but then I carefully planned for myself. I thought I made up my mind that it was useless for me to stay in Tibet. I can't help the Tibetan government, I can't help my brother, I can't help the Tibetan people, on the one side. If I help and I speak the truth, I speak the correct things, the Chinese won't listen. The Chinese will suspect me. Also they are saying I am not collaborating with them. Or they will maybe also ask, suspect me as a GMD agent, or American agent, or an Indian agent-it can be anything. And then, also it was very difficult for me, for my conscience did not allow me to collaborate with the Chinese. So therefore the best... if I remain, maybe, eventually because of my attitude persuade the Chinese not to do this, not to do that. Maybe also going to embarrass the Dalai Lama, or compromise his position. So therefore it was best for me to leave Tibet and go to India. Because I also thought if something really happened, or if something can be done, maybe only one remedy, because at that time the Indians had some relations at least, good or bad, I don't know, but some relations with the Chinese government, like Nehru. So before my departure I tried to approach the Indian Government, whether it was possible for me to come and stay in India, because it was impossible for me to remain in Tibet. And through the Indian Consulate General [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Who was it at that time?   

**A:**  Sinha, S. Sinha. So Sinha had sent a cable, a secret message, an encoded message to Mr. Nehru-the diplomatic... it must be through the wire. After a few days and the cable had returned my request, the reply returned, and they are saying I would be welcomed if I am coming to India. And then they are asking which area I will be crossing. So I told the Indian government it is very difficult because I don't know which area I can cross. It was still very uncertain. But then I planned actively that I'd better depart. So I discussed with my mother and my brother, Lobsang Samten, [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན]. The situation was such that they also thought maybe a useful purpose can be served if I go to India to establish some kind of contact. And through, maybe through the Indian government, I can persuade the Chinese to slow down some of their activities and behavior. So without informing anybody else except my mother and my brother, on the pretext that I'm doing this little bit of land reform business on my own, privately. So I first did Ramagang [Tib. ར་མ་སྒང] just on the other side of Lhasa. Then I did it in Tölung Seshing [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་ཟས་ཞིམ] near Tsurpu [Tib. མཚུར་ཕུ] in that area we have a small estate. And then I told General Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua that I'm doing these things, so I'm going to Chayü [Tib. བྱ་ཡུལ] and Jora [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར]. These two are just at the border area of India. So I went to Chayü and Jora and then I crossed from Jora to India. So my purpose coming to India is just what I mentioned just now. Hoping, of course it was very difficult, nobody knows how much influence Mr. Nehru has. But then at that time, wishful thinking, hoping Mr. Nehru or maybe international... some kind of publicity, if we can organize some of the Tibetans and in India try to publicize the situation in Tibet, and tried to introduce, at least make it well known to the people. Otherwise because Tibet has completely been sealed, nobody knows what is going on inside Tibet. Whether the Chinese are going to cut or chop, whatever the generals or the army will do, nobody knows. So the main purpose in going to India is that purpose: try to make a little bit of noise, or, if possible, through Mr. Nehru, to persuade the Chinese government. So that is why.   

**Q:**  Did you speak English at the time?   

**A:**  A little bit. Not very much. A little bit. So during my stay in India, in 52, from 52 up to now, seven years before the 1959 situation... and during this period of course we had established contact with the Indian officials. Like the political officers in Sikkim, like Dayal and Apa Pant and all those political officers, through them persuading whether it was possible for Mr. Nehru and the Indian government to persuade the Chinese to behave in a little bit better way in Tibet. And that was one way. And then the second way was to try to publicize through some of the news media, some [from] time-to-time travelers coming from Lhasa or Tibet. And we tried to get the press to get involved and publicize the Tibetan situation. And then, I think during 53-54, the Indians were thinking they wanted to invite the Dalai Lama to pay a visit to India. That idea started in 55 I think. In that period I think because the Dalai Lama went to China in 54 and he met Mr. Nehru in Beijing I think. So since then I think that the Indian government, particularly Apa Pant, is very much seeking our opinion and they wanted to invite the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  He seemed very sympathetic, Apa Pant, no? To the Tibetan cause?   

**A:**  Yes, maybe in a way. I mean, let me comment again on these things. So we from the beginning told the Indian government it is very difficult for the Dalai Lama to come to India because, first of all, the Chinese won't like it. In case the Dalai Lama comes to India, he has to disclose the true situation and true feelings of the Tibetan population and Tibetan situation at least to the Indian government, to Mr. Nehru. So therefore it was very difficult for the Dalai Lama to come. If that happened the Chinese would be very angry. Unless India will agree, allow the Dalai Lama to come and stay. If that happened then we will participate, pursue, try at least persuading the Dalai Lama to come and pay a visit to India. So I think in 55, and the idealism since 56 was going to be a Buddha Jayanti, so-called 2500 year anniversary of the Buddha. So they thought maybe that is a very good excuse and to invite the Dalai Lama by that period. So before that we very seriously discussed with the Indian government, in particular through Apo Pant-saying if the Indian government allows the Dalai Lama to remain and stay in India and if the Indian government can act in-between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese government-to persuade the Chinese to abandon some of the Chinese interventions into the internal problems of Tibet. So gradually the Indian government agreed and they promised they would do so. And Apa Pant is telling us the Indian government agreed and they are also willing to act in-between if the Dalai Lama comes, if the Dalai Lama remains in India, and they will act in-between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese government. So they agreed also that the Dalai Lama can come and stay any place he would like to stay, no problem. They will offer one of those big palaces of the Maharajas, the former Maharajas of India. So then I think since these things are worked out, that the Indians are willing, we thought probably, maybe it would be very useful for the Dalai Lama to come. So we all tried, Mr. Shakabpa, myself, and Khenjung, we all tried persuading the [people] surroundings of the Dalai Lama. Particularly at that time Phala was the drönyerchemmo. He was in very close contact with us. So in that way we had developed this idea of inviting the Dalai Lama to come to India. Then the Indian government sent Marajaja Kumar, the Dharma King, [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ], to Tibet to extend this invitation, to deliver this invitation. So that happened in that way. So you are asking. Of course the Indian government is sympathetic about the Tibetan situation. I suppose India's interest [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  But what was all of this about... what I don't understand is that there was all of this, in 55 and 56, talk about wireless. That the Indians were training some Tibetans through Jenkhentsisum to do wireless, and they gave you wireless. I don't know if they were ever sent to Tibet or not. The main people were Apo Pant and Bose, I guess who must be C.I.D., I don't know who he is?   

**A:**  No, no. Nothing to do with Apa Pant and Bose. You see, I think this wireless training and this kind of situation was, I think, done by American intelligence organizations. You see, Apa Pant, I don't know Bose you mentioned. I don't know who is Bose. Maybe Ghosh, I think, somebody. I think the Indian C.I.D., Indian intelligence. So I think what happened was the Indian training for the intelligence, for the Tibetan wireless operations, were not done until 19... even I forgot myself. So many things are [have] passed. You see, Americans started giving us... taking some of our people to the United States and some American bases in the South Pacific and training in 55 and 56, like that. But not Indians. The Indians were only interested, this Indian intelligence were only interested in training some of our people on how to collect intelligence. No wireless training by Indians until the eventual cooperation between Americans, Indians and Tibetans jointly established some kind of coordination. That I think started in 19 [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  That would be 62 or somewhere around there.   

**A:**  Yes, yes, 62. Then the Indians are also helping us, training some of those wireless operators. Because... yeah, that's right, 62. So before that Indians are only training, some of the Indian intelligence organizations, training some of our young people for how to collect intelligence and how to use some of those strange ink writings. That kind of training. Otherwise, no. So they gave some assistance for training those people and giving them some pocket money as well as some of their expenditures. They had these things. Not very many, a few of them, I think about six or seven, that's all. Of course Indian intelligence was keeping in some kind of contact with me and Mr. Shakabpa and Mr. Khenjung through Indian intelligence organizations in Kalimpong. Because Mr. Shakabpa and Khenjung stayed in Kalimpong. They had constant...   

**Q:**  Is that Mr. Ghosh? That was his job?   

**A:**  No, not Mr. Ghosh. I think they had quite enough... they had so-called Indian intelligence Additional Director or Deputy Director or something like that stationed in Kalimpong. Even nowadays they have this organization there. So that's the system. They have a main office in Delhi, that's right, yes.   

**Q:**  I was also a little bit surprised that the Indians were helping you by transmitting messages, wireless and other stuff from Lhasa, from Dekyi Linga, [Tib. བདེ་སྐྱི་གླིང་ག] [the Indian Consulate] in Lhasa to the Sikkim and that stuff.   

**A:**  No, no. I think the Indians are very cautious, except before my departure, my request to cross India and come into India allowing me to stay in Darjeeling, I mean, that's through Mr. Nehru directly. That message, yes, the Indian Consulate did accept that.   

**Q:**  Because I've seen a document that says something to the effect that in 1956, I think it was either the C.I.D. guy, this Ghosh, or whatever his name is, or, the Sikkim Political Officer said that from now on the people in Lhasa can only send messages twice a month via the consulate.   

**A:**  No, not to us. No, we have no experience with using India for that. They were very cautious. No, no, nothing like that. No, I don't have any knowledge like that. Maybe you may have seen something else, no.   

**Q:**  So anyway, you tried to get the Dalai Lama to come out in 1956.   

**A:**  Right, right, yes. 56 visit. 56 and 57.   

**Q:**  And your plan was what? You were trying to get the Dalai Lama to stay; now what was the plan? What would be the advantage of having him stay in India versus going back?   

**A:**  You know, because the prevailing conditions in Eastern Tibet, in Amdo and Kham, were very explosive. And even in Central Tibet. So we thought if the Dalai Lama can come to India, even remain in India, under the excuse-because he was really pressurized by the Tibetan population all over from Eastern Tibet, Kham or from Amdo and also Central Tibet because of the Chinese intervention of the Tibetan government's day to day affairs-so at least if the Indian government can take up, with the Chinese authorities in Beijing, and pursuing, stopping this kind of interference by the Chinese authorities in Lhasa. So if the Dalai Lama can manage to stay, we thought that way, maybe we can avoid a complete clash between the Tibetans and the Chinese. Because a complete clash is unthinkable. Hundreds of thousands of people would be killed and tremendous tragedies and bloodshed. In order to avoid this bloodshed we thought if the Indian government could act in such a way, and then some kind of compromise, if the Dalai Lama remained like that and without completely breaking away, saying "I'm not going back at all," because of the problem and being very seriously pressurized, "my people we are suffering," and so therefore hoping the Chinese will change some of this... correct some of these mistakes, and then he will return. In that way, it's not a complete clash.   

**Q:**  And the Indians had said they would agree?   

**A:**  We thought the Indians agreed completely and promised they would do so. But then they changed their minds during Mr. Zhou Enlai's visit and talks. I think Mr. Zhou Enlai visited twice.   

**Q:**  Twice?   

**A:**  Yeah. And Mr. Zhou Enlai also very much persuaded me and Taktse Rinpoche [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] to not persuade the Dalai Lama to remain in India. And he promised he would go back and change all those mistakes which I demand and he would change even some of those Chinese generals and withdraw most of the troops, un-nest the troops in Tibet. And he apologized for the inflation and suffering of the Tibetan population. And he would go back to persuade Chairman Mao Zedong to do those things under the condition, hoping the Dalai Lama is not persuaded to stay in India, the Dalai Lama should return.   

**Q:**  He told you that?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. Absolutely. Marshal He long, Zhou Enlai and the Chinese ambassador Yang Guansong, Yuan Zhongxian. Three of them, myself and my brother, Mr. Norbu, and then also the interpreter Li Zuoming. Li Zuoming is still there.   

**Q:**  I'm gonna see him in June.   

**A:**  Very good. So he authorized me and my brother, he said "we're not going to persuade you and your brother to return, you can remain here as a witness. If we don't behave ourselves, if we don't fulfill all these promises, you can shout against us, you can shout and make noises in India."   

**Q:**  And his promises were to withdraw more troops, no reforms?   

**A:**  He promised he would withdraw the troops, un-nest the troops, and those bad generals he would withdraw and change.   

**Q:**  And he probably told Nehru the same thing?   

**A:**  I don't know what discussions between Nehru and Mr. Zhou Enlai exactly, so for that I think you should go to India and do some research, find out exactly.   

**Q:**  Yeah, I'm going.   

**A:**  But then, I think it is sad, Nehru had changed his mind and actively more or less forced for the Dalai Lama to return. And we also... I felt terrible.   

**Q:**  He forced him? In what sense did he force him?   

**A:**  Saying he must go back. Can't stay in India. So the Dalai Lama had no choice, he has to go back. The Indians had changed their minds.   

**Q:**  He said he can't or he shouldn't?   

**A:**  Pardon me?   

**Q:**  He said it's better to go back or did he say he really can't?   

**A:**  You must go back.   

**Q:**  You must go back?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. "You're not allowed to stay in India if you stay." So therefore, I think being forced I told Apa Pant and the Indian government he'll be murdered. The Dalai Lama has such exposure coming to India, and talks with various people, with Mr. Nehru, and it is completely exposed. And now if you are going to push it back, and he's gonna be completely murdered and sacrificed. So therefore the consequences are going to be very serious. So I think even today I believe if the Dalai Lama did not visit India without India's persuasion, without India giving us this false hope, I think the Chinese had no excuse to kill and bring such destruction in 1959 about Tibetan culture, the Tibetan people's belongings. So the Chinese had no excuse to rob and to loot and to burn, to kill. They had no excuse to do these things. At least I think their hands are bound if there is a complete clash. So, because the Dalai Lama was being forced to return and then the situation deteriorated. And then eventually the disaster the Dalai Lama escaped, and then the Chinese had taken terrible methods of suppression. Suppression is alright, killing is alright, but then... Professor Goldstein, you, as a scholar, Tibet is a virgin land, never touched, no foreigners had really touched with such extensive looting, burning and destroying. This is really still very much unknown what really happened from 59 to 66. Ok. one period. And then 66 to 79. Another period. Because in 66 the Cultural Revolution started. So, I think you know, I know, exactly between 59 and, say Lhasa, Central Tibet, and other areas, 59 to 66 what's happened. And 66 to 79 what's happened. I think in Eastern Tibet, like Amdo area, 53 to 59 it already started. And in the Kham area also, 55 to say 59 it started. So it's terrible, I mean, how the Chinese destroyed the belongings of the Tibetan population, monasteries, government, peasants, individuals. Even I had had taken, even if I have a spoon in the kitchen it is taken, not once, taken three times. Confiscated. So I think, I told the Chinese, I told the Chinese communist government, in the Chinese proverb they do like this, they say, Chinese proverb: "[ch, sun ren li ji]." "sun ren," means I destroy my enemy, make destruction, [li ji] means I gain everything. I gain, I make a profit, I gain.   

**A:**  ...If people still don't know what has happened, if they know exactly what happened, I think generations are going to feel ashamed of the Chinese Han people. What they have done to Tibet. Internationally people do like that, they are fighting, saying "destroy that one!" and "kill that one!," "rob that one!," and I gain everything, and I'm proud. But today what's happened to Tibet, see? Poverty stricken, and so poor, so backward. What do you gain? You gain nothing, and you get very disgraced internationally. And eventually, if the population of China learned what really exactly happened in the minority area of Tibet, I think they will feel ashamed of what the leadership is doing.   

**Q:**  Yeah. I think you're right.   

**A:**  So, I think the truth should be told.   

**Q:**  I'm gonna work on that period. This book is almost done. From 59 on. I'm starting. I've already started.   

**A:**  Nobody can cover these things. This is my conscience. I'm telling the Chinese, "my conscience, I'm not telling others, but I'm telling you in front of your face. What's happened? Tell me what has happened. Why are you doing these things?" Of course the system is bad, land system is bad, officials, lamas and superstition and this is bad. This can be changed because these things are not because a particular individual likes to do these things, it is generations... its inherited history. In China it is like that, Yuan, Ming, Qing, even the GMD period. Even today to some extent some corrupt practices are still there. And these things are like that. And Tibetans have maybe copied from here, copied from India. And its ancient, you can't blame. This has to be changed and brought to reforms. So they feel ashamed, many of them, they say, "we feel ashamed with what has already happened."   

**Q:**  These are the current people?   

**A:**  Some of them, but not all of them. Some of them still want to hide it Like Deng Xiaoping, he wants to hide these things he doesn't want to show. Maybe you should tell Professor Goldstein about Deng Xiaoping.   

**A:**  Because he is responsible, you know. In 49 he was under the Liu Bocheng and the South-West Military Bureau. And he was in control. And the Tibetan military area command, [Ch. xi zang jun qu] direct under the Chengdu military area, direct. So through him, and to go to the Central Government, to go to the United Front Office, Li Weihan, he was in Beijing. So Liu Bochen ... I saw some of these reports they are trying to cover it very hard, saying whatever happened had happened during the Cultural Revolution, the destruction. This is not true. From 59 to 66 all the monasteries, Potala, Norbulinga, private and government monasteries, everything complete inside. Searched everything, even the individuals, families, everything is gone, o.k. And then skeletons. The house, monastery's buildings are there because the skeletons are still not yet destroyed. But then during the Cultural Revolution in 66, some of those bad elements probably thought the inside is empty, there is nothing there, so it's better to pull everything down. So they are asking, you see the military area in Lhasa asked for permission to pull all those things down. Do you know what permission was given? Said, "be careful, you better not touch it in the border area, you better do inside where you can do it, whatever you want to do." But then the border area is very sensitive because the foreigners are watching. These kind of instructions were given by the Chengdu military area. Mr. Deng Xiaoping is absolutely, from 49 to 66, was very much involved with that. And then Wang Zhen. Watch his behavior in Gansu and Qinghai, how many people were being murdered and killed. Like General Custer in the western movies I saw, he sends his men to shoot those red Indians. I think the Chinese have done worse than what the Americans had done to the red Indians. And manhood is being completely killed, and only the children and the animals are alive, survived. Even some of those Lanzhou University students are telling me, sometimes they are bringing loads and loads of meat, yak meat and sheep. They say nobody's looking after them because no manhood is left.   

**Q:**  Obviously that was a bad mistake on the Chinese part, all those things.   

**A:**  It's terrible, irreversible.   

**Q:**  Irreversible, it probably is.   

**A:**  But then, that's o.k. Whatever happened has happened.   

**Q:**  It's really a tragedy. All of these things [question not finished]   

**A:**  Whatever happened, happened. I'm willing to forgive, ok. But it's very important that the Chinese must treat Tibet as a human being, as equals. Not exploitation, and not like colonial territories. You must treat Tibetans, ok. Tibet should progress, should change. Tibet cannot remain in those days. Tibet must catch up. Not the world, catch up to China. If compared today, China and Tibet, what a gap. I never... they don't allow me to go for many years. Many years ago they wanted me to go, but I refused to go because, you know, they are asking me "why don't you want to go? Everybody is rushing to Tibet." I said, "you want me to tell you the truth? What are my feelings, why I'm not going, why I refuse to go?" So they are saying, the United Front Office, they're asking "please tell me," they ask. I say, "I know my country, I'd love to go any minute, just now I wanted to go." But then if I went I will see. I know so many things, and so I know the past. I know now, and so many things happened. If I saw those things I am going to burst into tears. I'm going to burst my feelings. I'm going to speak the truth to your officials, they won't be very happy. And then if I criticize you people, you won't be very pleased. So therefore it's best if I not go for the time being. You are telling me you are improving, you want to improve conditions, this and that. Very good, please, quickly go ahead, improve the conditions. After you have improved, I will go. That's my reason. You want me to go and see? To see what? To see blood and tears, what's happened.   

**Q:**  Yes, now things are hopeless. Very bad.   

**A:**  So therefore I request them to please go ahead, do it. And once improved I'd love to go. I want to go and visit. I will praise you. You have built very good bridges, you've built very good roads and this and that, and then introduced electricity and schools. I will praise you, I will dance. And then the minute those bad things... I won't say I will control myself. If you go just now, you want me to go, I will go and see. I will cry every day. [laughter]   

**Q:**  Nowadays it's a bad situation. Anyway, right now I'm interested in the history of the past. Because the past is what creates the present, you know.   

**A:**  So that's why for the last 15 years I'm going there, the Dalai Lama is sending me, and then I'm going to try... I'm trying to persuade them, you know, I'm trying to bring some kind of amicable and reasonable settlement. I know maybe the system of the Dalai Lama and maybe the government of Tibet in some of the Chinese minds is useless. But then the minds of the Tibetan population, the sentiment, I think it is very important for China and the Dalai Lama, and the Tibetans, we must try to reconcile. You know, hatred is not going to solve our problem. Prejudice is not going to solve our problem. We must accept reality. The Tibetan population, I told the Chinese, generations and generations, side by side, shoulder to shoulder, side by side, we have lived very peacefully, we had very good relations. Whether you like me, or whether we don't like you, no alternative. For so many thousand years, generations, we have lived like that. And many generations to come we have to still stay together. Unless Tibetans move to the moon. You see, therefore, the problem has to be solved. We must be friends again, we must try cooperate again, collaborate and cooperate to try to develop Tibet. Tibet is a virgin land, completely primitive. It would be useful to China and useful to Tibet. So therefore we must try to bring this understanding and some kind of settlement. It is, I tell you, we're not talking the independence of Tibet, we're talking about the legitimate rights of the Tibetan nationality. The Chinese should restore that, and try to not use everybody as a puppet. You think Gyalo Thondup come and I will use you as a puppet? I'm not going to act like your rubber stamp. You are using Ngabö, Phüntso Wangye, [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ] everybody you are using them. I'm not going to do it. If I really want... if you really want to treat me as an equal I will come participate in the People's Republic of China. I will speak my voice according to my legitimate rights about Tibetan nationalities and try to participate in the Chinese People's Republic. I'm not going to act as a puppet, as your rubber stamp. And that I think is not going to... really I think what you're doing with last so many years everybody knows that's a rubber stamp. You're using them as tools. So we're not seeking to break away from China, we're seeking for you to be reasonable. Please don't kill us. But you always say, "you are the splitters, you are fighting for independence, you want to break away from China." But if you bring a mirror to see your own behavior, what you are doing for the last, say forty years, leave beside as evidence, say forty or forty five years, just see your own... bring a mirror to see. You don't examine your behavior, you are always saying "you're bad, you're no good." I'm not going... if you are good, you kick me, go away. I won't go, I won't say I'm going to stay with you. Why don't you think that way?   

**Q:**  Well some people do. Hu Yaobang thought they may change.   

**A:**  And the Chinese say, "Mr. Thondup, you're right. We have no argument with you. What you are saying is absolutely correct. We feel ashamed and we don't want to use any force to you people. We don't believe in force. But what to do upstairs like that? Say if our upstairs is gone and it's just you and me, our problem will be solved just like that. No problem!" So still we have the upstairs there. One upstairs is gone, Bo Chenyun is dead, I mean of course I feel sorry for him, he is a good man, he is an honest man. But then this small dwarf is still there, Deng Xiaoping, he's the culprit.   

**Q:**  He certainly is the hard-liner now, I think. Anyway, let's go back to the 1950's. There are two things I wanted to also ask you about. One is your connections with Taiwan for help, and the other is the U.S. It surprised me to learn, now maybe I'm wrong, that about during the same time as the U.S. thing was happening, 56-57, that there were a lot of contacts with Taiwan that you had initiated, writing. You wrote to Eisenhower as well as to Jiang Kai Shek. And Taiwan was interested, and they sent somebody and he came to Kalimpong. There was a lot of talk about aid and my understanding of this whole incident was that the Chinese said they would give training and troops and what not, but that you all, you all meaning Jenkhentsisum, said that "you have to publicly say Tibet will be independent." And at that point, then China didn't say that.   

**A:**  No. I think what happened, Professor Goldstein, you see, we noticed when I came out from Tibet in 52, we noticed that all the publicity or propaganda from Taiwan about the Tibet issue, they are saying the Tibetans... why the Tibetans are against Chinese communist rule is because Tibetans are hoping, yearning for the return of Chinese Nationalists. They say under their leadership, under their instigation, under their directives, the Tibetan population are very much cooperating with Chinese Nationalists in order to return of the mainland by the Chinese Nationalists. So that kind of publicity. So we thought that type of publicity is very hurtful because we, this is my purpose coming to India and telling the world the Tibetan population's against the Chinese Communist rule is definitely spontaneous. It has nothing to do with somebody instigating. GMD is not instigating. Americans, maybe in the top level and some top-level Tibetan officials, maybe they have some kind of contact. But the population's opposition of the Chinese Communist regime has nothing to do with anybody teaching them to do it, or Indians, or the British are telling the Tibetans to do these things. Maybe some officials who have very good relations with the British, or maybe some, later on, some Tibetans have... like the Dalai Lama's visit to Yadong, and some Tibetans contact with Americans through some of those strange people, some strange intermediate foreigners. Between the United States Consulate or American ambassador or something like that. So we thought the Tibet... we are publicizing after 52 saying the Tibetans are not fighting for... say against the Han people. Tibetan's development is a natural development of Tibetan people against the unreasonable policies of the Chinese communists. What they are doing, and bringing changes. And because of that it has nothing to do with the GMD telling us to do these things. Or nothing to do with Indians, or Americans, or British. So this-our view and the publicity of the Chinese Nationalists [GMD]-is a little bit different So therefore we always request the Chinese Nationalist government to change. Change the policy towards their publicity. Unless they recognize it is a spontaneous movement of the Tibetan population against communist rule or communist policies. It has nothing to do with the GMD and nothing to do with foreign powers.   

**Q:**  No, I'm not saying that. That's not what I mean. I know this is genuinely a Tibetan movement, but you have to get aid from somebody?   

**A:**  But then, I think it is sad, Nehru had changed his mind and actively more or less forced for the Dalai Lama to return. And we also... I felt terrible.   

**Q:**  He forced him? In what sense did he force him?   

**A:**  Saying he must go back. Can't stay in India. So the Dalai Lama had no choice, he has to go back. The Indians had changed their minds.   

**Q:**  He said he can't or he shouldn't?   

**A:**  Pardon me?   

**Q:**  He said it's better to go back or did he say he really can't?   

**A:**  You must go back.   

**Q:**  Yeah, but... I see.   

**A:**  So unless that is correct, we are not going to collaborate with the Chinese Nationalists. So that is why all these years [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  But they offered, it seems, like here, Li Dongben, I'm not sure, I've only heard the name in..   

**A:**  Li what?   

**Q:**  Li Dongben. He came in 56 to India and discussed with you about...   

**A:**  Li Dongfang?   

**Q:**  Oh, Fang?   

**A:**  Li Dongfang, Professor Li Dongfang.   

**Q:**  Yeah, some of these names are a little bit strange. And then later, the next year, somebody called Kang came. Kang, from Formosa met with you in Calcutta. Talking about concrete things, like "we will give you guns, we'll drop them into Kham" and that kind of stuff?   

**A:**  No. They have... Generalissimo Jiang Kaishek is very sympathetic and sending many emissaries to come and see me, and they are always offering whatever assistance. Training and help, they are willing to extend whatever possible. But then our argument is always based on requesting them to change their publicity, and they must recognize it is a spontaneous movement of the Tibetan population. It has nothing to do with the GMD's leadership or instigation for the Tibetans to fight the Chinese communists. Because the expectations of the return of the Chinese Nationalists to China. So these things we argued all these years. Since that is not agreed, this is more or less all delayed and not reaching any agreement with the Chinese Nationalists. I think that is the main argument between them and us So that is why we never accepted any assistance from the Chinese Nationalists. And then we went to the Americans for help and training. So Americans did accept help, and we accept American help, we accept American training, sending the people to various training places. So we started like that way.   

**Q:**  Who were the 80? There were 80 Amdos, I heard, who went to Taiwan. Who organized that? That seemed to be a separate kind of arrangement.   

**A:**  No, I think what happened in the 1980's... no, not 1980's [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  No, I mean 1957.   

**A:**  1957, yes. Some individual Tibetan Lamas and some Khambas and they wanted to go to Taiwan with my knowledge. And they asked my permission whether they can go. I said very good, you can go. One is, I'll tell you the name, I think... you know the late Jayang Shepa's [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་བཞད་པ] brother wanted to go from India to Taiwan. And [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Not Aba Alo?   

**A:**  Not Aba Alo. Jayang Shepa, the Lama's brother, the Lama, Rimpoche's brother. The previous. And he went. And then another person who went was Gelek Rimpoche, [Tib. དགེ་ལེགས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. He's still in Taiwan. He came from Lithang. And he wanted to go. He told me whether he is allowed to go there. I said, very good, Rimpoche, if you want to go, you should go. But then both of them made an agreement without disclosing the agreement with me. So they should have went according to their individual capacity. So they all went like that. So last year I went and I saw both of them there. So those people who went, GMD with an agent talking to them, and all left from Taiwan. But those two who I sent, they are still very loyalist. They stay in Taiwan.   

**Q:**  I see!   

**A:**  So I told the Chinese Nationalist government, "these people I have sent, they are staying here loyally without betraying the Chinese Nationalists." They are in Taiwan.   

**Q:**  And the other people were [question not finished]   

**A:**  They are all gone.   

**Q:**  No, but the other 80, they were just individuals, or there was a leader who was organizing?   

**A:**  No, no. All individuals went.   

**Q:**  All Amdos?   

**A:**  No, not all Amdos. Some are Khambas, some are Amdos, even some were Central Tibetans, I think they went.   

**Q:**  And the idea was for training? Or just to go?   

**A:**  No. I think not really for the training. I think they went for some kind... you know we all have a problem financially, very hard-up, everybody. So they went and probably one can get some financial assistance, individual families solving their livelihood. And then somebody else just went maybe for some Chinese training or something like that, I don't know. I have no knowledge. Not particularly anybody we have sent or somebody else sent as groups, no. Or sending for dropping or training. Maybe the Chinese Nationalists agents, they have recruited some of those elements from Nepal and India quietly went for the training, maybe.   

**Q:**  How was the first connection with the Americans about training? Did the Americans come to you or to Lady Phünkhang Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ] or to [Sikkim Prince] Gyese Rimpoche, [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] and say "now we're interested in training people," or did one of you go to them and ask? This is in 56?   

**A:**  No. Much earlier. I think 55. 55-54. The reason why, because the Tibetans from Eastern Tibet, like Gyadotsang [Tib. རྒྱ་རྡོ་ཚང]. I mean, Gyadotsang lived in the Litang area, they had sent a Lama.   

**Q:**  See that's Gyadotsang?   

**A:**  Gyadotsang. They sent a Lama seeking for assistance from us. And hoping if we can help them. Asking us to approach whatever government is possible. Americans or Indians or whatever possible assistance. So since they have sent like that from Kham, that's in 55, 54 or 55, so... I think 55, I'm sorry, not 54, exactly 55.   

**Q:**  Early in 55 or late? Can you remember?   

**A:**  Early 55.   

**Q:**  That is the one everybody called him Gyadotsang Lagen [Tib. བླ་རྒན]?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right, Lagen. And before Lagen also some of their relations are coming much earlier, in 54 even. So seeking for assistance and arms and whatever training, and that's from there. So that's why we have approached Americans, I have approached Americans, some of our people coming and seeking help and seeking training, whatever is possible. And then in that way, subsequently, in that way a decision was taken by the Americans to take some of our people for training.   

**Q:**  But in 55 the fighting hadn't even started in Kham yet?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  Then there was a second group that came in 56.   

**A:**  It had already started. In think some... some area.   

**Q:**  Not in Lithang?   

**A:**  Not complete, I mean, but it had already started in 55. I think it already started. Some of those isolated active planning by the Khambas to attack the Chinese or to prevent the Chinese in some areas. Yes, it already started at that period.   

**Q:**  And this Gyadotsang, he came straight from Lithang, or he came from Lhasa?   

**A:**  Straight from... via Lhasa, straight from Lithang, yes.   

**Q:**  And then again in 56 a whole group came. What I had heard is that Andrutsang, [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང] had sent 27, up to 27. And one was Lotse, and Athar, and those people.   

**A:**  No, what happened, I think, subsequently, one side they had asked us to approach for the training, and then the other side we had asked who are people you are going to train, should be trained. And then they sent quite a number of young, able-bodied young men. Some of them are directly from Kham, and some of them are from Lhasa, they had reached India. In that way, yes, that's right. That was I think in 56, yes 56.   

**Q:**  And when did the U.S... Can you remember when the U.S. first showed interest in training people?   

**A:**  I think 56. 56, yes.   

**Q:**  I had one person tell me that in September of 56 [question not finished]   

**A:**  The month, exactly, I don't know. We have a record, I don't know. I can't tell you just now. Maybe sometime in 56, yes.   

**Q:**  And this training, now, how did this fit in with your plan? I mean, you had a plan of the Dalai Lama coming to India and the Indian government being the mediator between China and Tibet, and then so how did this training of people [question not finished]   

**A:**  No, we thought in 56, we thought since are people are asking for help, and first we thought, maybe, never thought of a really organized, armed resistance. First we thought maybe it would be useful for us to... some of our people should be trained. I'd say, radio operators, communication, in that way, because communication was so difficult and so slow. Because travel from Kham to India would take months, in the fastest way it would take a month, so it would be better if some of these people would be trained as communication operators and then we can get a more clear picture. In that way, first we thought that way. We never thought of immediately organizing for an armed resistance, no. But then, our people in Amdo and Kham were very much thinking for the armed assistance, yes. But from our side, from India like me, since they had approached, I thought probably the best way is to train some of our people for the radio communication operators. And then, eventually, it developed into armed clashes between Chinese and Tibetans. But then, you know, we, our country in Amdo and Kham in those days, we had lots of arms. You know, Tibetans are very fond of arms. During the late Manchu period the arms were available, not prohibited. Every individual, if you have money you can buy arms, buy rifles. Not heavy arms, rifles, pistols, in all Amdo and Tibetan regions were allowed to keep and sell. Even in the streets of Lhasa, even in Kumbum, [Tib. སྐུ་འབུམ] and even in Qinghai and Kham, all the big villages in the markets you could buy arms.   

**Q:**  Now Athar then, when they were dropped in, Lotse and Athar, when they were dropped in, they went to Phala? They were under instructions, right? To go to Phala and find out what the government wanted? It was intelligence, and what did the Tibetan government want? That's what I understood, I mean, I know Frank, Frank Hallobar.   

**A:**  Yeah, Frank Hallobar. He has very good knowledge. Very nice person.   

**Q:**  So that seemed to be from their point of view that he was supposed to go and ask Phala among other things, what is going on and what is the government.   

**A:**  Correct, yes.   

**Q:**  And, as near as I can understand, Phala said "we have no plans, we have no anything." Is that your understanding of what was happening? Because it seemed that when Phala was in India with the Dalai Lama at the Buddha Jayanti that there was much more dealings going on about resisting the Chinese and that.   

**A:**  No. You see, Phala was actually not involved in resistance. Phala was very much involved in persuading the Dalai Lama to come to India and he was very much involved with that. And then Phala was also very much involved with, you know, since he is the drönyerchemmo, he is more or less as a general secretary for the Dalai Lama when the Dalai Lama traveled in 54 to Amdo, Amdo and Kham, returning from China via Kham. You know, Phala has acted as a public relations man, public relations. Get all the Tibetans united in Amdo and in Kham, and get close to the Dalai Lama and with the Tibetans, and that type of work Phala is doing. Phala is not organizing, encouraging the Tibetans to go and fight, resist, no, he is not doing that. He is not doing that at all. But then during the Dalai Lama's departure from Amdo and Kham, I think the leaders, the indigenous leaders in Kham, they are organizing for the resistance. Because, you see, the mentality of the Amdos and the Khambas are like that. If the Chinese are bad they are going to hit back. That kind of... bandits, not really bandits, very aggressive. Since the Chinese are interfering, taking many of their things and this and that, they are attacking the Chinese. And then the Chinese are then of course retaliating, attacking them. So they were more or less forced into some kind of organized resistance. Initially maybe it was just one village, or maybe this group or that group, they were very much scattered, not united. Then the population of Amdos and Khambas realized it was very important for them to organize. Organize some kind of loose organization for the resistance of the Chinese. And that way it happened. And then asking for arms, also coming from them, not from Phala, not from the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  So really then, the Tibetan government was not particularly interested in any of this. Because that what it seemed from the reports the U.S. were getting. They had no plans and they didn't... they couldn't even get to see the Dalai Lama, these two people.   

**A:**  Yes. No, no, no. Only through the intermediaries like Mr. Phala or somebody else. Even they can't go immediately to see Mr. Phala very frequently. Probably through intermediaries to Mr. Phala, that way.   

**Q:**  to Amdo, Amdo and Kham, returning from China via Kham. You know, Phala has acted as a public relations man, public relations. Get all the Tibetans united in Amdo and in Kham, and get close to the Dalai Lama and with the Tibetans, and that type of work Phala is doing.   

**Q:**  Did you... what kind of relations did you have with the Khambas? With Andrutsang and those people? What were you telling them and what were they telling you in 58 once this got started and once they moved to Driguthang [Tib. གྲི་གུ་ཐང] and those kinds of places; once they moved out of Lhasa and there was a regular uprising?   

**A:**  I think, you see, Andrutsang's main purpose was hoping to organize some sort of resistance and also hoping to get the Tibetan government arms from some of the storage in the monasteries. So those were Andrutang's preliminary aims; to organize, and hoping, and a certain area he would clear up, particularly in the southern part of Tibet, clear up the situation, and [answer not finishes]   

**Q:**  Meaning?   

**A:**  Clear all the Chinese out.   

**Q:**  Oh, the Chinese out?   

**A:**  Isolate the Chinese in the many, many areas in the southern part of Tibet. That was, I think, Gombo Tashi's aim, and Gombo Tashi of course sent the messages asking for more assistance, I mean arms, no other assistance. And also, Gombo Tashi was trying through various intermediaries asking the Tibetan government that some of those arms should not be given to the Chinese, should be handed over to his people, his forces. So that I think was Gombo Tashi's dream.   

**Q:**  And what was the U.S.'s view of that?   

**A:**  The United States government had no particular view.   

**Q:**  No, I mean, the C.I.A.   

**A:**  No, the C.I.A. had no particular views about internal activities of Gombo Tashi, except the C.I.A. had promised to train some more people and eventually to give some assistance to the Gombo Tashi group, yes. That I think was the C.I.A. view. Then, speaking from today's terms, it was very much disorganized. Very much disorganized. Not really a properly organized way of resistance. It was just by circumstances, people are leaving some of those able-bodied men because they don't like the Chinese behavior, leaving from their area to join in Gombo Tashi's forces in that way.   

**Q:**  But, you know, it seems to me, what I'm trying to understand is that some of the Khambas and others complained that the U.S. didn't really send us any arms. And what I'm trying to find out is, if you remember, whether... Was the U.S. basically in favor of helping them by giving them arm, but just never got around to it because of logistics or whatever or bureaucracy? Or was the U.S. really saying, "don't fight, this is not the time to fight" and they were not really too interested in encouraging more fighting? This is in 58. After 59 it's separate.   

**A:**  The United States actually were giving very little assistance, even the arms, very little. You see, there were a few drops. One in Amdo, one in Kham, dropping arms but very little, insufficient. And then actually if today you go back, that really provoked, gave the alarm, disturbed the Chinese. The Chinese must have been thinking "oh, arms drop! Maybe more coming." And then the Chinese were taking very swift and very serious action.   

**Q:**  When was that? Where were these, in Amdo? And that was when?   

**A:**  In Amdo, yes.   

**Q:**  What year was that in?   

**A:**  That was also in 58, I think. 58, yes. 58-59. And also Kham. Near Lithang. And also... Yeah, so not very much. So afterwards people are complaining saying they have been given very poor arms, not sufficient arms, of course those complaints are reaching us much later. And then of course that attracted more Chinese suspicion and [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  More retaliation?   

**A:**  More retaliation.   

**Q:**  But like the people you were dealing with on the U.S. side, what were they telling you? Were they telling you that we're gonna help these guerrillas to mount a good resistance by training them with guns and sending guns? Were they saying that? And that we're gonna help Tibet politically? I know that the U.S. was willing to help send people on a trip to the U.N. and that. You and Shakabpa and those people were talking with them about [question not finished]   

**A:**  That's after 59.   

**Q:**  No, but the conversations were started in 58. And one time they offered 100,000 rupees to help pay the expenses of a group going out and that. It didn't actually work out, but... So what was the U.S. really offering? What were they offering you?   

**A:**  The United States was offering, I mean, like that, saying they will help for the Tibetan resistance. But then the Tibetans must receive training first. After receiving training, after organizing among ourselves and knowing how to utilize all that assistance, and then they will continue to give this aid for the arms and training, that's one side. And secondly, the United States very much asked me to persuade the Dalai Lama to come out from Tibet to India.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  And then even giving us promises saying if the Dalai Lama comes out from Tibet to India, they are willing to support him until he gets the independence of Tibet. So these are the United States... pursuing these kinds of policies. So I have told Americans that it is very difficult for us to persuade the Dalai Lama to come out. It's not that easy because the situation is now very much under the Chinese control, so therefore it's very difficult. But then the United States thought if the Dalai Lama comes out, then they will definitely support until he regains his independence of Tibet. That's the United States'... the C.I.A. policy. They say this is approved from the United States' President General Eisenhower at that time. This is my understanding between the Americans and myself.   

**Q:**  So they wanted, first training, then they would give more, kind of, aid?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  And the idea was... what I had heard is that the idea was that if the Dalai Lama came out, then he would be like, as one person told me, he would be like a "Buddhist Pope," that they would try to make him famous all over. I mean, like, he's famous now, but in those days the world never knew of him, in the sense of now. And that that was part of their idea that he would be a symbol of Tibetan freedom if you were outside. Is that the idea?   

**A:**  I think the United States government never told me that they will create the Dalai Lama as a Pope or something like that, but then they were very much hoping, if the Dalai Lama can manage to come out, they would like to support much easier for him. Instead of his remaining there. If he comes out from Tibet to India, then they will support it. Very much actively the C.I.A was pursuing this particular line.   

**Q:**  And what did the Dalai Lama think about that?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama, as I mentioned to you, for instance he is coming to India as promised by the Indian government, and then the Indian government eventually changes their mind and the Dalai Lama has to return, so it was very difficult. This, of course, we have conveyed these kinds of things through to the Tibetan officials, and to Phala and his people, but then, I think, we didn't have any particular discussion about what the Dalai Lama' feelings were about these particular lines. No, I have never had... Because in 56, we were busy for him to come and stay there. And during 56 such things happened and he returned. The after he returned, so many things are happening in Tibet and the situation had rapidly deteriorated. But then of course nobody could be sure whether he could manage to escape. Even at that time, in March, during the uprising period, disturbances period, we're all not quite sure whether he could manage. But then we had conveyed these things, American thoughts about the Dalai Lama should come out and they will support. And these things are already conveyed through Phala to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  And that was after he went back in 57, this is later?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  And Phala never wrote back an answer saying that for these reasons we can't?   

**A:**  No. At that time it was very difficult, very dangerous. If you send it by writing or by verbal, if these things are leaked out it's very dangerous.   

**Q:**  But you had a code-book?   

**A:**  Yes, I had a code-book.   

**Q:**  I've seen names that India was called, "white" something or other, and everybody had a code name.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. We had code names about India, America, code-languages. Yes that's right. [laughter]   

**Q:**  And then Phala had that too, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. I think, actually, we had... I had a code secret telegram. But then we couldn't stand it any more by that time, the situation was very serious.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama came to India, there was one incident I don't understand, and that is that-when he had decided to go back and he went back to Kalimpong and then up to Gangtok-there was a plan to create a disturbance in Tibet. And two messengers were sent to Lhasa to Andrutsang and to the [Tibetan] Military Headquarter, Magjikhang, [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང] to create a disturbance around Lhasa, military disturbance. And then a bunch of Khambas were organized to go up to Sharsingma, [Tib. ཤར་སིང་མ] or some place just in Yadong, and create some disturbance. And the idea was that the disturbance would force the Dalai Lama to stay in India because it was too unsafe to go back. A number of people told me that. Some people told me that they had even bought their... that they had made new tsampa to take on this.   

**A:**  No, not true. Not true. I think they are making, I don't know, some kind of strange [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  It never happened. They told me that it never happened because the people in Lhasa said we're not gonna cooperate.   

**A:**  No, no, no. Nothing happened like that. If that was going to happen, or organized, I would very much be involved because I was connected with all these groups, no. At least not with my knowledge, no. Unless somebody deceived me, no. No such things. I think there are so many conflicting stories, that kind of situation, maybe, I don't know, no. [Editor's note: That did happen. See Goldstein 2019, Volume 4]   

**Q:**  Well that's why my work is very hard, because it's hard to tell what is true and what's a story.   

**A:**  Yeah, you have to be very careful because, I think it's true because our people are very very fond of... you know the Tibetans are very fond of creating some strange rumors for one, and then, secondly, our people are very fond of liking and disliking. You see, I noticed your book, I like your book very much, I liked it, but one portion I think is unfair about Reting Rinpoche [Tib. རྭ་སྒྲེང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]. You have mentioned Reting Rinpoche had sexual relations with some ladies. It's not true. I know very well about Reting Rinpoche, he was very close to me. He had boys, you know these lamas they have these sexual relations, yes it's true, but then, not with women, no, it's not true. So, you see, when you are traveling to Tibet, Tibetan lamas, Tibetan officials, nobody will be liking these politics. I think that's not true. The rest is correct. I think what have written is... I think I like it, your book, I like it.   

**Q:**  The writing is very controversial, yes.   

**A:**  For instance, about my father, it's correct also. My father was very hot-tempered, because... ignoring the way, or eluding the way of getting such big power, being the Dalai Lama's father, then of course, that's also true, what you have written is correct. But the Reting Rinpoche, that particular portion, it is not correct. Because I knew him very well, we were very close. And then we talked all about Taktra and all the politics, everything. He trusted me, very much so. And my going to China, I tried to balance this understanding with him, and tried to balance and hoped eventually he can recapture power, like that. And these things are also discussed. So I know very well about Reting Rinpoche.   

**Q:**  Well, when I write my revision I'll think about it.   

**A:**  That's alright.   

**Q:**  But actually that book has been banned in Lhasa now. It was translated into Chinese and it's available. They changed some things, but they translated it into Chinese and it was available in Beijing and around. But then in Lhasa they banned it just this year.   

**A:**  Since you are traveling so often and you've become an authority and attending and writing about these things, why not persuade the Chinese to open up Tibet and to do better things? Who are the people you are dealing with in China? Who are the people?   

**Q:**  The Chinese don't pay any attention to me. They're not interested in anything. I don't deal with... Nobody in Tibet in the government even sees me. I see the Party Secretary Tenzin Shuji, [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན; Ch. shu ji] occasionally, but not much. They really have no interest, they have no interest.   

**A:**  Not in Beijing?   

**Q:**  In Beijing I don't see anybody either. Sometimes there's the United Front Bureau [Ch. tong zhan bu], some of the people there, but they just... they don't really have any interest. They translate what I write, but they're not interested in my opinion. I just wrote a long paper on this issue, on the contemporary issue [question not finished]   

**A:**  Because you have a very good knowledge now, you traveled and you researched and you made a tremendous effort. It's very good, but I think some of these Chinese leadership, they should listen to people like you and, you know, it's a pity. In the last so many years they never reached a good, balanced way of thinking, the Chinese. Because in Beijing, in my experience, most of them they don't have power. For everything they have to go and ask Deng Xiaoping. And Deng Xiaoping has a particular, strange behavior. He promises and he changes, and he changes all the time, he never keeps his words. And first he is talking to us, saying everything can be discussed, accepting Tibetan independence. O.K., we agreed, I agreed, the Dalai Lama agreed, and within that framework we are talking and talking, nothing. First, we had agreed saying Tibetans who have good knowledge about Tibetan language and English can go back and participate in teaching, that was agreed. And then, eventually, that again was dropped, changed, some excuse. And then also agreed we can send two of the Dalai Lama' representatives-more or less not permanently stationed in Lhasa, but stationed in Lhasa-traveling to some areas and trying to keep in close contact with his own people as well as Chinese officials in Lhasa until the return of the Dalai Lama. And that was also dropped. And then comes to... in Deng Xiaoping's words, he promises, but then, sometimes, gradually his subordinate officers are asking, saying these things cannot be promised, this cannot be agreed, this has to be changed, and then he changes like that. So I think all the officials in the Chinese government who are handling with the United Front Office, they all have no powers, they have to go and ask him.   

**Q:**  I just wrote a long piece, probably a lot of it is wrong because I don't have a lot of information, but I'll send you a copy, it's coming out in a couple of weeks. On the contemporary thing. It gives some history but it gives a solution, a compromise that I think could meet the interests of both the Chinese and the Tibetans. And it's very negative about what's going on in Tibet, I mean I think the Chinese are doing terrible things there, and unnecessary. But I see there is a split between the Chinese government going way back between a more moderate wing-which I think was Mao Zedong in the 1950's-and then the more hard-line view, which is "let's just do what we did to the people in China, let's do the same to Tibetans," just reforms and that. And that came up again in 1980, with Hu Yaobang was a return to the more moderate form of, I think, the earlier Mao Zedong. But it had no support in Tibet, as far as I can see. Dorje Tseden [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་བརྟན] none of those people. Ragdi, any of them. They disliked those policies because they felt it would weaken them. And so I've heard many people in the party, lower down, tell me that they consider that Mao Zedong's moderate policy towards Tibet in the early 1950's was one of his biggest mistakes. And that led to the uprising, the Dalai Lama being in exile. From the Chinese government's point of view, now all this trouble they are having is because Mao Zedong was too nice. And that's the Chinese view of Tibet. Looking at it as an American, you can see if they just sent in the army, shot a lot of people, changed the government, taken over everything, right, they would have no problem now. In reality there is something to say about that, and that argument is still a live argument, I'm told, within the party.   

**A:**  I think [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  I mean, you know much better that I do, but [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yeah, you're right, maybe that they are thinking that way, but I think that the leadership who are directing the Tibetan policies in the 60's and 50's are not really thinking very carefully for the long-range interest of Tibet or China. I think, in a very haphazard way some actions were taken immediately, decisions are taken, kill, and suppress, and this and that, but not thinking for the long-range interest for China. I think because of that reason the leadership themselves, they are also... For instance, I mentioned, last year, a year before last, they say... we're talking about Tibet is being so much divided, Amdos, are... so many autonomous prefecture, Zhou, and then Ganzi [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས] Ngaba [Tib. རྔ་བ] and all that, abolishing of the Shikang province, and incorporation into Sichuan, the Ganzi and Ngaba. Then I asked the Wangzhao Guo, "why are these things... instead of Ganzi and Ngaba is 100% Tibetan speaking, and Tibetan people, why not join the Tibetan Autonomous Region, why incorporate with the Sichuan Province?" And I told Amdo Wangdor [Tib. དབང་རྡོར] there is so many mistakes in the past, so many things are done without very carefully thinking. I told him the Tibetan people today, because maybe they are not yet educationally developed, not educated, and they are still very much backward, but they will come, the Tibetan population in Kham and Amdo, they will definitely demand self-respect. Why make such forceful divisions? So it is very important for the Chinese government to consider, instead of dividing the Tibetans, they should unify the Tibetan population, Tibetan nationality. For instance, in the past, in Hrumbia, in Inner Mongolia, Hrumbia was incorporated, Heilungjiang, many years ago, and then, after Wu Lanfu's return to power in Mongolia as well as the central government, and then, again Hrumbia is taken away from Heilungjiang to incorporate into Inner Mongolia, that's the correct thing. And then, afterwards again, I think before the Cultural Revolution... during the Cultural Revolution they had taken away, after returned, then after a few years, again they took it away. And then after the Wu Lanfu's return, they again brought back these things. So these things are, I think correct, why these things are doing like that. And then they say that Tibet and Kham are not possible to be unified. I said why is it not possible? They say this is difficult, not possible. Then I mentioned to Wangzhao Guo, the present United Front Minister, why is this possible for Inner Mongolia to have Hrumbia taken away, again incorporated into Inner Mongolia, and again taken away and gave back twice. That's possible, o.k. And then about Ngaba and Ganzi it's possible to incorporate into Sichuan province, or even possible to incorporate into Tibet proper. So I think so many unreasonable, unthinkable, strange things happen. They can't even give a correct, justified reason.   

**Q:**  See, but I think that you hit on the real thing, there has to be trust. China and Beijing has to feel that their interests are safe in Tibet. Until they feel that there is trust, then it's not in their interests to really take risks anymore. And that's the problem: that the policies that have occurred since 1978 have been ones that have increased the feeling that the risk is too high in Beijing, and so then the worst ones, with the worst ideas-the same ones like Fan Ming in the 50's who did not want this moderation policy, who wanted to just make central Tibet, Ü [Tib. དབུས] and Tsang [Tib. གཙང] you know this front and back Tibet-those same kind of ideas are still there. And so I think that if you deal with Chinese policy now, now you know that and I'm sure you tell people in Dharamsala that, but I don't know if they understand that the Chinese are different. And that there are ones with different views the same way that there are Tibetans with different views and Americans with different views on every issue. And you have to be as smart as they are and play to the ones whose views can get you something. But you may have to give up something, temporarily. Maybe not for a hundred years.   

**A:**  I think its very true because, you know, like some of the Chinese, like the Chinese ambassador in Delhi.   

