# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0057.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 64  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ] is an older brother of the Dalai Lama. In this interview he discusses some issues in the modern political history of Tibet and what he did from 1950-1959, including when he briefly returned to Tibet in 1951-52.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0057_04/H_0057_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Before I ask you about the specifics of 1951-52, I want to ask you what you did from 1950 to 1959 and then I will come back to the specifics of the 51-52 period.   

**A:**  In February of 1952, I went from America to India and then to Lhasa. During this period my mother was living in Kalimpong, from 1951-52 when the Dalai Lama was in Yadong and then went back to Lhasa. She had heard that I was probably coming and so she was waiting for me. So I went to Lhasa with my mother. I stayed a few months in Lhasa and then escaped to India.   

**Q:**  Where were you in 1950?   

**A:**  In 1950, I was in Taiwan. The Taiwan Government detained me for 1 year and 4 months. They didn't allow me to go out and they wanted me to stay and work in the country.   

**Q:**  Why did they ask you to stay?   

**A:**  They were suspicious that I would go to China and make relations with the Chinese Communists. So they asked me to stay and I stayed for 1 year and 4 month.   

**Q:**  From Taiwan, where did you go?   

**A:**  I went to America. From September 1951 I went to the States and then went to India in February, stayed a few days, and went to Lhasa with my mother.   

**Q:**  The Taiwan government did not allow you to leave or what? Were you under a kind of a house arrest?   

**A:**  No, not house arrest, but they were not giving me an exit permit. So I was not allowed to leave Taiwan Island. Within Taiwan I could go anywhere. I was not confined to a house, although one could say house arrest if one wants to give a strong interpretation.   

**Q:**  Then you went to the States?   

**A:**  Yes, to the States and then came to India and then to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay at Lhasa?   

**A:**  From the 2nd Tibetan month to the end of the 5th month. Then via the southern area, via Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང] I came to India in about the 6th or 7th month of 1952.   

**Q:**  After that until 1959, where did you stay?   

**A:**  I was permanently in Darjeeling. From the 8th month of 1952 until the Dalai Lama came in 1959.   

**Q:**  I want to ask you this. When you went to Tibet in 51 or 52, who were the people in power, the decision making group? What were there ideas, their agenda? You must have also met some Chinese leaders. What were they thinking and what did they say?   

**A:**  During this period the main person was the Dalai Lama. Under the Dalai Lama were Sitsab Lama Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and Sitsab Lukhangwa [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ]. Under that was the Kashag consisting of Surkhang, Ngabö, Dombor [Tib. གདོང་པོར], Shasur and Lhalu. As far as I remember, there were 5 of them. During this period when I arrived in Lhasa, I first went to meet the two Sitsab. What I was telling them was mainly, since the Chinese army was daily arriving in increasing numbers. During this period there was a lot of commotion [Tib. ཟིང་ཆང] in Lhasa. The commotion was created by petitions from numerous dzong and estates by the general public who were gravely concerned about their welfare. The petitions were presented to the Kashag, and probably to the Sitsab and the Chinese were also receiving them. From the numerous dzong and areas, the main reason why the people were concerned was that they stated that they do not accept the 17-Point Agreement. Their second demand was that the Chinese army cannot remain in Tibet and must withdraw. What the petition stated was that the 17-Point Agreement can not administer and protect the rights of the Tibetan people, the status of the Dalai Lama as well as the power of the Tibetan Government. So if we continue in this fashion, the status and power of both the Dalai Lama and the Government will be weakened and so this is not acceptable. They stated that it is necessary to have a new agreement since the present one will not be accepted. The second demand was for the withdrawal of the Chinese army, particularly as it had a tremendous effect on the rising price of daily necessities and there is a serious inflation thus causing difficulties for the people. So this is what seems to be their main demand and this was the situation in Lhasa at the time I was meeting the two Sitsab. Since I had been abroad for so many years; I left in 1944 [actually 1946] and only returned in 1952, I wanted to pay my respects and greet the two Sitsab who were the political leaders of the government. This was one reason why I went to meet them. Secondly, based on my experience abroad, the situation in China, and the way the communists thought, I told them that we the Tibetan government, under the leadership of the Dalai Lama, the 2 Sitsab and the Kashag must take the initiative for land reforms. Our land system in Tibet was very ancient and nothing really had changed. Not only for the betterment of the living conditions of the Tibetans, but I saw a great danger that the Chinese will use the land reform issue to meddle in our affairs if we don't take the initiative. We should do the land reforms completely and the lands should belong to the people and reform the system of the society into a good one. If these were begun, then the Chinese will find it difficult to instigate between our people. I stated to the two Sitsab that they must do this and you should report this to the Dalai Lama. They said that what I had said was very important and that they will give it due consideration. Secondly, what I was also telling them was about the way the CCP leaders were thinking and that there were many troubles inside China which all gave the impression that in the future Tibet will face difficulties and there will be much instigation and stirring up troubles [Tib. མདའ་དཀྲུག་ཕུ་དཀྲུག]. Therefore, it would not be good if you don't be careful. So the most important is to proceed with the land reforms and also the Tibetans should have solidarity. Otherwise, in the future, there will be difficulties ahead. This is what I was emphasizing. As I saw it, we were heading for a clash between the Tibetan government and the Chinese authorities in Tibet. The concerns expressed by the Tibetan public and the conduct and the thoughts of the Chinese were heading for a severe danger. Therefore the land reform really must be implemented immediately. What the two Sitsab said was that such talk should not be mentioned in public, although the question of land reform is not much of a problem. Ideas stating that we will not have good relations with the Chinese in the future are something that should not be said publicly since even the Kashag is impure and unreliable [Tib. ཁྲ་ཁྲ་བ་ཁྲ] The Kashag cannot just meet concerning such matters since they will immediately go and report to the Chinese. So any talk that will hurt the Chinese should not be mentioned. Whatever you have to say tell us not anyone else. So regarding all these questions, since I have arrived, I said that I will meet government officials, the Kashag and the Chinese authorities. They said that that was good and that most importantly if I could inform them about what the Chinese were saying and thinking. So at this time I met a number of Chinese officials like the main Chinese representative Zhang Jingwu (Zhang Daibiao), the Commander-in-Chief [Ch. si ling yuan] of the 18th Corps Zhang Guohua, Political Commissar, Tan Guansan, and there were 1-2 Vice Commander-in-Chiefs; Wang Qimei who probably came to Tibet from Sichuan-Yunnan and Fan Ming who came via Lanzhou. Most of the time I met them together and on a less frequent basis I met mainly Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan. What I would tell them is that as a result of the numerous Chinese army presence in Tibet, the Tibetan people have very well expressed their concerns and reacted. However, you should not be alarmed and stir up trouble and instead take a careful consideration of the situation and handle the situation calmly. I was always trying to persuading them that it is not conducive to be suspicious and aggressive [Tib. ངར]. What they told me is that the strong reactions and numerous petitions from all over Tibet for the revocation of the 17-Point Agreement and the withdrawal of the army are outrageous and that this is the handiwork of the imperialists and that the two Sitsab were behind the whole thing. I told them that this is absolutely not correct, that the two Sitsab are not behind this and they were not pushing it. The natural apprehension of the Tibetan people was that all of them fear that it would effect the power of Dalai Lama and his government. And secondly, because of the presence of too many military forces, there was large-scale inflation since the procurement for the military was only done from the local area. It was these reasons that the people were agitated; the imperialists didn't incite the two Sitsab at all. It is not good to suspect like this. So I was requesting them to handle this issue calmly and carefully. I always used to tell them that you Chinese have always insisted that the Tibetans and the Chinese are like brothers. If that is so, then you should take the position of the elder brother and you must persuade the younger brother. If you do things recklessly and thoughtlessly [Tib. ཏོ་རོ་མོ་རོ], it would not be good at all. So this is what I always used to tell them. When I went to see the two of them many times, the two officers used to say that they are going to send the army to arrest the two Sitsab. I said that you should never do such a thing since the Tibetan people will be deeply disappointed. Of course, you have the means to do it, you have the guns and the arms and you can send the soldiers and arrest Lukhangwa by force, but the Tibetan people will be very hurt. Beside that, both you Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua will have a bad reputation. It is not an easy matter since the relations between the Tibetan and the Chinese is an historical one of over several thousand years. The Tibetan population is very close to the Chinese. I used to say this. For instance, if one white man, a Muslim and a Chinese and a Tibetan get together. If each invites the other to dine, from my perspective the Tibetan will first go to the Chinese house. Since, in the past we had the many relation mentally, so there is something like a closeness of the minds. If you now say you are going to immediately "kill and cut" you will destroy this centuries old feeling of love and racial harmony between the Tibetan and the Chinese. So you should think about it carefully." So Zhang Daibiao said, "Well you are always saying that these two Sitsab are not the running dogs of the imperialist. But take for example last night. Surkhang Wangchen Gelek [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] came to see me last night and he told me "Zhang Daibiao, you are a stupid man. Why are you angry with the actors in a movie and get all worked up about them? It is useless to get angry with them. You have to inquire about the person who made the movie." So Zhang Daibiao said he asked Surkhang who are the makers. Surkhang told him that it was the two Sitsab. Zhang Daibiao said "Even Surkhang in the Kashag came after dark to my house and told me this." I told him, "It is impossible for the two Sitsab to be agents of imperialists. If you don't believe me, why don't you invite Lukhangwa one day in front of us all and ask him if America is located east or west of Tibet and he hardly would not have any idea where it is located. So leave aside the question of being an agent, he will not even have a clue as to where America is located. If Surkhang told you that then he just felt like saying it. It is just a tactic to sow dissection. So you should be steady, stable and careful [Tib. བབ་བརླིང་བརྟན་གསུམ] So for many months I was there I had a lot of contact with the Chinese. His Holiness the Dalai Lama at times used to tell me, "You have a lot of contact with the Chinese, what are they saying?" Even the two Sitsab used to ask me. So during this period the situation in Lhasa was very grim because His Holiness the Dalai Lama and the two Sitsab were left in one situation up there and the Kashag was absolutely unreliable. For example, Ngabö Sawangchemmo also told me. In situations like this, he was a good man. He was never the type of person to sneak out quietly at dusk to report the proceedings of the Kashag to the Chinese. Of course he had his share of problems with the signing of the 17- Point Agreement, and went to China from Chamdo, etc. But he is a much more dignified person. He doesn't go at night and report what was discussed yesterday in the Kashag. Surkhang Sawangchemmo used to go and report to the Chinese. Zhang Daibiao himself told me. Likewise, Zhang Daibiao also told me that Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ] Dzasa also used to come and report. He was actually not in the Kashag but he used to ask the tsipön about discussion of the Kashag and drungtsi meetings. Zhang Daibiao was friendly and open with me and he used to tell me that. One day Ngabö told me that one day he stressed [Tib. བཙིར་བདར] and said in the Kashag, "Whatever we discussed in the Kashag and with the drungtsi is leaking out. It is terrible! How exactly it happens that immediately the Chinese knew about it. Who actually reports to the Chinese. And at that time, the Künsangtse Tsipön cried at the drungtsi's discussion and said, " When I went home, my brother [Künsangtse Dzasa] is insisting and asking me about the discussion of the Kashag and the drungtsi and if I did not tell him then he would blame me saying that I am keeping the secret. If I told him then he goes to report to the Chinese. This is very terrible." [laughter] So, while I was at Lhasa, I also meet Sawang Ngabö who related to me in detail what transpired at Chamdo and the 17 Point Agreement, and how the situation was one of no choice at all. He also related the Tibetan situation at that time and how he was purposely sent as Dome Jikyab to antagonize [Tib. བཀྱག་བཀྱག་བྱས] him. There must be some group, maybe Taktra Labrang and Surkhang and others, maybe some didn't like each other and they were malicious [Tib. བསམ་གནག་བྱས] to each other. Sawang Lhalu at that time was a new member of the Kashag. Yuthok Sawangchemmo had the Kashag, rank but he never used to attend the Kashag, he sort of quietly avoided and he was at that time staying at Taring house. I went to see him briefly too. I went to see him at the request of His Holiness the Dalai Lama who asked me to go and see what he was doing since he reportedly doesn't attend the Kashag and is hiding himself and nor working and that it would be good if he did. His excuse was that he was sick and he was avoiding and keeping quite. So at that time the two Sitsab were sincerely working with the wishes of His Holiness and for the interest of the Tibetan people, but the Kashag it seemed was so difficult to work. But it was just not the Kashag alone, so many others, for example Depön Phüntso Tashi [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས], my sister Tsering Dolma [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ] and other aristocrats were courted here and there by the Chinese, given salaries in dayan and were too preoccupied with money and everybody was being close with the Chinese. Only a few were not. However, my impression of your grandfather was very good. He invited me to dine with him twice and there were Chinese officers as well there. He was cordial with them but never overly close to the Chinese like the saying, "Almost Entering the butt" [Tib. རྐུབ་ལ་མ་འཛུལ་ཙམ]. He did not hold any position but there were others like Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] and various lamas who were being extraordinarily close to the Chinese, flattering and "sucking up" to them. But your grandfather was not doing that and he was good. This was my impression. So finally, in view of the total situation it was a grim one with the people in difficulty, His Holiness the Dalai Lama too and so I thought that If I stayed in Lhasa the Chinese would just use me. The Chinese were saying that we will support His Holiness the Dalai Lama and you and we will together clean up the bad elements of the society in Tibet. It was difficult for me to accept this because in my mind thanks to His Holiness the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan people, an entity like Yabshi was made possible. His Holiness was recognized by the regent Reting and the Tibetan people have accepted him and our family, so we are grateful to His Holiness the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan people. So instead of serving and being beneficial for the Tibetan people, if I let the Chinese use me and join with the Chinese and be against the Tibetan people and the government, this was something impossible for me to do or accept. On the other hand if I stayed in Tibet the present situation was such that it seemed necessary to challenge the Chinese. But to do that the means strength, and support was not there, for the Chinese had a large army and various means at their disposal and we can't challenge them. But to collaborate with the Chinese and be against the Tibetan public was to me out of the question, besides, it would be against the karmic law of cause and effect. So, thirdly, examining the situation, it looked like things would not get better, but worse. It seemed to me that we did not even have any relations with the Indian Government. So I thought if I left we could establish some relations with India and through India with other countries, at least to voice our cause abroad. As far as the Chinese are concerned, they could very well destroy us, kill us and cut us and nobody would have known about it. So I thought I would go to India and begin some work. Even though nothing may be accomplished immediately, later if the Chinese really cause much suffering there would be a place of refuge if we did leave Tibet. India was the closest neighbor and if we had no relations with India and in case we had to flee and if India refuses, it would be difficult. So I thought that it would be a good idea if I quietly sneaked out to India and begin some work, prepare the ground in case we had to flee. And even if the situation did not come to that, I could, through Pandit Nehru, express the sentiments of the Tibetans to the Chinese Government. So with these in mind, in the 7th or 8th month of 1952, via Jayü [Tib. བྱ་ཡུལ] and Jora [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར],[I left]. What I [said] was that I am doing [land reforms]. The was that the Yabshi family had 5 estates. One was in Tölung Seshing [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང་ཟས་ཞིམ], another in Ramagang, another near Gyangtse called Drongtse [Tib. འབྲོང་རྩེ], and Jayü and Jora. So the question of land reform I was beginning to do it. I went to Seshing and redistributed the land to the people. The grain that had been piled up in storehouses, were distributed to everyone. I did the same thing in Ramagang. So I had a good excuse. What Zhang Daibiao was saying was that I should take the Youth Delegation and go to China for the 1952 Youth Conference and then to Vienna as a member of the Chinese Youth Delegation to attend the International Youth Conference. He had received a telegram from Mao Zedong in this regard. So I said that I will definitely go, but first I have work on land reform at my estates at Jora and Jayü. They told me to return soon to which I said I will do so definitely. So I went to the estates and began the land reforms and then quietly I sneaked out to India. So that's how I remained from 1952 onwards. That's a concise rendition of my story and the situation in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  After the signing of the 17-Point in 1951 there was a sort of an agreement to work together. Was there a deliberate policy on the one hand for the Kashag to work within the confines of the Agreement while the two Sitsab and the people began to pursue an independence approach?   

**A:**  At that time, mainly His Holiness the Dalai Lama is around and so is Ngabö and Lhalu who are still alive, the people who were acting running the day-to-day activities. So you must meet them, it would be very good. I for my part have related my own personal story to you. But at this time, His Holiness the Dalai Lama was in charge of the local Tibetan government along with the two Sitsab and the Kashag. The Central Chinese government's representative is Zhang Jingwu. Likewise the Commander-in-Chief of the 18th Corps was Zhang Guohua. However, as I see it, I don't know much since I was not a government official but my impression was that the Chinese were encroaching on the internal government functions, etc., and I think Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were interfering a lot and thus leading to clashes. But actually how it actually transpired, the day-to-day functioning, if you ask those who were the members of the Kashag, then you will know. For my part I related my own personal story hoping that it will be of use to you.   

**Q:**  I am not very certain of this but when you came to Kalimpong, yourself, Shakabpa, Ganden Villa Khenjung, Yuthok and Phünkhang began an organization. What was the plan or agenda of the group?   

**A:**  I came from Tibet in 1952 and most importantly I felt that at Kalimpong a number of us Tibetans should get together and start an organization, a tsogpa. The Chinese were making it very difficult for the Tibetans and we felt that it was important to publicize the Tibetan issue and the Chinese conduct. So for these reasons we discussed and began an organization. There was Shakabpa, Khenjung Lobsang Gyaltsen, Phünkhang Lhajam, Yuthok Rinzinla [Tib. རིག་འཛིན]. in the beginning, Yuthok was not there at the outset. Dhando [Tib. དར་མདོ] Rimpoche and some traders and Tibetans who had come from Tibet. Later, Gyantse Palchö Thubten Nyinje [Tib. དཔལ་ཆོས་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད] and the tsidrung Champa Wangdü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུས]. They were sent by the Lord Chamberlain Phala and there were many people working. So the idea was to publicize the Tibetan issue.   

**Q:**  At this time, the U.S. was taking an interest in Tibet. How did this relationship with the U.S. begin, what messages were they sending and who in India were relaying the U.S. messages, and how effective was it?   

**A:**  This is a long story and today I won't be able to finish telling you about it. Yes, I was in India and established relations with the Indian Government and the people had established an organization to publicize the Tibetan issue. On the other hand we were also trying to establish relations with Taiwan and America - so we were doing it from three fronts. From my perspective, relations with the latter two could only be done secretly since it was difficult to do these formally. So in this way I was able to establish wide relations with the Guomindang [in Taiwan] and the U.S. and there were a lot of discussions. This I will have to tell you later since I have to go and meet someone at another office. So maybe we should today leave it with the Tibet issue and later whether it concerns America or other we can talk about it.   

