# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0057.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Unknown (Phone Interview)  
**Date of Interview:** 14 April 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted, recorded, and transcribed in English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 66  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ] is an older brother of the 14th Dalai Lama. In this interview, he discusses some issues in the modern political history of Tibet. Focusing mainly on the 1950s, he describes some of his involvement in negotiations with the Tibetan government, the Chinese government, and the Indian government. He also discusses the circumstances of his move to India, negotiations with India regarding the Dalai Lama's exile, the C.I.A.'s involvement in the Dalai Lama's exile, and the CIA's involvement in intelligence operations in Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0057_01/H_0057_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Was Jenkhentsisum an organization? How did it start? When did it start? Often Tibetan organizations have a document and they (the members) put their seals on it. Did you have kind of a loose relationship between you and Shakabpa and Khenjung?   

**A:**  [English has been left uncorrected]. In 1952, when I was in Lhasa some of my family members decided I should go to India secretly to try and establish some kind of contact with the Indian government. That was mainly my mother and my brother and myself. Nobody else. The main reason at that time was that the situation in Tibet was very serious because the majority of the population was very much against the Chinese occupation forces. You know, the People's Association's [mimang] movement. By that time, the government of Tibet and the Tibetan people were completely cut off, isolated. No contact with the outside world and particularly, nobody knew what is going on inside Tibet. So we realized that it was very important that one of us went to India and established contact with the Indian government to try to promote some kind of understanding and try to inform the government of India and other countries what was going on in Tibet. What the Chinese were doing. So my main purpose was to go and do that kind of a job. So when I reached India, I tried to make contact with our own Tibetans in exile, like Shakabpa; Khenjung - Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན] followed afterward, much, much later. My initial job was to organize and establish contact among the Tibetans, such as the Maharaja of Sikkim and his sisters, and some of our Tibetan officials like Shakabpa, Phunkhang [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང] and quite a number of others.   

**Q:**  When you said your brother above, did you mean the Dalai Lama or Lobsang Samden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན]?   

**A:**  Lobsang Samden. He was the jigyab khembo, working in the government. So my mother, myself and Lobsang Samden, we decided it was very vital for us to have some kind of contact with the outside world so they would know what the Chinese were doing and how the Tibetans were suffering. So my main purpose with going to India was to organize some kind of Tibet group and try to mobilize international opinion. When I started this contact, then people started calling us Jenkhentsisum. It was not an organization. It was more the leading members of the Tibetan exile community in India.   

**Q:**  Did that change? It seems that after 1957 when the Dalai Lama went back to Tibet, it seems that more organization was attempted to be done.   

**A:**  Jenkhentsisum, from 1952-56, it more or less became a symbol of Tibetans in exile, in Kalimpong. We three were the leading members and then there were quite a lot of other residents of Kalimpong, Darjeeling, and Sikkim.   

**Q:**  But it seems you were trying to do things with the Indian government, but what I'm not sure is, like, whether all three would meet to say someone should go to meet the Sikkim Political Officer in Gangtok, or whether you went on your own, and those two went on their own? Or you would have some more [internal] organization?   

**A:**  We three were leading in the approach toward Indian officials in Sikkim, or Delhi, and through the media, the Indian and Western correspondents, to try to publicize the situation in Tibet. For that reason, we jointly, more or less, approached the press as well as approached the Indian government. India had a very good relationship with China, so we urged them to influence the Chinese to restrain their actions. At that time, the Chinese generals, like Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan, were very much unreasonable and very aggressive and very much acting imperialistically. That's why I left Tibet and Lhasa, because I was really disgusted with what they were doing, and I could foresee from 1952 what was going to eventually happen. So it was dangerous for Tibetans if no contact [was made with the] outside world and no one outside knew about the Tibet situation. So we needed some contact with the outside world [saying how the] Chinese were doing all kinds of things in Tibet. Because of that, we more or less organized among ourselves in exile, in India, to approach the international community through the press or through the Indian officials. Mainly, we hoped the Indian government could persuade the Chinese since they had diplomatic relations and Nehru had very good relations with the Chinese by that time. At least, the Indian government claimed to have very good relations with China. The whole thing started in that way. Nobody encouraged us to come out and do this. We ourselves did it because we disagreed with the behavior of the Chinese Army in 1952.   

**Q:**  In Tibet, your main relationship seemed to be with Drönyerchemmo Phala. Later, of course, it was with the Chushigandru people, Andrutsang [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང] and those people.   

**A:**  That was later, much later. Drönyerchemmo (Lord Chamberlain) Phala was not at the place. We didn't know much about him, except through my connection with the Dalai Lama and the two regents, Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and Lukhangwa. Phala is much younger. He didn't come into the picture at all during this particular period. He comes into the picture probably in 1954, and in 1955, he accompanied the Dalai Lama to Beijing China. On their way back I think they established contact with Khambas and Amdos and Eastern Tibet during that period. Otherwise, he didn't come into the picture in 1952.   

**Q:**  So who were you dealing with in 1952 to get support and try to find out what was going on? Was there any specific person?   

**A:**  You mean inside Tibet?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  You see, I was in Lhasa for about five months and staying in Lhasa. I established various talks with the Chinese as well as with the Tibetan government officials, mainly the Kashag members and the sitsab. At that time, the majority of Tibetan officials were collaborating with the Chinese. The Chinese were giving them dayan. The two sitsab and the common people were very much against the Chinese, but the majority of Tibetan official nobility were collaborating with the Chinese generals in Lhasa because the Chinese paid them. I don't know, there was some kind of payroll without even very much work. And all the Tibetan nobility got large sums of dayan, even my sister and my sister-in-law.   

**Q:**  Yes, they were doing that even in the monasteries. Since Phala became more important after 1954, they were sending back and forth [question not finished]   

**A:**  Phala seems to come into the picture because after the Dalai Lama's 1956 visit to India, during the Buddha Jayanti, we established contact with Phala because he had more or less the same thinking as us because he realized after the Dalai Lama's trip to China and Eastern Tibet the very aggressive and unreasonable policy towards Tibet. More or less, he thought along the same line as us. We spoke a lot about what was happening and what the Chinese were doing, and we also complained that it was better for the Dalai Lama not to return to Tibet, [it was] better [for him] to remain. Since Phala was the drönyerchemmo, he was very much close to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Was he in favor of staying in India or going back?   

**A:**  He was very much in favor of staying in India, but not very openly, because his position prohibited him from being too open.   

**Q:**  Were you disappointed when Nehru recommended that the Dalai Lama go back?   

**A:**  Of course. You see, in 1952-54, we reached some kind of understanding with the Indian government through the Political Officer in Sikkim, a person called Aba Pant. They, more or less, requested for the three of us; Shakabpa, Khenjung and me, to persuade the Dalai Lama to pay a visit to India. Starting in 1954 and 1955 — You remember the later Maharajah of Sikkim? He went to Tibet to invite the Dalai Lama to pay a visit to India. At that time, we all talked to the Indian government officials through Aba Pant. If Nehru agreed, if the Dalai Lama came to India, if he remained in India, if India, Nehru, could act between the Tibetans and the Chinese, persuading the Chinese of their wrong policies — If that happened, and if the Dalai Lama could stay in India, if Mr. Nehru allowed this, if that happened, then we said we would try to persuade the Dalai Lama to accept the Indian invitation and to come to India to visit. That was around 1955. The Indian government, through the Sikkim Political Officer, Mr. Aba Pant, they agreed. They assured us that they would allow the Dalai Lama to stay back. This was after the Buddha Jayanti. Whatever the Dalai Lama wanted to do in India — They would offer one of those Maharaja Palaces if the Dalai Lama stayed. Then Indian government would try to act as an in-between to try and persuade the Chinese about our difficulties; our problems in Tibet. Because of this agreement, we went all out to try and persuade everybody, including the Dalai Lama, to accept this invitation to come to India and to stay back ( in India). That was all pre-decided in 1955 before the Dalai Lama's arrival in 1956.   

**Q:**  So the Indian government's idea was that if the Dalai Lama stayed in India, then they could act as a middleman and try to negotiate better terms, rather than support an armed uprising?   

**A:**  That's right. Not to support an armed uprising. They would act as a mediator between Tibet and China and persuade the Chinese to give up those wrongdoings; their interfering with internal Tibetan affairs... Because of that understanding, the Dalai Lama accepted that invitation and went to India and visited. Then, afterward, Mr. Nehru changed his mind and really betrayed us, pushing the Dalai Lama back... Because of politics. The Indian government, because of — what do you call it? the border problem. They had a very calculated behavior and exploited the situation of our problems. Of course, we didn't know ourselves. We sincerely believed, thinking that India could help us with our difficulties in Tibet. They promised. But afterward, when Mr. Nehru changed his mind and pushed the Dalai Lama back, it gave us such a shock. It was a very difficult situation. And I even told the Indian government officials in Delhi that it was a disaster because the Dalai Lama was very much exposed in India. The way he was speaking about his position and about the Tibetan situation, the Chinese would have been very angry about the Dalai Lama's speeches and visit to India. I told the Indian government that if they pushed him back, that meant they were going to murder him and then the situation would be very explosive and couldn't be controlled. The Tibetan situation was already very serious between 1955, 1956. There were so many fighting in Eastern Tibet in Kham. The whole situation was very sad. They needed to go much deeper. The Chinese, how they acted from 1955 to '59 in eastern Tibet, it really pushed the Tibetans to the point of no return. They were very backward and ignorant and emotional — it was a very desperate situation and without knowing the consequences, they fought back against the Chinese. And the Chinese were adopting a very, very unreasonable approach to the various problems of Kham and Amdo between 1955-56-57, and then in '58 and '59. Then from 1959 to 1966, there were more horrible things happening with what the Chinese were doing in Tibet. You should, Mr. Goldstein, study this very carefully. I think this is very serious. Still, few people know about these things. What really happened in 1955, 1959, and the Dalai Lama's departure, and before the Cultural Revolution. So many frightening things happened all over the place in Tibet. Like General Custer killing all those red Indians.   

**Q:**  In this book, I am going up to 1959 and in the next book, I am going up to 1979 because there were many killings in 1969.   

**A:**  From 1959-1966, the most terrible things prevailed. If the Chinese themselves knew, they themselves would be ashamed. It was absolutely premeditated killing and robbing and looting. It is unfair if we do not write all of this truthfully. Nobody asked us to do these things. We ourselves were pushed by the Chinese into doing them [means rebelling]. As for myself, I was very pro-China, I was very fond of the Chinese people. Only a few Chinese individuals handling the Southwest Bureau of the military area, until today, were responsible for these terrible deeds, not the Chinese people.   

**Q:**  I know earlier the Indian government was training wireless operators through the Jenkhentsisum, [right]?   

**A:**  The Indians were using some kind of tactics and [were] not sincere, and they were exploiting the situation and we were falling into their stupid trap.   

**Q:**  Then the Americans come into this and it seems [question not finished]   

**A:**  The Americans came into this much later. Because once — as soon as I came out of Tibet in 1952, I wrote to the American president, Mr. Eisenhower, and also to Generalissimo Chiang Kaishek, informing them about the plight of the Tibetan situation.   

**Q:**  What did they reply?   

**A:**  They were very much interested and sympathetic, and they sent all sorts of emissaries to come and see me from 1952-1955. But nothing happened. Then afterward, after 1955, the Americans were taking some interest and trained some of our people. All these things are now well-known.   

**Q:**  Did the US become interested after the revolt in Kham and Amdo started?   

**A:**  I think in 1956 they started to become interested. I think that then they started to realize that the things we said were starting to come true. Then they started training some of our people and helping some of them. The Nationalistic Chinese also tried to exploit our situation in the initial stage, but nothing happened. But the Indian government, they, of course, knew exactly what was going on. So they exploited the situation. They were not really interested in helping Tibet.   

**Q:**  The US provided very little help in the early years up to when the Dalai Lama left.   

**A:**  If you consider all that happened in the entire situation, American assistance was very limited.   

**Q:**  The Indians were manipulating and trying to do their own things. The Americans in the CIA who spoke with me said that they didn't try to mislead [you] or the other people they were talking to and they said, "We are not going to give you troops."   

**A:**  Americans were not really misleading [us] and exploiting our situation. I think that by that time, they wanted to do whatever little they could. They were sincere. The Indians were really exploiting the situation and using Tibet to make gains in their relations with China and their border problem.   

**Q:**  What did the Americans say they were going to do for Tibetans before 1959?   

**A:**  To some extent, Americans, looking at the situation, and US policy, they were trying to assist the Tibetan resistance and encourage the Dalai Lama to leave Tibet and come to India. After 1956? Yes, after 1956. The Americans also gave us a lot of empty promises. They said that after the Dalai Lama went into exile, they would help until Tibet gained its independence. These were really very secret talks with me and various American organizations. All these things were betrayed. The Indians betrayed the Tibetans and the Americans also did so. We were very simple and naive and didn't know the various consequences... Being pressured tremendously by the Chinese. In 1952, there was no reason for the Chinese authorities to be in Lhasa. Those generals were very emotional and very erratic, and very bad. I never saw that kind of Chinese in my lifetime. They were crude without proper education, a very bad group of people. The worst was Zhang Jingwu... his personality and his behavior. He was such a crude man.   

**Q:**  I met Fan Ming in China.   

**A:**  Fan Ming is another one. He is much more rubbish. Now that he is getting old, maybe he is better. At that time, Fan Ming was not so important. Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan — of course Fan Ming and Wang Qimei were always there and listening what they were talking about [laughter].   

**Q:**  In 1959, do you think the Americans let Tibetans down by not following [through with] what they had promised, or was the American failure after the Chushigandru got the big operation?   

**A:**  In 1969, Americans came to tell me that they had to discontinue all Tibetan assistance. Henry Kissinger made a promise to the Chinese, and the Chinese made this a precondition. One condition was to cut off diplomatic ties with Taiwan. A second precondition was to cease support for the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan resistance. So in order to establish diplomatic relations with China — the US has already given in to the Chinese. Since then, they gave up and ceased all support for the Tibetan resistance after 1969.   

**Q:**  Some of the Chushigandru told me that they blame the US and you for 1958-59, for not providing them the arms they needed to fight the Chinese. I do not think that is fair, but how would you answer them [if they said] that, that you only sent a few arms and it wasn't enough, so we couldn't fight the Chinese and we lost. Is that fair?   

**A:**  No. That is very untrue. Maybe some of our people are exaggerating. Whatever assistance we required by that time — the US did provide some of them [with weapons], but maybe not as much to an extent as our people needed. Maybe they needed more. Maybe it was something like that. Otherwise, I do not think it was correct.   

**Q:**  I do not think so either, that is why I wanted to talk with you.   

**A:**  I think it is very important that we be very accurate about the situation. As far as I know, I think Americans did their best in this particular period. So it is wrong to give wrong information at this particular juncture.   

**Q:**  When I talk to people in Kham who were left in Tibet in prison, they say that the people who were dropped in Kham in 1959-60, they were trained and dropped in and did not come to take the leadership role, and say 'now we do this or that and this is the strategy.' Even in 1959 they came and said, "We are kind of here to help you do what you want to do, but it is up to you." Was that the US policy, that they were not sending in people to become leaders and organize people?   

**A:**  That is very correct. [They said] "Our main purpose was to try to help the leadership and the resistance inside Tibet. We are not sending people to lead them to fight the Chinese. They are going for training and going to be sent to be helpful to those resistance leaders inside Tibet in Eastern Tibet or Amdo. We never acted as leaders giving them guidance, except giving them some kind of help. That is our main purpose." They sent me many messengers from 1952 to '59 seeking assistance and [asking] for me to seek assistance from the international community. So my reason for coming to India in 1952 was mainly for that purpose. I don't claim I was leading or organizing [things]. No. It was a spontaneous, natural resistance of the Tibetan people to the wrong policy of Chinese to the desperate point of no return. How could you expect us to fight? We don't have any knowledge. It is absolutely foolish for us to say we know how to fight. We do not know how to fight. I was so disappointed in 1952 during my stay in Lhasa. Those Chinese did not listen to reason.   

**Q:**  What did you want them to do?   

**A:**  I was [trying to] persuade Zhang Jingwu, Zhang Guohua and Tan [Guansan] to take a very lenient and patient attitude to try and solve the problems — to not treat Tibetans as their enemy, to not treat Tibet like an occupied territory. Treat Tibetans like their younger brothers. They must patiently pursue a brotherly policy, like an elderly brother. "If you treat us as occupiers or as enemies, you are going to do a disservice to China. For the past 5,000 years, we have had a very good relationship between the Hans and Tibetans. If you do not behave today, you are going to destroy that relationship. Once the 5,000-year harmony and good relations are destroyed, it will not be easy to repair." I told this to General Zhang Jingwu and I am always trying to persuade them along this line.   

**Q:**  Do you agree that part of the problem was that the two sitsab were also very aggressive? They didn't have to be that way and negative with the Chinese generals from the first day. They helped create a bad atmosphere also.   

**A:**  What the Chinese were doing, maybe the communist system, I don't know, they were trying to disturb the relations between the villagers and officials, nobilities, lamas, monasteries and commercial groups, and they were trying to make them fight each other. They were trying to benefit [from] the divide and rule. They would exploit that situation. They were doing nothing else. That's why I was so disappointed in 1952 when I returned to Lhasa, in February.   

**Q:**  What do you think about 1958 when the Chushigandru, led by Gombo Tashi [Tib. མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས], [was] set up in Lhoka and started attacking the Chinese? It seems now, looking back, that they were much too early. They were not really organized. They didn't have good weapons. Did you and the US advise them to wait and not to do things because it was too early? Or did you think that was a good thing to do then? Or did they not listen to anyone at all?   

**A:**  We never advised them to go and fight. We always tried to get them to organize themselves and avoid direct confrontation with the Chinese. But they didn't listen to us. They went ahead without an organized way according to their convenience, and they also probably went to capture Tibetan government weapons and ammunition. I don't think they had any idea to fight against the Chinese. The Chinese were so scared and they tried to consolidate and concentrate in pockets. The Chushigandru took advantage of this and could roam around the countryside at will while the Chinese were located in some pocket. Tibet is a large country, so it was very difficult for the Chinese to cover everywhere. They did not have that many troops.   

**Q:**  Did you tell them not to fight? To wait until organized?   

**A:**  No. What we were telling them was not to fight, and [we were] trying to persuade the Chinese to change through a different method by the Tibetan government or international community, like India. We never expected people would go and fight. But things were out of our control. We didn't have good communications also.   

**Q:**  One of the aims in 1957 of US was when they sent people to Samye was to collect intelligence: who were fighters, how many, what [did] the government want and what was Phala's plan, and resisting the Chinese. And the third thing was to set up cells, little secret groups which, some kind of organization widely spread throughout Tibet. Is that pretty accurate?   

**A:**  Yes, that is accurate.   

**Q:**  I heard that the government had no plan to do anything.   

**A:**  The government had no plan to resist or to fight the Chinese. They probably prayed for the Chinese to change their attitude [laughter].   

**Q:**  I also heard that they were unsuccessful with setting up little groups [cells] because the Chinese security was too much and no one trusted the other in Lhasa.   

**A:**  There was very poor communication. You had to go on horseback to deliver messages.   

**Q:**  So is what I said accurate?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  One thing the Dalai Lama told us was that Lhamo Tsering [Tib. ལྷ་མོ་ཚེ་རིང] told him that the CIA had arranged his escape routes in 1959, although the Dalai Lama says the decision to leave was entirely his own and he doesn't know about that. He said I should ask you.   

**A:**  That is not true. I don't know how Lhamo Tsering made that up. We didn't even know the Dalai Lama was escaping. I think the Dalai Lama was forced due to severe circumstances and then forced to escape to the southern part of Tibet. At that time, [there was a] large number of Tibetan resistance fighters in that area. But we didn't arrange how he should escape or what route he should take. We didn't know of his escape.   

**Q:**  I heard and believe that after the escape began, you were in contact with Litang Athar [Tib. ལི་ཐང་ཨ་དར].   

**A:**  That's correct. The Dalai Lama escaped, Athar and Lotse [Tib. བློ་ཚེ], our two men who were a radio team, they were in the southern part of Tibet. As soon as they contacted the Dalai Lama, then we knew which route, et cetera.   

**Q:**  I heard that you or the US was saying to the government in Tibet, saying try to hold on to an area of Tibet as a "free Tibet." That it would be important to leave some people in Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ] or somewhere as a free Tibet. That would serve as the basis of a free Tibet, but that was not successful and Chushigandru and everybody came out.   

**A:**  We never advised them to act that way. But the Tibetan government, the Kashag, and the other officials who were accompanying the Dalai Lama, were thinking of this - to hold on if possible, to hold on to part of southern Tibet. I, at least, never advised them that way.   

**Q:**  I thought that the initial idea was to set up Chushigandru in Pemakö [Tib. པད་མ་བཀོད], as this would be part of Tibet as a base, rather than operating from a foreign country in Nepal? That was not possible because no more troops left.   

**A:**  That was not possible, the Chinese were chasing everybody and it was difficult to do anything. So we never tried in Pemakö or that area.   

**Q:**  But weren't there conversations about that as a possible place?   

**A:**  No, I never had any conversation with anyone about that. Maybe something happened in that no man's land between India and Tibet. Even the Indians didn't know which area belonged to India and which area belonged to Tibet, particularly with those areas like Walung [Tib. ཝ་ལུང] and Dzachukha [Tib. རྫ་ཆུ་ཁ]. It is so complicated.   

**Q:**  When you were negotiating these things with the US to train people et cetera, did you then have to ask the Tibetan government or the Dalai Lama each thing? Like say the Americans were willing to [question not finished]   

**A:**  No, no. The Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government were not in the picture. Myself and Jenkhentsisum and Chushigandru, we were in the picture. The Tibetan government had no contact with the Americans at all. We also didn't have a direct contact with the Tibetan government. Indirectly, we had [one] through officials. The Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government was not involved with the CIA or with any American organizations.   

**Q:**  But you were in communication with Phala, weren't you?   

**A:**  Occasionally, we had some, and when the wireless operators reached Tibet, we had some, but otherwise, we didn't. I only acted on behalf of the Chushigandru, and I had messengers and had direct contact with Gombo Tashi. Not with the Tibetan government or any other officials, particularly the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I thought there was more contact with Phala.   

**A:**  No, we and Phala acted during the '56-57 Buddha Jayanti visit.   

