# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0057.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** (Phone Interview)  
**Date of Interview:** 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted, recorded, and transcribed in English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 66  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ] is an older brother of the Dalai Lama. In this interview he discusses the Tibetan government's attempt via its officials in its Nanjing office to persuade him to return to Lhasa from China, where he was then a student.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0057_03/H_0057_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  [takes place in the Bureau Office of Tibet in Nanjing in the late 1940s where he accidentally saw a cable from the Kashag about him] [Editor's note: the Englsih has been left uncorrected]. ... and (it) is concerned about me and when I'm returning to Tibet. Instructions coming from Kashag. And I tried to put that cable in my pocket and then I walked into their mahjong table. And then all of them are suddenly getting up saying, "Oh, Mr. Thondup, they called me Lhasey Kushab, [Tib. ལྷ་སྲས་སྐུ་ཞབས], you have come, very good. We have something very important to talk to you about." I told them, "Don't worry and let's talk about it slowly, so you play your mahjong." They said, "No, no, no, we're not going to play any more Mahjong," and they discontinued their mahjong and they asked me to go to their office. So I went to their office and they sit down there and they're saying that they are very worried about me and my future. They never mentioned anything about the cable. They told me they are very worried about my future and my welfare if I stayed too long in China. I said, "Why?!" They said because the civil war and all the disturbances in China. And then they said my father passed away and then my father is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གུང] A high title in the Tibetan government.">gung</a> [Tib. གུང] [a high title] that's a duke of Tibet. He has to be replaced. His title had to be taken over and no one else can accept the title except for myself. Since my mother is alone, I should go back now and take that job and title. And then I said, "Any other concerns?" And they said, "No, nothing else." And then-I am so naughty-I picked the cable out of my pocket and said, "What is this?" You know that particular cable that Kashag is quoting like that they said that the Dalai Lama's brother is remained too long it is going to be very, very complicated. It is not suitable for the interest of Tibet and the Tibetan government and the Tibetan people. So therefore whatever tactful method including whatever money can be spent to persuade him to return to Tibet. You know, that kind of language. Because I read my own Tibetan language. So I said, "You people are lying to me." They are all shocked that I already saw it. So they were very embarrassed. Because it was not a bad intention of Kashag and the government of Tibet. It was good intentions that wanted me to return because things are now very bad in this area, and nothing else. I was very angry and told them to tell Kashag to go to hell. I'm in China to study. I'm a student. I have nothing to do with the politics. Why does Kashag suspect me? Kashag should do something that is good for Tibet and for the country and for the interest of Tibet and for the welfare of the people of Tibet. And don't fight among themselves and don't suspect me in China. I'm studying in Chinese. I have nothing to do with the politics.   

**Q:**  That's an interesting story and I am sure your book will be interesting too.   

