# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0003.01  
##  : with Lobsang Phüntso [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཕུན་ཚོགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 10 August 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Lobsang Phüntso [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཕུན་ཚོགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 54  
**Date of Birth:**  ca. 1935  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lobsang Phüntso [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཕུན་ཚོགས] was a monk in Kundeling Monastery in Lhasa. In this interview, he discusses the process of becoming a monk in the old society and the daily routine of life in Kundeling Monastery.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0003_01/H_0003_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Lobsang la, you were a monk in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> was what? We were talking a moment ago, is what, you said it was a part of Drepung?   

**A:**  Part of Drepung, yes.   

**Q:**  In what way was it a part?   

**A:**  It belonged to Drepung's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Tratsang [Tib. སྒོ་མང་གྲྭ་ཚང].   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Tratsang?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So do the monks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> have to do anything with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Tratsang, or go there or anything like that?   

**A:**  Oh, no. The monks don't have to go there, but some monks first entered in Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> College and after that they came to Kundeling.   

**Q:**  Did they actually stay in Drepung for a while? Or did they just have to put their names in [the register]?   

**A:**  No, they didn't have to stay in Drepung, but some monks used to stay in Drepung for a moment, and after that they came to Kundeling.   

**Q:**  What was the difference? Why did they do that?   

**A:**  I don't know, but most of the monks don't have to go to Drepung Monastery first. They can come directly to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> from the outside, from any monastery, but Kundeling Rimpoche had to study in Drepung Monastery when he was young. Then, when he finished his studies, he came to his Labrang, Kundeling.   

**Q:**  And <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚེ་མཆོག་གླིང] 1.The name of the incarnate lama who had served as regent. 2. The monastery of that lama in Lhasa.">Tsecholing</a> [Tib. ཚེ་མཆོག་གླིང], where was he from?   

**A:**  I'm not sure. I think he belonged to Sera Monastery.   

**Q:**  So you joined the monastery roughly in what year? Do you remember how many years ago it was?   

**A:**  When I was in the monastery in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> for about four years when I was a teenager.   

**Q:**  Teenager?   

**A:**  Teenager.   

**Q:**  You joined at what age?   

**A:**  Twelve or thirteen.   

**Q:**  And you're how old now?   

**A:**  Now I'm forty-eight or forty-nine.   

**Q:**  Forty-nine, so that would have been ... what year would that have been? About 1952, after the Chinese came. That was after the Chinese came or before?   

**A:**  Before.   

**Q:**  Before?   

**A:**  Before.   

**Q:**  Before fifty-nine, but then you know in 1951 there was, the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and all that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  That was after, or that was before?   

**A:**  That was before.   

**Q:**  It was before that?   

**A:**  Before.   

**Q:**  So you must have been a little bit younger then?   

**A:**  Maybe younger then. I don't remember clearly.   

**Q:**  It was long before that, or just a short time?   

**A:**  Just shortly before.   

**Q:**  Yeah, so maybe it was 1948 or 49.   

**A:**  Forty-nine, at that time, yes.   

**Q:**  And how did you come to join?   

**A:**  That was strange because my ... I had an older brother who died at a young age, about nine or ten. After he had finished his schooling in Lhasa he died and my parents were very upset.   

**Q:**  Upset?   

**A:**  Yes. And then they made me be a monk, and I also wanted to be a monk.   

**Q:**  Was he your older brother or your younger brother?   

**A:**  He was my older brother.   

**Q:**  Older brother?   

**A:**  Older brother.   

**Q:**  I see. Your family lived in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, they lived in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  And how did they pick <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>? Were they Kundeling's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>? Is that why?   

**A:**  No, no, not that way. We are not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>'s miser. I think my parents selected some monasteries and then they asked some lamas to do divination.   

**Q:**  Did your parents first ask you, you know, whether you wanted to join the monastery or did they just say it would be good to join?   

**A:**  Yes. They just said it was good to join in the monastery, and I wished to join.   

**Q:**  Why did you want to join?   

**A:**  I liked to be a monk.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  What were you doing then? Were you in school or what?   

**A:**  Yes, I was in school in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Which school were you in?   

**A:**  Our school was a private school. We had about thirty students and one Tibetan official, his name was Menriwa [Tib. སྨན་རི་བ].   

**Q:**  Menriwa?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  He was from a small family?   

**A:**  No, a big family. Later he became the head of Shelkar [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར] Dzong. About 1958. [nineteen] Fifty-seven or eight.   

**Q:**  His name was Menre or Menriwa?   

**A:**  Menriwa.   

**Q:**  So then, what did your family do when they said they were going to make you a monk and they had to ... So then they said <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>'s good and then what happened? I mean how did it happen? I don't know how ... What did you do?   

**A:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>?   

**Q:**  No, like, your family. One day they did the divination. How? I mean like what were the steps?   

**A:**  What steps? Then we, my parents, went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> Tratsang and chose a teacher.   

**Q:**  They chose a teacher?   

**A:**  A teacher that I had to live with.   

**Q:**  Was it as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a>?   

**A:**  Gegen.   

**Q:**  So how did you find a teacher?   

**A:**  Oh, I think they asked somebody.   

**Q:**  Asked somebody?   

**A:**  Somebody else, some of their friends. I had an old monk teacher; a very good teacher.   

**Q:**  Was he a relative?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  So your parents asked around about who would be a good person, right?   

**A:**  Yes, right.   

**Q:**  And then they found this old monk and then they went and asked him?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When they went and asked him how did they do it? They had to give a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. They had to take a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and some presents and they asked him, and gave some money and asked [if he could be his student].   

**Q:**  Student? Now you would be called a gidru.   

**A:**  Gidru.   

**Q:**  And then he said what, yes?   

**A:**  Yes, he said yes.   

**Q:**  And then what happened?   

**A:**  And then one day we went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and entered.   

**Q:**  You went?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  He went?   

**A:**  No, my parents took me.   

**Q:**  With the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a>, or just by yourself?   

**A:**  With the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a>. To the gegen. And then gegen did all the ...   

**Q:**  All the what?   

**A:**  All the things that had to be done. And then we have to give some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> in the Tratsang.   

**Q:**  When you ... the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a> went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>, whoever the head of the monastery was, was there an abbot? What did they call it?   

**A:**  They called him lobpön.   

**Q:**  Were there umdze or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a>?   

**A:**  My teacher used to be the lobpön. He was an ex-lobpön and he used to be an ex-simpön of Tatshag [Tib. རྟ་ཚགས] Rimpoche.   

**Q:**  And you had to give <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> because you were going to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If you weren't going to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>, you wouldn't have to do that, right?   

**A:**  Uh, a little bit.   

**Q:**  A little bit?   

**A:**  A little bit.   

**Q:**  What does <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> mean?   

**A:**  It is to give. For one whole day you have to give <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> like [giving] food and tea.   

**Q:**  But what does <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> mean, like, donngo is like ...   

**A:**  Donggo is to give money and food. All those are called "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a>"   

**Q:**  To all the monks?   

**A:**  To all the monks.   

**Q:**  So the monks come and they pray, or do they just come and have a festival?   

**A:**  They do some prayers.   

**Q:**  They do some prayers in the morning?   

**A:**  For the whole day.   

**Q:**  For the whole day?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you know what prayers they do?   

**A:**  Oh, they do different prayers. We could ask for special prayers when I was becoming a monk. My family could ask, please do this and that prayer. And they wold do it.   

**Q:**  How many monks were there in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>'s limit was 112, but there were more than that. One hundred thirty or forty or fifty, like that.   

**Q:**  And they all lived in Lhasa?   

**A:**  In Lhasa; near Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Near Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes   

**Q:**  Where was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>? I don't know.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> was near the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] A famous hill in Lhasa on top of which was one of the two traditional Tibetan medical colleges.">Jogpori</a>; [Tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] you know the Jogpori ?   

**Q:**  Oh yeah.   

**A:**  But during the Cultural Revolution they destroyed it completely. It was a very nice Labrang. It was destroyed completely.   

**Q:**  So all the monks would come -- all the monks who were there. They would come and ... like what did you have to give for the offering? Like did you have to give tea, or ... ?   

**A:**  Tea and one type of food.   

**Q:**  Food once a day or twice a day?   

**A:**  In the morning we had to give a porridge.   

**Q:**  That's called what, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>?   

**A:**  Thukpa.   

**Q:**  Thukpa with meat?   

**A:**  With meat. With meat and cheese and with barley or rice. And then we have another food, like curry rice.   

**Q:**  Shamdre?   

**A:**  Shamdre. And then tea. Then we had to give alms to every monk.   

**Q:**  Now how much alms did you have to give?   

**A:**  I don't remember that. Five <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> for every monk.   

**Q:**  That was a lot.   

**A:**  Chöndze gave money.   

**Q:**  That was a lot of money. One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> was how many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a>?   

**A:**  Fifty sang.   

**Q:**  Oh, so fifty <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> was one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a>, so that's like ten or more dotse. But then you had to give to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་དཔོན] The name for &quot;abbot&quot; in some monasteries, e.g., Kundeling.">lobpön</a> and those, you had to give them a double share, right?   

**A:**  We had to give double to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་དཔོན] The name for &quot;abbot&quot; in some monasteries, e.g., Kundeling.">lobpön</a>, the umdze, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a>, and to all the monks and some servants who worked in the kitchen. There were some lay people.   

**Q:**  Like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་ཟན] A type of serf/bound peasant who lived in the house of his or her lord and worked as a servant without pay.">nangsen</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, like nangsen.   

**Q:**  They got the alms also?   

**A:**  They got it also, but they got less than the others.   

**Q:**  Was it called "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགྱེ] Alms given to monks.">gye</a>" [Tib. འགྱེད] or was it called something else?   

**A:**  "Gyekel" [Tib. འགྱེད་སྐལ] alms share.   

**Q:**  Gyekel?   

**A:**  Gyekel. "kel" was a "share."   

**Q:**  Oh.   

**A:**  Gyegi gala [Tib. འགྱེད་ཀྱི་སྐལ་བ].   

**Q:**  Was that the same name as for the monks, or a different name?   

**A:**  When the monks didn't come to the prayer assembly, it was called Gyekel. My <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a> didn't need to attend the assembly, but he got all the gyekel and all the shares of food and tea were delivered to his shag.   

**Q:**  So that went on all day?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> do you think that cost, a lot?   

**A:**  Oh, I don't remember. Quite a lot.   

**Q:**  You had to do the cooking, right? Did your family have to arrange making the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>, or did the people in the kitchen do it?   

**A:**  The people in the kitchen did it. But we had to give them the ingredients. We had to buy meat and rice and everything. We had to give it to the steward [Tib. ཉེརཔ]. There was a steward of the Tratsang's storeroom (Tib. ཉེརྩང [གཉེར་ཚང]). We have to give it to the steward who gave it to the [monastery's] kitchen.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go and take your vows with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་དཔོན] The name for &quot;abbot&quot; in some monasteries, e.g., Kundeling.">lobpön</a> or somebody before this? You know, say 'I'm going to be a monk...'   

**A:**  Before that, I had to cut a tuft of hair <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྲ་ཕུད] The tuft of hair cut from boys during the monk initiation ceremony.">traphü</a> that was left on the shaved head when becoming a monk.   

**Q:**  How did you do that?   

**A:**  I went to the lobpön.   

**Q:**  You went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་དཔོན] The name for &quot;abbot&quot; in some monasteries, e.g., Kundeling.">lobpön</a>?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  With your teacher, or with your parents?   

**A:**  With the teacher. He cut the tuft of my hair. And then did some prayers, special prayers, and then I became a monk. And then he gave me the ... my vows [Tib. སྡོམ་པ].   

**Q:**  I mean he reads them to you and then you just say yes? What did he do?   

**A:**  He asked some questions.   

**Q:**  Like what did he ask?   

**A:**  Are you a low caste person like a butchers or blacksmith [Tib. རིགས་ངན་མགར་རྒྱུད་ཤན་རྒྱུད] then I said I am not. Then he accepted me to become a monk. He would say that if you are those type of people, then you are not allowed to become a monk.   

**Q:**  That takes how long, a short time?   

**A:**  A short time.   

**Q:**  Now when he cut the tuft of hair, your hair was already cut?   

**A:**  My head was already shaved, but there was a little tuft left on the top and he cut it.   

**Q:**  And that was called what?   

**A:**  It was called Traphü [Tib. སྐྲ་ཕུད]   

**Q:**  You were already wearing monk's clothes?   

**A:**  I was wearing monk's clothing then.   

**Q:**  But when you went in to him were you already wearing monk's clothes?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And those were made for you by your parents?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And that's before the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> was offered?   

**A:**  Before the donggo.   

**Q:**  So when he did that, then did he write your name in the book [monk's registry]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And then you were established as a monk?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then you had to go some place to say you were going to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did your parents tell them, or did your teacher tell them? How was that done?   

**A:**  We gave that speech in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a>, then automatically I become a chöndze. There were regular monks and chöndze. There were two kinds.   

**Q:**  And what was the advantage of being a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>?   

**A:**  Chöndze came from wealthy families because they had to give lots of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> to become a chöndze. Then I didn't have to do the serving work in the monastery. I didn't have to serve.   

**Q:**  What was that called?   

**A:**  That was called chadegyug [Tib. ཕྱག་བདེ་རྒྱུགས]. It meant to pour tea for the monks when they are in meeting in the prayer assembly. Some young monks had to pour the tea and they have to study blowing the trumpet and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་གླིང] A clarinet type of wind instrument played by monks in religious services.">gyaling</a> clarinet [Tib. དུང་རྒྱ་གླིང]. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> didn't have to do those things. But chöndze had to study all the scriptures. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>, we had to memorize 5 pages of long scripture every month. And there was a test every month.   

**Q:**  When you entered the monastery, did they give you a test to see whether you could read? Or didn't it matter?   

**A:**  It didn't matter. My teacher asked me how much I could read and what prayers I knew.   

**Q:**  Did you know how to read?   

**A:**  I knew how to read because I had almost finished my school.   

**Q:**  Were the other regular monks called tratrel, [Tib. གྲྭ་ཁྲལ] or monks who came as a tax wherein a family had to provide a son to become a monk?   

**A:**  They were called ordinary monks [Tib. གྲྭ་པ་དཀྱུས་མ] or tramang.   

**Q:**  Those who were not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་དམངས] An ordinary or common monk.">tramang</a> were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So before the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> you were living in the monastery, right?   

**A:**  I could go to the prayer assembly meetings Tib. tshogs] as soon as I gave the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a>, but I could stay with my teacher [before that].   

**Q:**  So you lived with your teacher in his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> or did you call it shagtsang?   

**A:**  We called it shagtsang. It consisted of the teacher and six students. It was a big shagtsang.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>?   

**A:**  My teacher's name was Tempa Gyatso [Tib. བསྟན་ཨོཨ་རྒྱ་མཚོ], so people called it Tempa Gyatso's shagtsang.   

**Q:**  Who did the cooking and that kind of stuff, like making the fire and all that in your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a>?   

**A:**  Some students would do that by turns.   

**Q:**  You were a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a>, so you didn't have to do that and you were exempt from all that, right?   

**A:**  In the monastery, I didn't have to do that, but in my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a>, I had to do whatever my teacher told me to do, but because I was the youngest member, I didn't have to do much.   

**Q:**  Your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> was big, so how many rooms did it have?   

**A:**  We had three rooms. The teacher stayed in one small room and there was a quite a big kitchen, and the other two rooms were shared by the six students.   

**Q:**  Were these rooms joined together or separate?   

**A:**  Separate. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>, the monks lived in two story buildings. One on the second floor and one downstairs, and one where there were separate rooms.   

**Q:**  What about the monastic officials of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>? Where did they live?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> Rimpoche lived on the top floor of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> where there were big rooms.   

**Q:**  He had his own staff, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> had a four story building. The Rimpoche lived on the top floor.   

**Q:**  Was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> like this and was the door here? [speaker was pointing]   

**A:**  Yes. The monks lived here on the side and here was the stone floor.   

**Q:**  Was it similar to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they looked alike.   

**Q:**  Tsomönling was not destroyed, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> was not destroyed, but they destroyed <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> completely.   

**Q:**  Now they are renovating Shide. You were living with your teacher before you offered the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a>?   

**A:**  One or two days before the donggo.   

**Q:**  Did your teacher give you advice when you moved in?   

**A:**  He told me about the discipline of the monastery and how to go to the prayer assembly meetings, and how to read pecha.   

**Q:**  What did he say about the discipline?   

**A:**  He told me to get up early in the morning, wash my hands and face and take tea and go to the prayer assembly. Before that we had to say some prayers. In the prayer assembly, tea was served 4 times.   

**Q:**  Do you mean in the morning or over the whole day?   

**A:**  For the whole day. Twice in the morning and twice in the evening. After that, we stayed in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> and studied pecha.   

**Q:**  The first prayer assembly was early?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there assembly tea, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མང་ཇ] The morning tea served to monks from all the monastic colleges at the main prayer assembly hall.">mangja</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. And then there was another mangja.   

**Q:**  That took one hour or two hours?   

**A:**  About two hours.   

**Q:**  You got tea and what?   

**A:**  Tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> in the morning. Sometimes there was a special <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> when the donors would come and give the donggo for the whole day -- in the morning thukpa and tea and at noon they gave some shamdre.   

**Q:**  That was just for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a>, but what about the normal days?   

**A:**  For normal days, they gave tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> in the morning.   

**Q:**  That's for two hours. Then did you go back to your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a>?   

**A:**  Then there was a break time.   

**Q:**  For about how long?   

**A:**  That was for about 10-15 minutes and then we went to the prayer assembly and that took about two hours and then we had a break.   

**Q:**  For the second prayer assembly, did you also get served <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>?   

**A:**  There was no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> the second time. Thukpa was served only in the morning.   

**Q:**  What was the morning assembly called?   

**A:**  It was called shogtsog [Tib. ཞོགས་ཚོགས].   

**Q:**  And the second assembly was called what?   

**A:**  The second was called gungtsig [Tib. དགུང་ཚིགས] and the afternoon assembly was called gongtsog [Tib. དགོང་ཚོགས].   

**Q:**  The gungtsig gave what? Tea?   

**A:**  Tea, and some foods like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤ་འབྲས] A food made from meat and spices fried with rice.">shamdre</a>, were served in the gungtsig.   

**Q:**  That's not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and that's like a meal, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If they don't have <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤ་འབྲས] A food made from meat and spices fried with rice.">shamdre</a>, what would they give? Would they give bag?   

**A:**  Sometimes they give bag. Mostly the monks brought their own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> in a small bag and they ate bag after drinking tea.   

**Q:**  So did you get <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and some kind of food every day?   

**A:**  Regularly. Every day it was three times. They [the monks] got <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> in the morning and they got tea once.   

**Q:**  One tea and one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a>?   

**A:**  And one tea at the second prayer assembly and one tea at the third one.   

**Q:**  Was there tea at the morning one too?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They got <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤ་འབྲས] A food made from meat and spices fried with rice.">shamdre</a>?   

**A:**  Not regularly.   

**Q:**  In the afternoon, if you wanted to eat, then you ate your own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Was it the same at the gongtsog?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How long was the second one?   

**A:**  Normally, it didn't take a long time. It was like one and a half hours and one and half hours for the third time.   

**Q:**  After the second time, what did you do? Was there a long break?   

**A:**  After the second prayer assembly, there was a break and after the third one finished, the assemblies were over for the day.   

**Q:**  Was that like before noon or in the afternoon?   

**A:**  It was in the afternoon. Regularly, all the assemblies were finished in the afternoon. Then we went back to our own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> and read <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> or did whatever we wanted to do.   

**Q:**  Was there like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. chöra (ཆོས་ར)] The walled-in grove in monasteries (monastic colleges) where monks go to study/practice debating.">dharma grove</a> or something like that?   

**A:**  There was no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. chöra (ཆོས་ར)] The walled-in grove in monasteries (monastic colleges) where monks go to study/practice debating.">dharma grove</a> in Kundeling. We read <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> in our own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a>. In the evening, at around the 6-7, all the monks stayed outside of the shag and we recited loudly the pecha we had memorized by heart. That took about 2 hours.   

**Q:**  What's that called?   

**A:**  It was called kyorta [Tib. སྐྱོར་རྟ].   

**Q:**  Did somebody come to listen to this, or did you stay all together there?   

**A:**  At the end, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> came carrying a long incense like stick and he went all around. When he hit the stick on a pillar it meant the kyorta was over.   

**Q:**  Every night did you say all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> [pages] that you memorized or just a little bit?   

**A:**  That depended. Some monks memorized many pages and some monks just memorize 1-2 pages. They memorize the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> in the morning and during the day time and in the evening they just recited it.   

**Q:**  So they were reciting whatever they memorize on that day and not the pages they had memorize in the last year or the last week, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  This was just the young monks?   

**A:**  All the monks who had not finished the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> study had to memorize it. After you passed all the tests for memorizing, then you didn't have to do the kyorta.   

**A:**  That took how long?   

**A:**  About 3-4-5 years.   

**Q:**  So in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a>, everybody was like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. Everybody had to memorize all the pecha.   

**Q:**  Was that the same in Drepung and other monasteries?   

**A:**  Almost the same, but more than Drepung.   

**Q:**  Was there a name for the first period when you were studying these books?   

**A:**  There were some steps.   

**Q:**  What were those?   

**A:**  Taking refuge (Tib. ཀྱམདྲོ [སྐྱབས་འགྲོ]), propitiating the deities (Tib. ཀངསོ [བསྐངས་གསོ]), Medicine Buddha (Menla, [Tib. སྨན་བླ]) and Desang Jigsum [Tib. བདེ་གསང་འཇིགས་གསུམ].   

**Q:**  Those were the names of the books?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did your teacher explain anything?   

**A:**  He explained.   

**Q:**  When did he do that?   

**A:**  Whenever he had time. We have to read and memorize <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a> and when something cames up, he gave the explanation.   

**Q:**  How did you learn actually to read the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a>? Who taught you how to read the letters?   

**A:**  The teacher would teach that.   

**Q:**  Who supported you in that period? Did your parents pay the teacher or what?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> would give us 24 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley per year and they also gave some tea.   

**Q:**  Was that enough for the year?   

**A:**  Yes. And on top of that, we got a lot of alms. There were many people giving alms and donggo.   

**Q:**  Did you have a good income?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You keep your barley separate from the other monks in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཤག, 2. ཞག] 1. The apartment/room of a monk. 2. The butter fat that coagulates on the top of butter-tea when the tea is left to sit for some time. If the tea had been made with a lot of butter, this layer could be thick enough to scoop off and save to later sell or eat separately. The senior monks are usually served tea with a lot of shag.">shag</a>?   

**A:**  The teacher kept it all.   

**Q:**  When you got alms, did you keep it?   

**A:**  I had to give it to the teacher and I asked the teacher for whatever I needed.   

**Q:**  And then you did that for 4-5 years?   

**A:**  I did that for 5 years I think.   

**Q:**  And then what happened?   

**A:**  Then I went to Beijing.   

**Q:**  Beijing?   

**A:**  Minority.   

**Q:**  Then the Chinese were there?   

**A:**  The Chinese had already come in 1951. We went in 1953 to Beijing.   

**Q:**  How did you get picked? How did you decide to go?   

**A:**  It was my own wish to study. Then I resigned from Kundeling. When we resigned, we had to give some tea, etc. and we had to report to the Tratsang (College) Office.   

**Q:**  Who was in the Tratsang Office?   

**A:**  The Lobpön, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a>, and the Gegö.   

**Q:**  What was that office called?   

**A:**  Tratsang Lhengye [Tib. གྲྭ་ཚང་ལྷན་རྒྱས]. I had to report to the Tratsang Lhengye that I was resigning (from the monastery). I was withdrawing from the monastic organization [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག་འཐེན་གྱི་ཡིན]. I wanted to study [in Beijing].   

**Q:**  You were how old then?   

**A:**  I was 17 or 18.   

**Q:**  Did you ever join also in Drepung?   

**A:**  I just did it when I first joined in Kundeling.   

**Q:**  So who was in charge there. The Tratsang Lhengye?   

**A:**  The Tratsang Lhengye were those <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སློབ་དཔོན] The name for &quot;abbot&quot; in some monasteries, e.g., Kundeling.">lobpön</a>, umdze, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> and the Tratsang depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ]. He was like the secretary. He wrote all the things. Those 4 or 5 people were in charge of the Tratsang. We call them Tratsang Lhengye.   

**Q:**  What about the ex-Lobpön, the Lobpön Surpa [Tib. ཟུར་པ] .   

**A:**  He was the ex-Lobpön.   

**Q:**  No. But was there an assembly that included those kind of people [the ex senior officials]? If something had to be settled?   

**A:**  The Tratsang Lhengye would meet.   

**Q:**  Even the young monks?   

**A:**  No, the Tratsang Lhengye.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see.   

**A:**  The Lobpön, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མཛད] The name of the chant/prayer leader in a monastery.">Umdze</a>, Gegö, and Tratsang Depa.   

**Q:**  But was there ever a larger meeting consisting also of the ex-officials?   

**A:**  Yes, sometimes there was.   

**Q:**  Now that was for monastery things, but for the estates and that kind of stuff, was that done by the Lhengye or by the Labrang?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> were done by the Labrang. The Tratsang didn't do anything about them.   

**Q:**  And the Labrang had what kind of officials?   

**A:**  It had many officials. It had 5-6 Dechang. And under them were the staff, the Shabdöba [Tib. ཞབས་སྡོད་པ]. There were about 10-11 of these. And then the head was the dzasa. [Phone rings, interview ends.]   

