# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0038.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Temba Söpa [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 23 January 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Temba Söpa [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 59  
**Date of Birth:** 1935  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Temba Söpa [bstan pa bzod pa] was a monk official in the Tibetan government and was part of the monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང] of Kundeling Dzasa. He worked in the Standing Committee of the Legjö Legung of the Tibetan government and was part of an informal anti-Chinese organization. In this interview, he talks about the uprising of 1959 and his role in the escape of the Dalai Lama and the battles afterwards.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0038_02/H_0038_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time, we talked up to 1958. Today I am going to ask you about 1959. You told me that there was some kind of group [Tib. ཚོགས་པ] that consisted of Kungö Maya [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་རྨ་བྱ], Ngawang Thöndrub [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ] and Barshi Jedrungla [Tib. བར་གཞིས་རྗེ་དྲུང་ལགས]. Did they have the group before the Assembly meeting about the Khambas or after that?   

**A:**  They had the group long before that. I don't know in detail, but in 1952, Ngawang Thöndrub and those people went to China.   

**Q:**  In 1952-53, three monk officials such as Ngawang Senge [Tib. ངག་དབང་སེང་གེ], went to China.   

**A:**  Yes. One of them was Yeshe Yönden [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡོན་ཏན], and there was a monk official with the nickname Aku Jagril [Tib. ཨ་ཁུ་ལྕག་རིལ]. And there was a monk official called Lobsang Tenzin [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་འཛིན] and also Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས]. I think, from the beginning, when those monk officials went to China their goal was to go to China to see what could be done [for Tibet] because the 17-Point Agreement was signed by force. They also set up an organization in the Nationality Institute [Tib. མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] [in Beijing] and they did a lot.   

**Q:**  With all of them being monk officials, didn't they have to ask for leave to Yigtsang before going to China?   

**A:**  Yes. They asked for leave, but the government didn't send them formally. They just talked to each other and went to China. After that, when the situation with the Chinese became kind of tense, many groups came into existence among the lay and monk officials.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1952-53?   

**A:**  Yes, it started from that time. Later, they became widespread. The more the Chinese situation became tense, the organizations also became more and more [prominent]. For example, at the time of the Mönlam Festival of 1959, after the Mönlam, the Dalai Lama had to flee. There were quite a lot of organizations then. When the Dalai Lama attended the [Prayer] Assembly at the Mönlam, we also attended the Assembly wearing simple monk robes and gowns, and we mixed in with the ordinary monks and went through the motions of attending the Assembly [he means they were informal bodyguards in case trouble arose]. At that time, I am not sure that there were many organizations directly set up by the government, but, there were many organizations.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Drönyerchemmo kind of had an organization before that.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, when they had to report something, it became as if they could not report through the Kashag because of the Chinese presence, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the Kashag there were the Kalön, and the Chinese were directly contacting the Kashag. So it was not convenient to report to the Kashag. So we were doing some things apart from the Kashag. The main point was that when the Dalai Lama left in 1959, the drönyerchemmo was the main one in charge. The Kashag was the government, so if the situation become uncontrollable [Tib. སྦོ་ལུག], the Kashag could say that they didn't know about that and it would become like [it was] done by an individual person. If they reported to the Kashag and if the Kashag gave permission, it would have become an official thing. So they [the organizations] did a lot of work without having the name of the government.   

**Q:**  Did the Drönyerchemmo set up the organizations or did organizations like Chushigandru just report to the drönyerchemmo and do those things? I heard that Andru Jinda [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་སྦྱིན་བདག] had relations with Namseling. Did Namseling report to the drönyerchemmo? Did the people who set up the Association [Tib. ཚོགས་པ] report to the drönyerchemmo or did the drönyerchemmo set up the People's Association?   

**A:**  I can't tell you in detail, but I guess that it was under guidance from above. They set up the organization. Otherwise, subordinates didn't have much idea how to do that and they didn't know the main points. But it was inconvenient for the superiors to do it directly. Therefore, they just told some people working in their inner circle and they passed the order down and set up the organizations, and then they reported it to the superiors. It came down from the top and it didn't go upwards from the bottom.   

**Q:**  I heard that just before the Dalai Lama returned from India in 1956, it was planned that Jenkhentsisum -- Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ], Tsipön [Tib. རྩིས་དཔོན] Shakabpa, Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. མཁན་ཆུང་བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་མཚན]-- and those people would make their effort [Tib. ཤུགས་བརྒྱབ] from outside, and they [people inside Tibet] would do it inside Tibet. And that the Dalai Lama and the government knew about that.   

**A:**  It happened long before 1956. If I tell you according to my guess, they set up an organization in China in 1952 and they also had relations with the people living up here [in Tibet].   

**Q:**  Who was the person that they [the monk officials in China] made relations with in Lhasa?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth, I don't have anything to tell you clearly about this. Maya-la was in Tibet at that time.   

**Q:**  Maya-la was in Kham in 1951.   

**A:**  He was probably one of the officials there. There were several persons with whom they made the relations [with] from China. There is an Amdowa living in the government owned house called Paljor Rabten [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར་རབ་བརྟན] in [Dharamsala]. He had a close relation with Lobsang Yeshe. He was probably one of their subordinates.   

**Q:**  I heard from Barshi Jedrung that a big meeting was held in 1958 regarding the Khambas. After that, they held some separate meetings. What happened at that time? What did they decide to do?   

**A:**  The meeting was held, and outwardly it was about mollifying the Central Committee and getting the Khambas to cease their disturbances. But internally, what they were talking about was -- there were probably several kinds of opinions. Some people said, "The Chinese told the Tibetans to get the Khambas to cease their disturbances. In order to do that, since the Khambas have many weapons, the Chinese have to give us as many weapons as they have. If we say that, the Chinese will give us weapons and that will be useful for us." They meant that it would be useful for opposing the Chinese. Some people said, "We can't do that." Finally, they decided to send people to talk with the Khambas. So Namseling, the two of them, were sent. They told the Chinese that they were going to advise the Khambas. They pretended to be going for that reason. But internally, they were sent to give instructions [Tib. སློབ་སྟོན] to the Khambas, and they also had relations from here [Tibetan government]. The main point was to reinforce the strength for opposing the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Among the Tibetan government officials, did some of them say that we should not make any disturbances [Tib. ཟང་ངི་ཟིང་ངི]?   

**A:**  Our work was kind of done all of a sudden. We didn't prepare for making war. But all of the people were thinking about making relations with the outside and striving for the independence of Tibet, and it was regarded that safeguarding the physical security of the Dalai Lama was of the foremost importance.   

**Q:**  You were in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What work were you doing at that time?   

**A:**  I was working in the Legjö Legung. In 1956, I was working as a clerk in the Chinese Public Security Department of the Tibet Autonomous Region. I was sent by the [Tibetan] government. After 5-6 months, I was among the cut-back people at the time of the postponement of the reforms after the Dalai Lama came back [from India]. We were just working there in name only. We didn't know the work and the [Chinese] didn't tell us anything. We just used to go to the office where they served tea, snacks and food, and we just sat there chatting.   

**Q:**  Why did they curtail the people in the Preparatory Committee?   

**A:**  It was because the reforms were postponed. Therefore, the establishment of the Tibet Autonomous Region was also postponed. So temporarily, they didn't need many people for the preparations. [Note: This is the result of Mao's policy of the "Great Contraction"]  

**Q:**  What kind of situation was it after the meetings mentioned above were held up to 1959? Didn't the Khambas listen to the Tibetan government when they were told something?   

**A:**  It was not that they didn't listen to the Tibetan government. But they [Khambas] were standing on our side and they weren't standing on the Chinese side, and we were supporting them. They were just saying Khambas, actually, they were not just Khambas. As I told you above, there were people from all parts of Tibet [with them]. The starting point was that there were disturbances in Kham in 1956 and they could no longer stay there, and they ran away to here. On top of that, our people were added (joined) and they fought [using] guerrilla warfare.   

**Q:**  In 1959, what were the majority of the people thinking since the situation had already become kind of tense?   

**A:**  Yes. The situation was tense, and all the people also felt tense in their minds and they thought a disturbance would occur. It was because the Chinese regiments and offices were preparing a lot and making bunkers everywhere. There wasn't a single Chinese office where they didn't have bunkers. They were digging trenches everywhere and they were very busy making bunkers. Though the ordinary people didn't have much idea, when they saw those things, they were frightened and thought that the situation was not going to be good. The people in the Tibetan government knew the situation and that they [Khambas] were also fighting [using] guerrilla warfare. Many Chinese soldiers were arriving, so it was very tense in the people's minds.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese prepare [for war] in 1958?   

**A:**  Yes, this was the most tense period. Otherwise, since the Chinese came to Tibet in 1951, they had been making preparations the entire time. But, it was not that tense and openly done. The more the Chinese could get prepared and set up their military bases and become confident, the more they became braggarts. At the beginning, the Chinese were very humble. They didn't have any choice but to do that then.   

**Q:**  In 1958, when the Chinese were preparing [for war], inside the Communist Party, they had probably made up their minds to implement a military [Tib. དྲག་པོ] policy, right?   

**A:**  Probably, but to tell you the truth, I didn't know much about the situation on the other side. We were just guessing through their actions. From the Chinese side, the more they could do military preparations, the more their conduct became harsh [Tib. རྩུབ་པོ] and they reinforced their strength. In 1957, the Chinese arrested some people and punished them, and they did a lot of things. At that time, construction was underway in Norbulinga and there were many horse-drawn carts belonging to the Tibetan government. They were transporting earth and coming across the bridge of the Lhasa River. There were guards on both side of the bridge and they probably stopped the carts. In the past, the Tibetan government was not stopping anybody on the bridge. When they were coming on the bridge, the Chinese soldiers stopped them. So one of the stable boys [Tib. ཆིབས་གཡོག] of the Dalai Lama's stable and a Chinese soldier fought each other. And the Chinese soldier shot and killed the stable boy.   

**Q:**  What did you do from 1958-59 and at the time of the uprising?   

**A:** When the uprising took place, in the beginning, I don’t know about that clearly. In Lhasa, I stayed near Norbulinga, not in the main city of Lhasa. On the 9th, one of our servants went to Lhasa and he said, “I heard in Lhasa that they were saying that the Dalai Lama is going to be invited to the Military Headquarters, and people were very anxious and frightened [Tib. དངངས་སྐྲག] about that.” I didn’t pay much attention to this, thinking that that was impossible. Regularly, we had to go to Norbulinga every morning. So on the morning of the 10th, I got up, and when I looked out from my room’s window which faced the main road, I saw many people running down. I thought it was strange and I was wondering what it could be, and I dressed hurriedly and went down. There were many people running down and there was nobody to whom I could ask something. I was wondering if whether this morning there was an audience [with the Dalai Lama] or what was going on. When I looked at the faces of the people, some were in tears, and some were very angrily agitated [Tib. ང་རྒྱལ] and were running down. The area was filled with people and I also went down with them. When I got to the gate of Norbulinga, the main gate was closed. Since we were shungshab, I went in and there were a few [other] shungshab inside the main gate. I asked them, “What is going on?” They said, “We heard that the Dalai Lama is going to be invited to the Military Headquarters, so the people came to request for him not to go there. If we don’t shut the main gate and stop the people from coming in, and if many people come in saying that they are the miming (the “people”), since there are many different people, we couldn’t bear the responsibility [for what might happen].” So I also stayed inside of there. Then Kalön Sambo came. People were creating a racket [Tib. ལྟོགས་ཅོར་རྒྱག] and after some time, they said that Sambo had been hit on the head by a stone. When I went out and looked, I saw him sitting under a tree wearing his yellow satin chupa. The reason for stoning Sambo’s head was nothing other than because he was then a commander of the Chinese [PLA] and he had Chinese bodyguards. So when the car stopped, the Chinese might have come out of the car first and people stoned them, and the stone hit Sambo’s head instead of the Chinese. This was what happened and they did not purposely hit Sambo. I swear by the Buddha’s statue [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] in Jokhang that the situation was really tense because I saw that they had thrown a dagger from a distance, which had hit the car door. Then Sambo was taken away. After that, they beat Phagpalha Khenjung [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ་མཁན་ཆུང]. When they beat him, I was inside the gate. Kungö Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་བ་ལགས] told me and a few monks from the Monastic Seats [Tib. གདན་ས] to go and lock all the outside gates of the Norbulinga fence, where they had stationed 6 Bodyguard Regiment soldiers at each gate and asked them to keep a good watch. So I went there. Draktenla [Tib. གྲགས་བསྟན་ལགས] and I were there. The two of us returned and told Kungö Tarala that we had locked the gates and here are the keys. He told us to hand over the keys to the Secretariat [Tib. འགག], so we handed over the keys and came down to the main gate. Right after that, he [Kungö Tarala] told us to come over and he dispatched the younger shungshab to be on guard at the gates where the soldiers were guarding. I was sent to guard the east backdoor [Tib. ལྟག་སྒོ་ཤར] of the yellow wall. While I was going there, I heard a gunshot outside the wall. People were creating a ruckus and I heard that Phagpalha Khenjung was destroyed [Tib. གཏོར]. I was standing on guard. Then I was among the people working on the Dalai Lama’s departure, which was probably on the evening of March 18th. I probably knew about it on the 17th. We were keeping it top secret. Kundeling Kungö told me, “I have something to tell you. You must take an oath that you are not allowed to tell anybody.” So I took an oath. Then he said, “It is not stable and the situation is chaotic, so perhaps the Dalai Lama will leave. It would be wrong [Tib. འགྲིག་གི་མ་རེད] if we didn’t make the preparations [for this]. However, the government cannot do it because if they did, it would become conspicuous." Therefore, our household [Tib. ཤག] made the preparations for the horses and saddles. On the afternoon of the 18th, Kundeling Kungö called me to our household and he said, “It is confirmed that the Dalai Lama is leaving,” but he didn’t say anything about the place or the time. He said, “You go and report to Kungö Chemmo (Drönyerchemmo), and then go to the (the Dalai Lama’s) stable and they will give you some horses, and bring them back.” Then I went to Kungö Chemmo’s quarters, but he was not there. When I asked where he went, they said that he went to the Kashag. Then I went to the Kashag, but we were not allowed to go inside. I told the gandrön to tell Kungö Chemmo to meet me separately [Tib. ཟུར་མཇལ], but he didn’t come out. Then Kungö Khembo (Jigyab Khembo) came out and asked, “What did you come for?" I said that I wanted to meet with Kungö Chemmo. He said “Oh, I see. What do you have to say? Just tell me.” I said “He (Kundeling Kungö) said that they would hand over some horses to me. So I came and got them.” He was keeping it top secret and didn’t say anything. He went inside and came out and said, “Go and call the stable head (Tib. chipönla [ཆིབས་དཔོན་ལགས]).” So I called him and he (Kungö Khembo) told him to send 5-6 of the better horses. Then the two of us went down and took the horses. I had a servant and the two of us led the horses. Then they told me to get the saddles from the Dalai Lama’s monk bodyguards [Tib. སིམགག] and the Dalai Lama’s simpön khembo on the way going back. But all of them were keeping secrets between each other. They didn’t have saddles to give and they were just saying that someone was not at home and so on. Then we just led the horses and returned. After we returned, Kundeling told me, “Tonight, at 11 p.m., a car will come on the bridge located at the back side of our house that is called the Chabgo Sampa [Tib. ཆབ་སྒོ་ཟམ་པ]. It will take people in the car and take them to the Ramagang ferry site from where they will cross the river. Saddle the horses and keep them prepared." They handed over about 30 soldiers to me, who were probably from the Trapchi Regiment, and told me to lead the soldiers. Then around sunset, Kundeling left. At that time, we made a decision that if people asked where Kungö went, I would say that he went on patrol to the hill called Jakyag Garpo [Tib. བྱ་སྐྱག་དཀར་པོ] on the other side of the river. Otherwise, people would be suspicious, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.  

**A:** Then I waited there, keeping the horses saddled. After that, some people came with the horses for the Dalai Lama’s two tutors saying that they were told to hand the horses over to me and Trijang Labrang’s Palden La. The departure time was at 11 p.m., which was very late and the soldiers asked me what they should do. I told them, “Go down and eat your food and relax. I will call you.” Then around 10 p.m., on the other side of the river, a machine gun was fired. This was the signal that they had finished all of their preparations. Many people who were guarding Norbulinga were going back and forth in a chaotic manner, but when [after] they heard this gunshot, they were hiding in their posts staying on alert. So the gunshot was, on the one hand, [it was] meant to calm the people down and keep these people on alert, and on the other hand, [it] was to give a signal saying it was calm over there and the (the Dalai Lama) could come. Trijang Labrang’s Palden La was with me and he said, “Now it is too bad [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་སོང]," and he was very scared. As for me, internally, I knew what it was and thought it made no sense [Tib. ཆོ་ཡོད་མ་རེད] to say that. So I went through the motions of saying, “Don’t worry. It is likely nothing [Tib. གའི་ཡིན་གྱི་མ་རེད]." Then at 10:30 p.m., I called the soldiers and went to Chabgo Sampa to watch where the car was going to come [from]. I saw that there were some people under the bridge holding bombs, and when I asked what they were there for, they said, “We are going to bomb the Chinese tanks if they come.” I said, “If they have already reached here, then it is all finished. Go up there, closer to them.” So I drove them away and I didn’t let any people stay around there. Near Chabgo Sampa there was a village, but I couldn’t drive those villagers away. So I just spread some soldiers around that area and told them not to let any people come to this area, and not to let the villagers come out. The officer [Tib. འགོ་བྱེད] was with me. Right at 11 p.m., the car came with the two tutors and the three Kalön; Surkhang, Shasur and Liushar. Each probably had a servant. They got out of the car and then they rode horses, and I saw them off to Ramagang. Then I recalled the soldiers and sent half with them back and left the other half there. I then escorted [the Kalön and tutors] to the Ramagang ferry site. Since it was at night, I couldn’t ride the horse because the place was uneven [Tib. ཐུར་བྱས་གྱེན་བྱས], so I came walking. Surkhang was carrying a handbag. I told him, “Let me take it,” and he said, “Please take it carefully. I have the Kashag’s seal [Tib. བཀའ་དམ] in it." We all had red torches and when I reached the ferry site, we were to turn a red torch three rounds and then the ferry would come over. Accordingly, when I turned the red torch three rounds, the ferry came over and took them across the river. And then we went down, and just before we reached the sand mountain pass called Chela [Tib. བྱེ་ལ], Kundeling Kungö was there. He came over and said that he was told to send this letter back and I was sent back to deliver a letter from the Dalai Lama. He said, “Tonight, go back and stay at Liu dzong [Tib. སྣེའུ་རྫོང] and tomorrow, get up early in the morning and come back.” So I didn’t have any choice but to go, although all the people were coming out and the Dalai Lama was leaving. I stayed overnight at Liu dzong where I met Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས] when it was around 1 a.m. I got up early the next morning and came back. When I reached the ferry site, all the ferries and coracles had been withdrawn and soldiers were stationed. It was blocked for all people going back. I told them to bring the coracle, I wanted to go back. But the soldiers said, “We will not let you go.” I said I had a work to do and then they told me to show them a pass. We didn’t actually need a pass, but a pass had been given and my servant showed [them] the pass. They were actually a little bit familiar with me. Then I waited for half an hour on a rock on the river bank. I was very sad then, thinking that since I crossed the river back, everything was finished [Tib. སེམས་ཐག་རེད]. If I crossed the river, I would reach Lhasa but the Dalai Lama had left. I had the Dalai Lama’s letter in my pouch. I thought of sending my servant to deliver the letter while I waited here and then after he returned, we could follow the others. The letter was not sealed, so I read it. It said that the Dalai Lama was going to stay in Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ] and he had appointed the Katsab and Sitsab, and there were instructions saying, "All of you must talk peacefully and contact us." Since this was a very important letter, I thought to myself that I had voluntarily joined the ranks of shungshab, so it would be wrong if I avoided delivering the letter and left at this time. So I decided I must return. Then the coracle came and crossed the river back. When we crossed the river and reached the wide empty space along the river bank, they were shooting from the other side. I didn’t pay much attention and came over. The bullets were flying near me. Then I stayed for a while and they didn’t shoot. I delivered the letter to Kungö Tarala. When I stayed with Lobsang Yeshe in Liu dzong, he said, “If you go back, please ask for as many as guns and ammunition as you can, and bring them to your house. After it becomes dark, I will send animals to get them and he would also come. It would be good if you could take out [of the armory] as many guns and ammunition as you can.” I told Kungö Tarala about this and then I took the guns and ammunition from the person in charge of ammunition [Tib. རྫས་མདེལ་དོ་དམ་པ] in the barracks. We might have been given about 20 guns and 20 boxes of ammunition, which contained 1,000 bullets in each box. I brought this to my house. I had a lot of ammunition in my house because the Trapchi soldiers accompanying him [the Dalai Lama] were selected in my house, and most of the bren-guns and guns, bombs and small mortars that can be shot while riding horses were there. These were all new and they assembled them in our house and cleaned off the oil. I had almost one full room packed with guns and ammunition. I waited that night, but Lobsang Yeshe didn’t come and sent a letter saying that he couldn’t come, and [he] said to send the ammunition through the pack animals [he had sent]. There were about 30 some pack animals. So I sent all the ammunition I got from down there and I also added ammunition from my quarters, as much they could carry, and they left. Since Lobsang Yeshe was not there, I stayed there for the night. Before that, I hadn’t gotten a good sleep for several days and I was very tired. So I slept in my quarters and told my servant, “Do not wake me up until I wake up.” I didn’t wake up until about 2 p.m. the next day. When I woke up, I was worried about what might have happened in Norbulinga, so I went to Norbulinga to look. In Norbulinga, there were the shungshab guards, like the late Gyentsen Jampa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་བྱམས་པ], and they said, “Is the Dalai Lama staying here?” I said, “Of course he is staying here. Where would the Dalai Lama go instead of staying here? Actually, you are guards and I am also the same. And he didn’t go from the gate where I was staying.” They said, “No, you were in a very hurried manner, so you might have definitely known about that. So please tell us.” They were insisting. But I was not allowed to tell because I had taken an oath. They didn’t know clearly whether or not he left and they were suspicious. I said that I didn’t know. When I just went around like on patrol and approached the north gate, people were hiding in the bunkers that had been dug. They came out and we were talking, and we saw a Chinese tank with a bren-gun on it going by. It was turning toward where we were staying. They entered into the bunker but I didn’t, and I just held my gun in my pouch, although we didn’t have anything to do. Because we didn’t do anything to them, they didn’t do anything and left. Then I came up and when I reached the main gate, it was almost dark. I said I was going home, since it [my home] was just a short distance [away], but they didn’t let me go. They were saying, "Don’t go at this late time in the evening because the situation is not good. So it is not good to go." Since I was a main gatekeeper, I had a place to stay there overnight. The next day, probably at around 1 a.m. to 2 a.m., the Chinese fired their first canon. The first canon shot was at the Dalai Lama’s palace named Tagten Mingyur [Tib. རྟག་བརྟན་མི་འགྱུར]. I was just below that. A wall behind the palace fell down. When the shell exploded, all the window glass fell, breaking into small pieces when the cannon shell fell near it. I got up quickly and Drakten La, who was there, and I were groping around in the dark. We found a gun and went to the park located near the [Chinese] Motor Station, which was nearby. There was a wall and inside it, our people were shooting from the small holes in the wall. There were many people and I also went there and went through the motions of firing a rifle. However, it didn’t work because it was brand new and still had oil in it, and since the weather was cold, it got stuck. There was another person who said we must clean it and he started cleaning it. Then I took out my Canadian pistol in my robe’s pouch and tried to fire it. But it fell on the ground and was filled with dust, so I had to clean it. However, there were many guns and we kept firing them. There were no people in the houses of the Chinese Motor Station, but on the upper side of the house from a protruded earth area [Tib. ས་འབོག་འབོག], they were shooting from there. When we shot together, it hit the earth and a lot of dust rose up and we couldn’t see them, so then we stopped shooting. However, they saw us first and they started shooting at us, and we had to stop shooting because of the dust. We couldn’t see them. Then when we looked out, we saw them going dressed in whitish clothing, so we started shooting at them. Like this, we kept shooting for quite a long time. They shot from their turrets and shot our people on the right side and the left side. Four or five of our people were killed. In the beginning, when they shot and we heard the gun sounds, it was quite scary. After about 5 minutes, I become fearless and when I saw people dying beside me with blood being shed, it was quite scary. However, after several people were killed, I could also not pay attention to that situation and become fearless. Actually, we couldn’t cope with them because they were shooting from the turrets. Then I went to Norbulinga to the Command Headquarters [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང]. Shakabpa was there and I went to make a report. But at that time, we were occupying the Potala and Jogpori, and Norbulinga was the nearest place to the [Chinese bunker]. I reported that "Unless we use cannons to destroy it, we cannot cope with them. So please destroy it by firing cannons from the Potala or Jogpori." Shakabpa said, “I received the message, but there is no way to send a person to deliver the message because of severe gun shots [heavy fire]. And all the phone lines are broken.” And we didn’t have wireless phones. After making the report, I didn’t have anything to do. When I went back, I saw Kungö Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] coming and he told me to help him, and we went to the Dalai Lama’s room where all the windows were broken. Then he took out a camera and put some film in his pouch. He also let me take an extra camera and he said, “If it comes to the final point [Tib. སྐབས་མཚམས་ལ་སླེབས་སོང་ན], we will commit suicide. So let’s go together.” I said yes. Right after that, they fired cannons and we couldn’t see them in the smoke and the dust. All of us got scattered and he left. Then I met Gethar la [Tib. དགེ་དར་ལགས] [a monk official] who said, “Now, there is nothing to do other than to leave. Let’s go together.” I said yes. Right after that, they fired cannons and we couldn’t see them in the smoke and the dust. When the smoke cleared, all the people ran away to that side or this side and got scattered. So there was nothing to do. To tell you from the vantage of religious views, what I would probably have to suffer from was the so called karmic result. However, I didn’t have any thoughts of leaving because I could see the face of the Dalai Lama very clearly. And I thought that if I left after the gunshots began and if I would meet the Dalai Lama, if he would ask me what happened and I said, “They were shooting guns, so I fled,” I would feel very much ashamed. I would need to have some information to report regarding what had transpired. So I didn’t have a thought to leave right away. So when they told me let’s go, I said yes, but I stayed there like this. I heard that all the people were fleeing from the Jensel Phodrang palace through the marshy area [Tib. འདམ་ར], but I thought it would be wrong to flee like this. So I went there to stop those people from fleeing and went through the motions of telling them, “It would be wrong if you don’t stay here [Tib. ཁྱེད་རང་ཚོ་འདིར་བསྡད་ན་མ་གཏོགས་འགྲིག་གི་མ་རེད]." But, no one listened to me and all of them were fleeing. But they were not to be blamed because the Chinese had already come closer to us from Nortölinga, and the cannon shells were like rainfall. So there was nothing to do. Gyentsen Chunden la [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཆོས་ལྡན་ལགས], the caretaker of the Jensel Phodrang palace was there. Then my servant came over and asked, "What are you going to accomplish by staying like this?" He was sort of scolding me, and then we came up and I reached the northern gate where I saw that there were 5-6 people. Among them there was Repa Thubden [Tib. རལ་པ་ཐུབ་བསྟན]. I had known him in the past and he would call me patron [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག]. He said, “Now we cannot stay like this. Let’s flee. I have as much money as we need. There is no problem at all.” Among them there was a fighter. I swear by the Three Jewels [Tib. དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ] that he came to shoot me saying, “These are the people who, from the beginning, when we requested them to give us guns, they didn’t give us anything at all and stopped us. Now see what happened?" And he was going to shoot me. [laughing in an ridiculing way]. Yes, in the beginning, the government didn’t distribute guns and stopped them. If I couldn’t shoot him first, he would kill me, so I was going to touch my gun. Right at that time, a cannon was fired and all of us fell down, including that soldier. I didn’t fall down and cannon shrapnel hit me here and my chupa was torn up. It hurt me a lot. I thought I got wounded and right away I went into the house of Ling Labrang [Tib. གླིང་བླ་བྲང] and took off my chupa and shirt, and found that the shrapnel had hit the flesh but it didn’t cut into my flesh. At that time, I felt proud, thinking that my protective talisman worked. Although all the people hid [sheltered] themselves when they were firing cannons, I didn’t hide myself and went straightaway. So some people were yelling, ”If you don’t hide yourself, they are firing cannons [and they will hit you].” But I was quite proud and just overlooked it. Then I heard that they were holding a meeting in the Yigtsang office. But when I went there, the meeting was over. There was Kungö Tarala, Gyentsen Tashi [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and Khyamtöpa [Tib. འཁྱམ་སྟོད་པ] [who] were coming out, and Kungö Tarala called me saying, "You came at the right time. Jogpori was lost, so we have to go and take it over." I went with Kungö into a house and we were planning to go by preparing clothes and ammunition. Right at this time, the Tseja [Tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] sent a person to call Kungö Tarala saying that a senriy lottery had been done in the Gönkhang. Kungö (Tarala) said, “Wait a minute. I will back soon.” When I reached [the area] near Shabden Lhagang, Kungö (Tarala) said, “There is a lot of ammunition in it. Take out several trunks of bren-gun bullets and we can do the accounting [inventory] when I come back.” Then I went in and there were people there, and the cannons were firing very severely. I told some people to help me take out ammunition, but people were hiding here and there and nobody helped me. So I picked up a trunk with 1,000 bullets and took it out. And I left it near the door and went in again to get another trunk with 1,000 bullets. I was waiting there. However, Kungö (Tarala) didn’t come back, but Lobsang Yeshe came and said, “Now, the only thing we can do is leave. Otherwise, there is nothing. Let’s go [Tib. ད་ཕྱིན་ན་མ་གཏོགས་ཆོ་གང་ཡང་མི་འདུག་ད་འགྲོ].” Then I said, “Okay. How shall we leave?" He said, “You go to the Dalai Lama’s stables and get some horses. I will take out as much ammunition as I can. Let’s load the ammunition as much as we can and then let’s go.” I said okay and my servant and I went down to the stables. All the horses had been caught by the Khambas and each Khamba was holding a horse. They were all ready to flee. I went to the stable head (Tib. chipönla [Tib. ཆིབས་དཔོན་ལགས]) and went through the motions of scolding him a little bit saying, “What happened to the horses? They cannot be used where they are needed, you gave all of them to other people.” He said “Please say something to them. Otherwise, I was almost going to be killed by them.” Actually, he was not to be blamed and I didn’t have any option of what to do. So then I took out my gun and went to go take a horse from a Khamba. If he said something, I thought of just killing him. I would not have any choice but to shoot him. But he let the horse go and didn’t say anything, and then I handed the horse to my servant. When I went back, Lobsang Yeshe was there and I told him what happened, and I told him to ask them (the Khambas) whether they would come up or shall we go down to talk. At that time, Sandu Lo Gendün [Tib. ས་འདུ་བློ་དགེ་འདུན] and Wangdor [Tib. དབང་རྡོར], who is now in Kalimpong, were there, and there was another new person. They insisted, saying, “Don’t go [by yourselves]. Let’s go together.” I said okay and then they held a meeting in the stables. At the meeting, it was said that the Chinese were near the gate, and Jogpori and Jakyag Garpo [Tib. བྱ་སྐྱག་དཀར་པོ], the hill on the other side of the river, were lost. "If we leave now, all of us will be killed on the plain, just like displaying something on the plate [easy to see]. If we fight, the Chinese have almost already reached the gate and there is no place to flee." Finally, it was decided that we should stop [Tib. བཀག] them until dark and to go after it became dark. "Let’s go and they will not see us." This was agreed [upon] and then we went out. Right at that time, a cannon was fired and several of them were knocked down. After the smoke cleared, I tried to stand up, but couldn’t. The bone of one foot was broken. I was carrying a small carbine rifle, so I used it as a walking stick and could stand up, but I couldn’t stand on my broken foot. Then [we] went into a stable house where they kept hay and some people followed me. Then a cannon was fired and destroyed the house. I tried to use the gun as a stick, but I couldn’t, so I came down crawling. I drank a stomach-full of water from the stone container where they would water the horses and I went to the stables. But I found that all the people had scattered and all the horses were running hither and thither. I stayed there for some time, but I couldn’t go and my wound was bleeding a lot. Then Dumra Shömpa [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར་གཞོན་པ] (a lay official), who is now in Nepal, came and said, “Oh my friend, you are wounded so seriously. What shall we do?” I said, “Now there is nothing to do. I cannot go, but you should flee. If you don’t flee, you will get killed. Can you find me a walking stick?” He picked up a stick and he left. But I couldn’t use the stick to stand up. So I crawled up and came up to Norbulinga where there is a palace called Tsokyil Phodrang [Tib. མཚོ་དཀྱིལ་ཕོ་བྲང], which was built in a small lake and there was a small drain. I tried to cross the drain by crawling, but I couldn’t get through. So I drank a stomach-full of water and laid down for sometime while the cannon shells fell like rainfall. It was like the sun [was] covered by the clouds. I could only see the sun like a reddish color because of the dust. Then I thought it would be best if I died. Otherwise, I could neither fight nor flee. If I got caught, they would torture me very severely and then kill me. The cannon shells fell near me, but they didn’t hit my body. Then I thought it would be better to commit suicide. So I took my gun from my pouch, and pointed the gun on my forehead and tried to shoot myself. However, then I had a second thought and I remembered that it was said that people who died in the water would have a very clear mind when they gained a human rebirth. So I thought it would be better to jump into the lake and die, rather than to shoot myself. So I put my gun back in my pouch and I jumped into the small lake around Tsokyil Phodrang. But when I got down, I touched the bottom of the lake and then I floated upward again. Then I would go down again and do the same [float back up]. And I didn’t die. Then I thought, maybe I might have to hold my breath, and I opened my eyes and mouth and jumped again. But in the water, I could see a whitish thing and it did the same, and if there were some stones at the bottom of the lake, I could have grasped a stone and died. But there were no stones, only mud. Then I swam out of the lake and tried to go up the stone steps but, I couldn’t. Then I took off my chupa and the bullets I had wrapped on my waist and threw them into the lake. Then I crawled upward and I reached the hall where the Dalai Lama would give audiences. When I saw the Dalai Lama’s throne, I was glad and thought that it was a good place to die, so I stayed near the throne. Then blood and water flowed down from my leg, and I saw people hiding on the right and the left sides because they were still shooting a lot of guns. It was about sunset. Then they were saying that the Chinese had gotten near to the gate, so we should set it on fire. Then I thought [about] what would happen to me if I didn’t die in the water and also in the fire. So I thought that since they were saying that the Chinese were just outside, if I went out, they would shoot me. I wanted to be killed and I didn’t have any other thoughts. When I came near the gate, one of my younger sisters’ husbands was among the volunteers and was also wounded. He said, “I was also wounded and brother, you are also here.” My body was all wet and I didn’t have a chupa to wear. He took off his chupa and put it on me and he asked, “What shall we do now?” I said, “We should flee amidst the Chinese toward the Ramagang ferry site. Maybe we will be killed and maybe we can get through. On the other side of the river, our people are there and we can fight back. If we stay like this, we will be killed and we will get nothing. I cannot go, so you go ahead and shoot and kill me here.” But he didn’t dare kill me and I had thrown my gun into the lake. Then he left. After a while, a child who was about 17 years old came over and said, “What shall we do? If we fight, all the people have fled. If I flee, the Chinese are near the gate.” I said, “There is nothing to do other than rushing out through the Chinese. Maybe you will be killed, and maybe you can get through and fight back. If you stay like this, we will be killed and you will get nothing.” So he was trying to go. Before that, I had never smoked, but I felt very cold and I asked him, “Do you have cigarettes?" He said yes. I said, "Give me a cigarette." He lit a cigarette and gave it to me and he left. When I smoked one or two puffs, I can’t say if this helped or harmed [me], anyway, I fell asleep or lost consciousness. At around 10 at night, I woke up and heard there was a lot of shooting outside. And they also were shouting, "Come out, come out." The Chinese were outside and a few people were going out in the dark. I didn’t have anything to do so I searched my amulet and ate some blessed pills. I thought if I got caught, they would torture me severely and then kill me, so it would be better to die before that. I tried to find a gun since there were many guns thrown around, but I couldn’t find one. I thought if I could find a gun, and then go out and shoot at them, they would kill me right there and that would be it. Then when I went out, they said, “Stand up, stand up!" But I couldn’t and I didn’t say a word and just stayed there. Then when they saw that I was bleeding a lot, they told me to go near to the Norbulinga gate where all the people who were captured were gathered together, but I didn’t go. Instead I crawled and went to the quarters of a Dalai Lama’s monk bodyguard. Maybe they didn’t see me in the dark or since I could not go, they were kind of relaxed and didn’t say anything. In that house, there was a fence made from sod [Tib. ལ་ར] and there was a stone step with two steps, so I couldn’t go up and just stayed there. I felt cold and because of the severe bleeding, I felt very thirsty. When I looked around, there were some people lying down who I thought were wounded. I never thought they were dead. I said several times, “Please give me some water,” but they didn’t answer. Then I crawled and shook those people, and found that they were all dead. I didn’t have anything to do. After some time, there were three soldiers in a group coming on patrol. They were carrying guns and were calling to the dead bodies, and when they didn’t make a sound, they kicked them. I also pretended to be dead. They used torches and looked at my wound which was bleeding. They just kicked me on my hip and I held my breath. They didn’t check in detail and they thought I was dead, and then they left. After half an hour, the soldiers came again. One of them kicked me on my lower belly, and I almost had to yell. [laughter] Then I went down and found a kitchen and I went in. At around midnight, a person came out from under the big water container and drank some water from the water container. I told him, “Please give [me] some water," and he gave me full ladle of water. I drank the water and returned the ladle. When the day broke, the Chinese came and said, “Come out.” I didn’t have anything to do other than to crawl out. I found that they were cadres of the United Front Work Bureau [Ch. tong zhan bu] who I knew, and I swear by the Jo Rimpoche [statue] that they went through the motions of welcoming me by stomping their feet and clapping their hands while smiling, and [they] told me to go there where many people were gathered. When I got there, some cadres came and differentiated the government officials. Most of the government official had already been arrested. At that time, there were Goyang Nga [Tib. སྒོ་ཡང་བ] [a lay official], Kyire Chömpel la [Tib. སྐྱིད་རས་ཆོས་འཕེལ་ལགས] [a monk official], a monk official named Kyelpa [Tib. རྐྱལ་པ] (a nickname meaning “leather pouch”) and Doctor Ane la. Altogether there were five of us. The others there were all ordinary people. The five of us were separated and left to sit under a tree while they tied the hands of all the people in a line, and soldiers escorted them standing on the right and the left sides. I thought they were taking them to a place where they would be killed. For the whole day, they didn’t give us a drop of water. Many soldiers were going up and down. At about sunset, a jeep came and the other four were put into the jeep. But when I tried to get in, they didn’t let me in, saying I had to stay there. It was almost dark and nobody took care of me. I had severe pain in my feet, and I felt hungry and thirsty. Then I saw Shölkhang Jedrung coming out. I knew him, so I called Jedrung La and said, “You must do whatever you want to do to me because I am in a very difficult situation.” He didn’t say a word, but he sent a person who carried me on his back and took me to Shabden Lhagang (in Norbulinga) where the wounded were. There were so many people there that there was not even a space to sit down. All the places were filled with blood. Thangpe [Tib. ཐང་སྤེ] (a lay official) was also there. I felt very cold staying there. Many of the wounded died and the others pulled the clothes from the dead ones and wore them. Near me, there was a Khamba with long hair who got a gown. I don’t know where he got it from. Around midnight, I heard he was making a sound, “sor sor”, which meant he was going to die. So I pulled the gown off of him. The gown was wet. Absolutely wet with blood like it had been soaked in water. I put it on me, which helped me a little bit [from the cold of March]. The next morning, we were given a mug of black tea and a mug of tsamba. My hands had become thickish because of the dried blood and there was no place to wash them. I didn’t have anything to do but to mix the tsamba with the tea. I made pag, which was red, and I ate it. After some time, the doctors came to give medical treatment to those who were not seriously wounded. Those who were wounded seriously were taken to a hospital. Three of us were told to stay there and then a truck came to where we were, and we were thrown in the truck by two soldiers like they were loading stones. I was in severe pain, especially since there were only three people in the truck, so it seriously shook and I had severe pain. Then we were brought to the hospital. The others were from among the ordinary people and they were put in large rooms with 40-50 people. I was treated more strictly, and was locked in a small room and told to wait a minute. Maybe they were vacating the room for me, but then I was put in a room which was absolutely empty without even a cushion the size of a handkerchief. Then they gave me a blanket. They took off my clothes and put white clothing on me, so I used the half of the blanket as a cushion and the other half as a blanket. The weather was very cold and I felt very cold. Then they gave me medical treatment. The doctor was scolding me very much. My bones were broken into small pieces and they picked them with tools one by one. They were malicious to me, purposely poking the wound with tools saying, “We are giving you medical treatment, but this is what you did.” They meant that during the war, the windows and doors of the hospital were shot at very badly. They were purposely poking the wound with the tools. I tolerated the first day and the second day, even I though I had severe pain. But on the third day, I could no longer tolerate it and I verbally fought with them saying, “You are not giving me the treatment for the purpose of treatment. [You] are being malicious [Tib. བསམ་མནག] toward me, so I am not going to accept treatment.” Like this, I yelled and fought with them. Then a Chinese doctor came and enquired [about] what happened. They told him that I was saying that I was not going to accept the treatment. Then he said in a gentle manner, “No problem, I will do it.” From the next day on, he treated me and it was better. (Showing us his wound on his foot) The nerves of my foot were cut off and this bone was broken. Because of the gun powder, I had puss on my wound and the puss spread onto the flesh, and this much bone came out from there. They didn’t use any anesthetic medicine and they used a tool which looked like one for cutting iron, and they cut the bone that was protruding. When they cut the bone it made a sound, “tag”, and the bone scattered on the wall. I couldn’t talk because of the pain. This was how they treated me. And as for food, they gave a mug of boiled water. One in the morning, one in the afternoon and a small mug of tsamba per day. They just call it tsamba because humans were eating it, but actually, it was the kind one fed to horses and mules by mixing in water [Tib. ཆུ་ལྡུར]. A nurse would come by bringing a thermos in one hand and tsamba in her other hand. And they only gave me one mug. I held the boiling water first, as I couldn’t drink it because it was too hot. Then the nurse would soon leave, and then I put the tsamba in the mug and ate a pasty tsamba mixture. I had to stay like this for about 8-9 days. One day they told me that I had to get my leg amputated. They said that if you don’t get it amputated, the puss will spread and you will die. I said, “I am not going to have my leg cut [off] and amputated at all.” This was because I had seen many people who had their legs cut off. This was actually malicious on their part. Even [though] we could see that they only had a small wound, they would make an excuse and just cut it off. I saw them bringing the leg that had been cut off and [they] were playing with it. Many people had their hands and legs cut off. Since I saw all of these, I said I was not going to have my leg cut off. They said, then you will die and I said, “I don’t even care if I die.” For several days, I insisted and kept saying that. So later, they didn’t cut off my leg. This was how they gave me treatment. It was very strange. I don’t know why. Once every three days, they would take us to a room for interrogation and they asked many questions. But I was thinking I didn’t care if they killed me and I didn’t have any fear. I wished to be killed. Otherwise, I didn’t have any thoughts. Then sometimes, they treated me in a gentle manner, and also gave me some tea and some snacks. And sometimes they took out their guns, and loaded them and threatened me. However, since I wanted to be killed, there was no fear at all and I stayed like this for a month and a half. Then though my wound was not cured, I was sent to the Military Command Headquarters [Ch. jun qu] and I was locked up in the prison there. It was strange that while they interrogated me in the hospital, one day, a Chinese officer came in wearing his uniforms and insignias. He was short with a black face and looked like a Tibetan, but he didn’t know Tibetan, so there was a Tibetan interpreter. When I recall that now, he also looked like a Nepalese. He came to the place where I was and he asked [about] my history, and he took a photo. On the next day, the Chinese came to interrogate me. I said I didn’t have anything to say other than what I told them last time. They said, “When did you say that last time?” And I said such and such person came and I told them. Then they hurried and asked me in detail about how tall the person was. What they asked me, what my answer was, what kind of interpreter there was. They were asking me in great detail. I don’t know why. Some strange people would probably go to that place. [laughs] Like this, I arrived at the Military Headquarters and on 25th June, I was taken to Norbulinga. On the 29th, I was sent to Jiuquan in China to prison. Shall I stop here?   

