# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0038.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Temba Söpa [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 25 January 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Temba Söpa [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 59  
**Date of Birth:** 1935  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Temba Söpa [bstan pa bzod pa] was a monk official in the Tibetan government and was part of the monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང] of Kundeling Dzasa. He worked in the Standing Committee of the Legjö Legung of the Tibetan government and was part of an informal anti-Chinese organization. In this interview, he discusses the work and reforms of the Tibetan government's new Legjö Legung. He also briefly discusses the reforms done by the 13th Dalai Lama, going to China with the 14th Dalai Lama, and how the representatives of the People's Association came to Ya'an to receive the Dalai Lama coming back from China. And he talks about how he worked on Chinese road-building projects for the Tibetan government.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0038_03/H_0038_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I am going to ask you why and when the Legjö Legung was initially set up, and where was the office located? What work did you do in that office? What was the reason for setting up the Legjö?   

**A:**  Just after the Dalai Lama took over the religious and political power, he spoke about that. As for the main idea, the purpose of this was to implement reforms and for going to a democratic system. But at that time, there wasn't any term like democracy. It was just called the Legjö Legung. It was created to improve the social system and implement reforms. It was the idea of the Dalai Lama and it was probably set up in 1952. There were [various] representatives in that office. There were two representatives from each of the government officials' ranks, and there were also representatives from the dzong, the estates and from the three great monastic seats [Tib. གདན་ས]. I heard that in the beginning it was planned to take back all the estates that belonged to the gerpa, and to give a salary to the government officials and the gerpa. They probably had been talking about that, but later it didn't work out. I heard that some of the gerpa said, "If the government is going to take back the estates, please take them back like the proverb, 'Taking the flower along with the lawn [Tib. སྤང་དང་མེ་ཏོག་ཆབས་ཅིག].'" Some of the gerpa owed a lot of loans, so they meant to say, "Please take back the loans along with the estates." Later, it was decided that all of the dzong and the estates that belonged to government were to be nationalized [Tib. གཞུང་འཛིན], and all of the income of the dzong and estates was to be delivered to the government. They used the proverb, "Putting all of the things in the vase [Tib. བུམ་པ་སིབ་བླུག]." Before that, the Tibetan government officials didn't have salaries. The gerpa had estates, but the tsidrung didn't have estates. When they had to work for the government, they had a lot of expenses which were paid for from their own pockets. Even when they traveled, the horses and the mules also had to be arranged by oneself. At that time, tax exemptions/reductions and loan exemptions/reductions [Tib. ཁྲལ་ཆག་བུན་ཆག] were implemented and new lamyig were issued for one year to official travelers. And it was decided to pay transportation fees to the miser according to the current rates when they sent the corvée horses and pack animal. At that time, exemptions for the loans were also implemented. Some of the miser owed loans for many years and the interest had been added upon the interest. Some of these loans were exempted from paying both the principal and the interest according to a limit of years to pay [Tib. ལོའི་ཚད་གཞི]. It also categorized three standards of households. The better off households had to pay the principal, but the interest was exempted. Some of the households were made to pay the principal with the payment arranged over a certain number of years. As for the poor households, both the principal and the interest were exempted. At that time, an ordinance [Tib. བཀའ་རྩ] was issued to all of the dzong and estates which had 8 points. It was like a regulation at the present time. I don't remember the 8 points one by one. Anyway, it was about the miser not having to work for the taxes indiscriminately, and the heads [Tib. འགོ་བྱེད] were not allowed to say something recklessly [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང] to the miser. In case they did that, the miser should directly report it to the government. It also categorized the seriousness of the problems. If the problem was so and so serious, the dzong could solve the problem. If the problem exceeded that limit, they should report it to the Legjö Legung. When there were major law cases between the dzongpön and the miser, it was decided that the law case should be filed to the Legjö legung and they would investigate these law cases. After the Legjö legung received the law case, they would hand over some of the cases to the branch of the Judicial System [Tib. གྱོད་ཞིབ] where the civil disputes were settled, or to the Kashag, wherever the Legjö legung thought would be appropriate. In case a dzongpön and a miser had a law case, the dzongpön himself couldn't make the decision. Therefore, the law case had to be decided by the Legjö legung who would investigate the matter and hand it over to the courts. When I was working in the Legjö legung, I was in charge of issuing the salary certificates [pay checks] [Tib. ཕོགས་འཛིན]. I was not in that office from the beginning. I worked only from 1955-1959. Usually, regarding the matter of reforms in the [Tibetan] society, the representatives would hold a general meeting [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་པ] in the Legjö legung and discuss what kind of reforms should be implemented. They were allowed to report the content of the meeting directly to the Dalai Lama. The other offices had to go through the Kashag, but the Legjö legung didn't need to go through the Kashag. Sometimes, the Dalai Lama would give orders to the Legjö legung saying that they should discuss such and such matters. The Legjö legung would discuss and report to the Dalai Lama about the decision made by the majority of the representatives. If the Dalai Lama agreed to that, he would make the decision and it would be approved. At that time, the Reform Office would also investigate the offices of the Tibetan government in Lhasa, and if there was something wrong going on, the Legjö legung would corner [Tib. བཙིར་རྡར་གཏོང] them. It was similar to the present situation where the People's Deputies [Tib. སྤྱི་འཐུས] are investigating and cornering the departments in Dharamsala. There was a general meeting of the Legjö legung where all of the representatives attended, and there was also a Standing Committee [Tib. རྒྱུན་ལས] which would continue to work on the resolutions made by the general meeting. I was one of the staff members in the Standing Committee. There was a kalön who would preside at the general meeting. In the beginning, the kalön was Ngabö. Later, because Ngabö had a close relation with the Chinese, there were many suggestions [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] from the meeting saying that we needed two kalön in the meeting. The reason why they said that we needed two kalön was that they had prepared to put Surkhang in the meeting because he was regarded as a little bit more trustworthy. In the beginning it was Ngabö, and later, Surkhang presided over the meeting alone. Under them, there were the drunyichemmo and Tsipön. On the Standing Committee, the drunyichemmo was Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] and the Tsipön was Shakabpa [this should be Namseling] and as for the assistant, there was Kundeling Dzasa. Then there were about 10 or so staff [members]. This was the Standing Committee who investigated the decisions made at the general meetings. The Legjö legung also had to investigate and finalize [Tib. ཞུས་དག] the annual accounts of the various dzong and the estates that belonged to the government. That's all the work that the Legjö legung was doing.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Chinese were also saying that they were going to implement reforms. What was their suggestion [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] on the reforms that the Tibetans were going to implement? Did the Chinese agree to the reform that the Tibetans were going to do, or did they want a different kind of reform?   

**A:**  The Chinese main purpose for implementing the reform was to put Tibet under Chinese control. This made it inconvenient for the Tibetan government to do its own reforms, but we still put those reforms into action. Later, [the Tibetan government] was unable to reform society according to the idea [Tib. དགོངས་གཞི] of the Dalai Lama because the Chinese did many different things.   

**Q:**  After the Legjö legung was started, did it kind of decrease in power [Tib. ཤུགས་ཆུང]? I heard that Ngabö was unable to attend the meetings every time and it was kind of inconvenient [for him] to attend the meetings because the Chinese were saying a lot to him.   

**A:**  Yes, the Chinese were telling him a lot, so it was inconvenient for Ngabö to work and attend the meeting. Later, Surkhang attended the meetings. But the Chinese were still telling the Kashag a lot, saying they couldn't do this and that. So we had to go along with them [Tib. བསྟུན] because we had already lost a little bit of power. Therefore, the Legjö legung was unable to do all of the things according to the ideas of the Dalai Lama and the remarks of the representatives. It was written in the 17-Point Agreement that the Tibetan soldiers shall be converted into the People's Liberation Army, but the Legjö representative's meeting stopped implementing this point. They made remarks and said that it was not alright to do that. So they [the Chinese] were unable to convert the soldiers and they were also unable to change the Tibetan currency into Chinese currency. The representatives made the remarks and they told the Chinese that the [people] did not agree with these, and stopped those things from happening.   

**Q:**  What was the cause [Tib. རྐྱེན] of the representatives of the Legjö legung talking about converting soldiers and those things, and how did they have the power to talk about that?   

**A:**  That was because they were the representatives of all the people, and they said very strongly that the people didn't agree saying and said that we should not do this for the time being. So the Kashag made it kind of benign [Tib. འཇམ་དུ་བཏང] and went through the motions of saying, "It is not alright if we don't stop doing these things because the people are not agreeing to that." Then they reported to the Dalai Lama about that. So it was convenient for the Dalai Lama and the Kashag to tell the Chinese that these were the comments of the representatives of the meeting. That's how those points were stopped from being implemented.   

**Q:**  It was planned to reform all the estates that belonged to the government, the monasteries and the gerpa [Tib. གཞུང་སྒེར་ཆོས་གསུམ], right?   

**A:**  In the beginning, it was planned to take back all the estates that belonged to the government, the monasteries and the gerpa. But, as I mentioned above, some of the gerpa said, "Please take back our loans along with our estates." The [government] didn't agree to that and it was delayed because of that. The purpose was to gradually move forward and do those things gradually.   

**Q:**  The monasteries probably didn't agree for their estates to be taken back, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The monasteries were also doing that and they were powerful.   

**Q:**  Where was your office located?   

**A:**  It was located on the top floor of the Jokhang in the Shingra [Tib. ཤིང་ར] (the "firewood storehouse").   

**Q:**  Did you reform the system of providing horse corvée and the pack animals?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  At that time, how much salary did they pay to the tsidrung?   

**A:**  There were different amounts of salary. I was a staff official in the Legjö legung, and I got 108 khe of barley per year and probably 60 dotse in cash. There were some differences with the amounts.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama had the idea of reforming at the time when he took religious and political power. Before that, there were a lot of troubles between the regents in the 1940s. Before the Chinese came, were the government officials thinking that there had been some harm [Tib. འཐུས་ཤོར] done to the situation of Tibet during that period [the time of the regents]? Or were they thinking that we still had remained as before and there were no developments? Were they thinking that reform should be implemented?   

**A:**  During the era of the 13th Dalai Lama, he had done something. At that time, he called the representatives or the important families who were appointed to represent the peasants, and the tsodrag of all the dzong and the estates to Lhasa. He held something like the present [Chinese] National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན]. He told them, "You people should say whatever opinions you have on the matter regarding the government managing the religious and political affairs, like the proverb, 'The tongue knows what is in the mouth [Tib. ཁ་ནང་ལྕེ་རྒྱུས].'" [i.e. telling all you know]. The representatives of the miser didn't do that, saying, "Until now, the politics of the government were managed by the government. We don't know anything. Please allow us not to make remarks." So the Dalai Lama said, "Now the mental understanding [Tib. བསམ་བློའི་གོ་རྟོགས] of the people is not high enough. So we should set up schools." After that, schools were set up everywhere in the dzong. Anyway, during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, he had stepped toward democracy many times, but to tell you the truth, there were many obstacles. The present Dalai Lama also said to set up the Legjö legung, but there were many obstacles. In the past, Tibet was kind of closed off to the outside world, but the 13th Dalai Lama opened the door and sent some students abroad. And an English school was also set up in Lhasa and factories were set up, but they were destroyed. As soon as the Dalai Lama arrived in India, he established the democratic government.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to China in 1954, were you among the retinue?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Last time, you told me about meeting the representatives of the People's Association, like Alo Chöndze and Bisu [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར]. Where did you meet them at that time [that trip]? Why did they come there?   

**A:**  According to the ancient customs, when the Dalai Lama came back from China, they came to receive him as a welcoming committee [Tib. འཚམས་ཞུ]. At that time, there were also representatives from the three great monasteries and the government officials. They came down to Dartsedo. The Dalai Lama was then in Chengdu, and when they sent a telegraph to the Dalai Lama, he told them not to come down further but to remain in Dartsedo. But they didn't obey his order and Alo Chöndze, Bisu and Shelkar Chandzö [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་ཕྱག་མཛོད] came down up [further] to Xi'an [note: this was actually Ya'an]. I was at Xi'an [Ya'an] on the day before the Dalai Lama's arrival for taking over the houses where the Dalai Lama and his retinue were going to stay and sticking names on the doors. At that time, I heard that a Tibetan had come to the bus station. It had been quite a long time since I left Tibet, so I felt kind of glad and I sent a person to the bus station and learned that the representatives of the People's Association had arrived there. When I asked, "What are they here for?" he said, "They said that they came to receive the Dalai Lama. And they don't have any place to stay or to go, so they are just sitting on their bedding and the Chinese aren't taking any notice of them." Then I sent people to get them, and left them in the reception room and served them tea. Then I asked them what they were here for. They said, "We came to receive the Dalai Lama [A welcoming delegation]. We received the order not to come down from Dartsedo, but we came down." I told them, "You were told not to come down from Dartsedo, but you did. Anyway, it doesn't make any difference." They said that the representatives of the government officials and the monasteries stayed in Dartsedo as they were told. Then I gave them a room and served them food. When the Dalai Lama arrived, they were granted an audience and submitted a letter to the Dalai Lama, and they offered the Mendredensum. Otherwise, they didn't have much to report. After that, the Dalai Lama sent them ahead to Dartsedo. When the Dalai Lama arrived at Dartsedo, he stayed there for one day and he met all of the representatives, and then they were sent ahead to Tibet. The Dalai Lama was invited by all of the monasteries and people on the way. And some of them had been scheduled before that. He also granted audiences and gave religious teachings.   

**Q:**  Did the representatives of the people think that the Dalai Lama would be unable to come back to Tibet?   

**A:**  They didn't think that he would be unable to come. They just came to receive him like people going to receive their relatives who were coming from a [great] distance.   

**Q:**  Did they tell you anything about the People's Association?   

**A:**  They had a lot of letters with them, but they didn't tell me anything. But they might have verbally reported to the Dalai Lama. When we came back to Tibet, all the people were disgusted [Tib. ཞེ་ལོག] with the Chinese. For example, there was a place called Minyag Rangakha [Tib. མི་ཉག་ར་ང་ཁ], which was a one day's journey from Dartsedo. I was working on preparing things there for the Dalai Lama's arrival, so I had to go ahead and get prepared.I heard that there was a smallpox epidemic in a place, so it would not be alright for those people to seek an audience with the Dalai Lama and for the Dalai Lama to get infected. When I inquired about that, they didn't tell me because they were afraid that they would be stopped from getting the audience. There were many people who didn't know when the Dalai Lama was arriving, and they had been there for 2-3 months. They had a hard time and their tsamba ran out while waiting for the Dalai Lama's arrival. At that time, I wore an ordinary person's chupa and went among the people. I went to the market and just went through the motions of asking the prices of things. I asked a person, "How much is this?" He said, "Your father's corpse [Tib. ཕ་རོ]! This Chinese corpse [Tib. རྒྱ་རོ] speaks Tibetan so fluently." He didn't tell me the price and he was almost going to beat me up. I was wearing a chupa, and unlike the people in that place, we were kind of clean. And the Chinese and Tibetans looked alike, and I kind of had a white complexion. So he thought I was a Chinese person wearing a Tibetan gown. He was almost going to beat me up and I couldn't tell him my identity. At that time, there was a serious contradiction between the Chinese and the Tibetans. After that, we knew the road from where the people were coming and the place where there was smallpox. But we couldn't stop them and people were coming in a rushing manner.   

**Q:**  In 1954, did you go to work on building the roads?   

**A:**  After the Chinese arrived in Tibet, they were building a highway from Chengdu to Lhasa and from Lanzhou to Lhasa. It was said that the Chinese and the Tibetan government each paid half of the expenses for building the highway. All of the workers were Tibetans and I was sent to pay the salary for three months to the workers who came from three counties: Taktse [Tib. སྟག་རྩེ], Metro [Tib. མལ་གྲོ] and Wölga [Tib. འོལ་དགའ]. The Tibetan government paid the barley salary from the government granaries in the dzong and the money was in the form of trangga garpo [silver coins]. I took the silver coins [equal to 4 srang] with me. Each horse or mule was loaded with two leather pouches of silver coins and 23-24 horses or mules were loaded with silver coins. There were about 40-50 leather pouches. I went to the three counties I mentioned above. After that, I went to China.   

**Q:**  It was probably written in the 17-Point Agreement that the Tibetan government shall help build the highway. Or was it written that the Tibetans shall help the Chinese coming up?   

**A:**  Yes. It was written that the Tibetans shall help the Chinese to come up. It was probably according to that [that they helped with the road building]. It probably wasn't written [specifically] about the road building.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese select the workers from the dzong?   

**A:**  We selected the workers from the dzong according to the different populations of the counties and the Tibetan government paid the salary.   

**Q:**  Did you pay daily wages? Or was it paid according to the work that was done?   

**A:**  It was a daily wage.   

**Q:**  Some people said that they were paid according to how many meters of work that they completed.   

**A:**  This was the internal description of the work. When we went to pay the salary to the dzong, we just paid the salary according to the total amount of workers to the dzongpön and the tsodrag. We didn't pay the wages to the individuals. Then they paid the wages to the individual workers. When they divided the salary in detail, they might have measured the meters of the road that were built.   

