# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0038.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Temba Söpa [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 5 December 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Temba Söpa [Tib. བསྟན་པ་བཟོད་པ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 58  
**Date of Birth:** 1935  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Temba Söpa [bstan pa bzod pa] was a monk official in the Tibetan government and was part of the monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང] of Kundeling Dzasa. He worked in the Standing Committee of the Legjö Legung of the Tibetan government and was part of an informal anti-Chinese organization. In this interview, he talks about working in the Standing Committee of the Reform Office [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས་ལས་ཁུངས] of the Tibetan government, and a number of incidents in Lhasa during the 1950s.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0038_01/H_0038_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Among the monk and the lay officials, some of the posts like Tsamshepa and the Lubu Shingnyer had to expend a lot from their own private belongings/income. They didn't have any salary and had to spend a lot of things. So as compensation for doing that position, they were later appointed as Dzongpön of the better dzong where they could get a good income. At that time, after delivering the income from the dzong to the government, the Dzongpön could keep the remaining income collected from that dzong. After the Legjö Legung was set up, all of the dzong and the estates were managed by the government [nationalized], and the Dzongpön were paid a salary. There were two different types of salary. The lay aristocratic officials had their own estates, so their salary was lower. The monk officials didn't have an estate, so their salary was a little bit higher. At that time, the main salary was barley. The monk officials were paid their salary from the nearer areas, wherever they wanted. The aristocrats were paid the salary from the long distance areas. In the past, the Lamas or monasteries who had made accomplishments for the government were issued a permanent lamyig, but the Legjö Legung collected all of their travel documents and it was decided to pay a regular transportation fee for the horse corvée animals and the pack animal corvée that the government had to impose. The government would issue a lamyig indicating that the miser had to send the corvées horses and pack animals because it was for the government, but [now] they would be paid a transportation fee. The permanent lamyig were collected and some new lamyig were issued for those [who] absolutely needed [them]. Also, all of the very old loans that the miser owed to the dzongs and the estates were exempted. There were two types of exemptions. The poor people were exempted from paying both the principal and the interest. The households who had better living conditions were exempted from paying interest, but they had to pay [back] the principal. Like this, many exemptions were granted. There were also exemptions on the taxes that the miser had to work for. The Chinese made propaganda and people were saying that the miser had to work for a lot of taxes. But looking at the manner of doing things in India and China, our taxes seemed [like] nothing much. In India, even when we buy a box of matches, we have to pay a tax. But we didn't have any taxes for those things. In Tibet, the taxes were collected because they were given land and a house. There wasn't a single tax imposed without giving things [like land and houses] to the miser. In this place, even if someone invested one's own money and established one's own industry, they would have to pay the taxes. I worked in the Legjö Legung until 1959 and that's all I remember.   

**Q:**  Did you put into action all of those things, like exempting the loans?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  As you said, the monasteries like Sera and Drepung and the aristocrats didn't like to implement the reforms on their own estates. Was there trouble from these two sides?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth, I heard that the great monastic seats [Tib. གདན་ས] who had the estates said that it was not alright to collect [reform] the estates that belonged to the monasteries. I didn't attend the meetings and I didn't start working on that. In the beginning, when they discussed that, I heard that they spoke like this.   

**Q:**  At that time, the monasteries were powerful and they wouldn't listen to anybody. They didn't even listen to the 13th Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The aristocrats didn't have much to say about that. Did the Chinese meddle into this matter?   

**A:**  In order to stop those things, the Chinese were lending loans without interest and they were doing a lot of things. We [the Legjö Legung] were doing a kind of democratic reform internally and were doing a kind of [internal] liberation. The Chinese didn't like it and they lent many loans without interest, which caused many hindrances [Tib. འགོ་རྐྱེན] [to our success]. If I tell you one of the hindrances, they wanted Ngabö to preside over this meeting [office] for the purpose of the Chinese knowing about this [what was going on]. Later, it was said, "It is not alright to have only one [kalön]. There should be two." They wanted Surkhang to be in there from our side. There was also this kind of struggle. At one time, Ngabö came, and at one time, Surkhang came. At that time, the Legjö Legung didn't need to report to the Kashag about their work. They could report it directly up there [Dalai Lama]. So if there wasn't anybody from the Kashag, the Kashag wouldn't know any[thing] about it. If the Kashag didn't know it, the Chinese wouldn't know about it.   

**Q:**  In 1955, the Dalai Lama came from China and in 1956, the Preparatory Committee [Tib. གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] of the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up. At that time, did the Chinese say that we should implement the reforms and go on the path of Socialism, or what did they say?   

**A:**  The Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up and they started implementing the reforms and going on the path of Socialism. The representative of the Central Committee [Ch. zhong yang] came up in 1956 and celebrated the Tibet Autonomous Region. At that time, all [of the] people were frightened [Tib. དངངས་སྐྲག] and thought that now the democratic reforms would be implemented and they would collect everything and make people into beggars. There would not be any other things to do in the reform. They would collect the privately owned things and make it into public ownership [Tib. སྤྱི་ལ་དབང་བ]. After that, all [of the] people were frightened and many people went to India. When the Dalai Lama went to India on the Buddha Jayanti, he talked [with the Chinese] and the reform was postponed for 6 years. Since then, all [of the] people became kind of slightly relaxed. But, people were still kind of frightened saying that, "In the future, they [Chinese] won't treat us nicely."   

**Q:**  I heard that the Chinese told the Dalai Lama that if he didn't go to Tibet, the situation in Tibet was kind of tense and there was some trouble there. Did the people in Lhasa think that the Dalai Lama would not come back? Did they [Chinese] increase the soldiers to do many things for the preparation?   

**A:**  Yes, they did the preparations all of a sudden when the Dalai Lama was in India. At that time, the government [the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region] appointed me as a clerk in the Public Security Department [Ch. gong an ju]. We were just working in name only. The Chinese didn't make us do the work and they wouldn't tell us anything. But I used to go to that office and I took a pistol in my pouch though I was wearing a monk's robe. When I had to deal with the Chinese, it was not that convenient [Tib. བདེ་པོ་མེད་པ]. So I took a pistol with me. One day, a Chinese clerk just went through the motions of fooling around with me and he lifted me up in his arms. When he saw something protruding in my pouch, he said, "What is this protruding thing?" I told him, "It is a gun," and I showed my pistol. It didn't seem good to keep it secret. They might have been checking [people] like this and they might have also heard something from the outside. One day, when I went to the office, there were a lot of soldiers near the gate, and they had put sand in sacks and piled [them] up on all of the windows of the office and made it like a bunker. It was kind of scary and there weren't many people there. When I entered the office, my colleague, the Chinese clerk, was there. But he did not pay attention to me. Then I went back home. All of a sudden they were very startled [Tib. འདྲོག་འགོ]. After a month I asked them, "You guys were very startled at that time. What happened?" They said, "We heard that 500 or 50 reactionary cavalry had come out into the Kongpo area. That's why we were on alert." Actually, it was the time when they were talking about whether the Dalai Lama would come back or not. So I was wondering whether they were thinking that if the Dalai Lama didn't come back, there would be a disturbance in Tibet. Or they thought of talking with the Dalai Lama and suppressing [Tib. མནན] him in India if he didn't come back. They might have been preparing something.   

**Q:**  Were they doing like they did after 1959?   

**A:**  Yes. Later the situation kind of calmed down. From 1958 they prepared and dug trenches and bunkers around Lhasa. After that they did the things inside Lhasa. Before 1959, they even dug trenches on the roads in Lhasa City and built bunkers everywhere. It was really frightening when they did that. I heard that there was the Volunteer Army for the Protection of Religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླངས་དམག]. Nowadays, they are calling it Chushigandru. Actually, it was not only the [people from] Chushigandru, there were people from Kham, Amdo, Central and Western Tibet, and there were aristocrats, monks and soldiers. They were fighting a little bit of guerrilla warfare in Lhoka. After the Chinese were well prepared, I heard that one day, the Chinese told the Kashag that they should eliminate those people and a general assembly meeting [Tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] was held. They discussed at the meeting that the Chinese were talking like this and that they should discuss about the methods. Finally, it was decided that we should mollify the Central Committee and cease the Khambas' disturbance [Tib. ཞོང་དབྱང་དགོངས་པ་དྭངས་བ་དང་ཁམས་རིགས་ཟིང་ཆ་འཇགས་ཐབས]. After that, they appointed the representatives and made the meeting slightly smaller. It was held in the Reform Office and I was among the members of the Standing Committee [Tib. རྒྱུན་ལས]. I wasn't among the representatives. I heard that they [the representatives] drank the water for taking an oath [Tib. མནའ་ཆུ] that they would not leak out the secret. I am not sure what they did. The point of the meeting was that they said, "We are going to quell the guerrilla warfare in Lhoka and we have to ask the Central Committee to give us weapons. It would be useful if we could get a good amount of weapons." Actually, they were planning to attack them [Tib. ཕར] [attack the Chinese], and they didn't have a plan to mollify the Central Committee.   

**Q:**  At the beginning they held the meeting, and after that they made some sub-groups. Did you attend the sub-group discussions?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. From that meeting they sent Namseling and Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས]. They told the Chinese that they were sent to advise the guerrillas. Actually, two of them gave instructions to the Khambas and they became the Commanders [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི]. All of the work was like this.   

