# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0048.01  
##  : with Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet, China  
**Date of Interview:** 3 November 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Benjor  
**Name:** Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང] was a Tibetan soldier. In this interview, he tells about his recruitment into the Tibetan army at age 14 as a corvée tax and about the life of a Tibetan soldier in Kham in the period 1940 through 1950. The subject also talks in detail about the Tibetan regiment in Riwoche and how he was sent to guard a border pass at Jagsam and fought with the PLA troops at the pass in 1950. He also talks in detail about being captured and then released to return to Lhasa. He also talks about the help the Khambas gave the Chinese and about his life in Lhasa in the 1950s after he returned from Kham.   

---  
### Tape 1  

---

**Q:**  I am 78 years old and was born in Chusum County [near Lhagyari]. I was 14 years old when I entered the Tibetan army.   

**Q:**  Why did you join the army?   

**A:**  I was a government tax. Our land was "leased." If one family sent one person to serve as a soldier and that person died, then they had to send another person to serve in the army. I was sent because one of my aunts' sons died and my younger brother was too young to serve and the family didn't want to hire someone else and pay them.   

**Q:**  Usually when a young boy is 18 years old, he could join the army. Why did you go when you were 14?   

**A:**  That was because we had a relative in the army who helped me to join although I was young. Families that received land from the government send a man to serve in the army. We had one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> of land. [Because the government had given them land with an attached corvée military tax]. After I joined the army, I stayed in Kham for 17 years. When I first joined the army I was trained to blow the bugle to give signals, but after some time, since the government sent its soldiers to many different places, I was also sent to a place where I became a regular soldier. I served (was servant for) the shengo named Demba. I served him for many years.   

**Q:**  Did you have a gun?   

**A:**  I had an English "khartum" gun and 100 bullets.   

**Q:**  Did you do military drills and training?   

**A:**  I did training.   

**Q:**  When did you arrive in Kham?   

**A:**  I arrived in Kham when I was 14, and stayed there for 17 years. In Chamdo there was a big military camp. The government considered Chamdo as the border between Tibet and China and from that camp they sent the army to the frontier to protect the border. My station was at Riwoche. The general of our unit camp was [the aristocratic official] Namseling. Then after him it was General <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>. He was a general for many years in Kham. Shakabpa was a very good general because he was very honest. I was about thirty when he came. After that, many Chamdo people asked the government to let him stay longer in Kham. He probably stayed in Kham for 10 years. Usually they changed generals after 3 years. Then they sent a new general named Phulungwaa [Tib. phu lungwa ba]. So when the Chinese Peoples' Liberation Army came to Tibet, Phulungwaa was the general in Kham. Dorje Tsering first stayed in Khyungpo Tengchen county for 8 years. Then they sent him to Jagsam in Riwoche. I was stationed at the place called at Garma Yodang.   

**Q:**  What work did you usually do?   

**A:**  Usually there was nothing for us to do in the army. We just stayed in the army barracks and waited until there was an order from the general. If something happened on the border, then we had to go and find out.   

**Q:**  How did you get to Jagsam?   

**A:**  I was sent there to defend it.   

**Q:**  What kind of defense work did you do?   

**A:**  If you go from Jagsam and cross a mountain pass you are in Nangchen. The Chinese were staying in Nangchen. So when I was staying in Riwoche County, one time they sent me and about 12 soldiers to Jagsam (which is on the border) because there was a rumor that the Chinese were coming to Tibet. So as border guards, we had to stay on the border.   

**Q:**  What did you do at Jagsam?   

**A:**  We had to stay up at night to see if the Chinese were coming. We stayed on the pass.   

**Q:**  How did the fighting come about?   

**A:**  One morning when my friends and I were staying on the border, suddenly we saw lots of Chinese coming to the Tibetan side of the mountain. I looked, but couldn't make out who they were. I told my friends that there are lots of Chinese coming, did you see them? My friends said no they may not be Chinese. They when we looked carefully we saw it was lots of Chinese coming up to the pass. Then I also saw a lot of Chinese coming up from around the sides, not only to the top of the mountain. Then myself and the other 12 soldiers thought that the situation was really bad. We decided that, "If we die, let's die together. If one of us flees, we will shoot him. Let's protect our border and stop the Chinese from coming." Then we Tibetans started to shoot at the Chinese. We were only 12 people. We fired down at them, but that did not stop the Chinese from coming. It was hard to stop them. We continued to shoot at the Chinese soldiers, but however much we fired, the Chinese still kept coming. Then the situation was very bad for us as all of our bullets were finished. Then a bugle instructor who was with us said now we have to flee, so we fled. The instructor and I stayed until the end (last) and then we ran to the bottom of the hill on the Tibetan side (of the border). The Chinese didn't appear at the peak at once, so I and the senior bugler stayed behind while the others descended. Then we also descended. The bugle teacher stopped to have a smoke and I washed as I was sweaty. I washed my face. Then we reached the Jagsam bridge and crossed it. At that time one person gave me [bullets] and then we saw the Chinese soldiers appearing on the other side. The Chinese were yelling, but I couldn't understand what they were saying. From where I was, I couldn't see where the others had fled to, so I was alone. I didn't know where the other soldiers had gone. Then I went to the [nearby] monastery and found that the Tibetan soldiers were there drinking tea. I said to them that the Chinese have crossed the bridge so I am leaving. Even if you guys stay here, I still want to leave. Then we left the monastery and fled into a huge forest behind the monastery. When we arrived in the forest, we heard the Chinese had arrived in the monastery and were making lots of noise.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese did you kill?   

**A:**  I killed a lot, but they still came. They didn't withdraw despite their losses. They were about to leave when they used binoculars and saw that there were lots of saddled horses outside the monastery because at that time there were 100 Tibetan soldiers in the monastery including the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a>, and they thought probably that they were about to flee. So instead of withdrawing, the Chinese attacked.   

**Q:**  How many of the 12 Tibetan soldiers died?   

**A:**  As many Chinese as we shot, they kept coming, stepping on top of the corpses. So because of this, we ran away through the mountains. We ran for 7 days without any <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>. We weren't with Phulungwaa Depön. He had fled from Riwoche before this. When we reached Lhodzong, Phulungwaa was there. We went from Lhodzong to Shopando, but from Shopando, Phulungwaa took us [back to] Lhodzong. At Lhodzong there were 140 loads of ammunition. We transported this one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་རྩིགས] A government edict.">satsig</a> [one day's journey]. Then the Khambas were in league with the Chinese, so we couldn't get any transport animals from the Khambas. So the Chinese seized Lhodzong. The Chinese caught them [Dorje and his friends]. Phulungwaa was also captured by the Chinese. The Chinese said to bring our guns, axes and shovels. I thought the Chinese planned to kill us and then use the shovels and axes to bury us. The Chinese gave us a bowl of tsamba every day and sent Phulungwaa to Chamdo. Then the Chinese asked us whether we wanted to be Chinese soldiers or to go back to our home towns. They also told us that if we wanted to be Chinese soldiers, they would immediately give us uniforms and other things. If we wanted to go back home, they would give us a pass and some expense money. None of our people joined the People's Liberation Army, so they were given 3 dayan. We wanted to go home because the Kashag was still there. We though we would have another chance for revenge. If we wanted to go home, they gave us some money and passes (to show to Chinese soldiers so we wouldn't be killed). They didn't ask us anything or beat us, but they did take our guns.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese ask any questions or beat you?   

**A:**  No. They were very nice. My friends and I all went back home to Lhasa from Chamdo.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese released you did the Chinese send any soldiers to accompany you?   

**A:**  No. But on the road we met a lot of Chinese soldiers and we were very afraid that we would be killed by the Chinese. However, the Chinese paid us no attention and did not stop us. When we met Chinese soldiers on the road, we were surprised that they Chinese paid no attention at all to us. Then we got to Lhasa. In the courtyard the Chinese were grouped in small units. We had a shengo and he was taking horses and mules from the monastery. I came out with the shengo. Below the monastery there was a village in which there were many Chinese troops. They didn't say anything to us. We stayed a night with a villager. I had a mule.   

**Q:**  When you were at Lhodzong, what did you think?   

**A:**  I thought, "One day I will die, but before that I want to kill 5 or 6 Chinese."   

**Q:**  When you were fighting in Kham, were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> people helping you fight the Chinese?   

**A:**  No. There were no <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> people helping us because they hated the Tibetan government because there was such heavy taxation. And also at that time the Chinese were saying that if they came to Tibet there wouldn't be any taxes and they will help the poor people and they will also divide the rich peoples' land and things. So actually the Khamba people were helping the Chinese and when the Tibetan government soldiers were running away, the Khamba people would kill them. When I was running to Lhodzong, several people were killed by the Khambas. At that time the Khambas were helping the Chinese, but after the Chinese stayed in Tibet many years, the Khambas also got a lot of taxes and turned against the Chinese and had an uprising and fought with them.   

**Q:**  Why did the Khambas help the Chinese instead of the Tibetan soldiers? Were there any other reasons?   

**A:**  When Tibetan government soldiers stayed in Kham, there were some rich soldiers/leaders who used to loan money to the Khambas and then hound them for the payment. So the Khambas were angry about this. The second reason was the government taxes collected by the military officers. So the Khambas hated these and that is why some Khambas wanted to and did kill Tibetan soldiers.   

**Q:**  Were the heads of Tibetan army Khambas?   

**A:**  No, all were Central Tibetans (üpa).   

**Q:**  How were the relations between the Khambas and the Tibetan soldiers before the Tibetans were fighting the Chinese?   

**A:**  The relationship was good, but after the Chinese started coming to Tibet the Chinese spread lots of stories about taking from rich and giving to poor, and about no taxes, so the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>s believed the rumors and they thought that the Chinese would be better than the Tibetan government. So while we got along well before, as soon as the Chinese came the Khamba's attitude changed and they sort of rebelled.   

**Q:**  How did the Chinese soldiers catch you in Lhodzong?   

**A:**  The Depön told me the Chinese were coming. I had long hair and boots like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> then. I told the Depön that we can hold them off for a day. The road into Lhodzong was bad with mountains on the sides and in front so we could sit [on the pass] and fire down on them. At this time the Chinese and Khambas had surrounded us without our knowing it so Depön Phulungwaa left his horse and fled [on foot] with a servant. We planned to take the Depön's horse and flee. Then suddenly the Chinese attacked with their guns firing. We had a Bren-gun operator with us and the bugle instructor. I was in a tent ready to fire at them. The Chinese were yelling to us, "Throw your weapons on the ground." My associate, the instructor, said throw your gun to the Chinese, there is no sense shooting. So I did this and stood up and was captured.   

**Q:**  When you threw away your guns, did the Chinese kill anyone?"   

**A:**  No. Once you threw the guns, they wouldn't kill you.   

**Q:**  If you had held your guns what would have happened?   

**A:**  I thought that the Chinese would have shot us. I wanted to shoot the Chinese too, but the instructor argued with me a lot so I finally listened to him. I really wanted to shoot some Chinese and even though I would die I would kill 4-5 Chinese. If I died at that time, then my family would not have to send another soldier for a few years [a custom in his home town]. If a soldier died in war this was considered good in his home village. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> was the general in the regiment he was a very good person. He used to put 15-20 people everywhere and he would stay in the main camp. Shakabpa treated soldiers and other people very well. Shakabpa also gave soldiers lots of beer (chang) and some money. When Shakabpa was the general the other leaders would not beat the soldiers and would treat them very well. Lots of people liked Shakabpa. When Phulungwaa was the general, he did not have that much power and the lower leaders (such as the rupön) had the power.   

**Q:**  What about Ngabö and Lhalu?   

**A:**  That was later. I was not a soldier then. When Lhalu was a general in Kham, he withdrew the soldiers from the border and also treated the soldiers poorly. When Ngabö became a general, he lost the war. Ngabö did not even have a chance to fight the Chinese soldiers. When they lost the war, the Tibetan government soldiers burned the armory in Chamdo. I didn't see that because I wasn't there at that time. When my friends and I went to Lhasa, we told the military headquarters what happened and it gave us two months' salary and let us go back to our home town. I went to my home town in Lhagyari. When I was in my home town I got a message from my brother who was staying in Lhasa working as a religious art painter. He said don't stay in our home town. You can't do anything there because you've been in the army for a long time so you don't know how to do agricultural work. Just come back to Lhasa. I listened to my brother and came to Lhasa. My brother told me, "Now it's very hard to live in Lhasa. You have to learn some skill." My brother said he would teach me how to paint. I said, "Now I am old. Just like you can't teach an old horse to run fast and teach an old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཛོ] A cross between a yak and a cow/ox.">dzo</a> how to plow, so I won't be able to learn any painting. I don't want to learn any skills." My brother died in 1992. Then I started to do some business and went to most of the Tibetan pilgrimage sites and then after that I met my wife and got married. We met in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How did you meet your wife?   

**A:**  I knew one of the monks who belonged to Phabongkha Monastery. He had given many loans in the Dzashö area. We were good friends. The monk told me don't stay like this, I will help you find a wife. Since he knew this area and these women, the monk introduced me to the woman who became my wife. Then my wife and I stayed in Lhasa one year since she had no relatives and my wife was very sick. In 1958, we returned to Dzashö and lived there since then. After the uprising, there was gyarshib. At that time I was doing trading and I had to pay a tax of about 1,000 yuan. I told the Work Committee at that time about what I did for business and said the tax was too high. Then the Work Committee reduced this tax from 1000 to 300. Since at that time I had no money to pay the tax, the Work Committee took my horse as worth 150 yuan. After that, the Work Committee came to the village and asked for the tax and I said I would pay, but actually I didn't pay that money. Then they finally came and took one of my oxen. After that I sold my one kau (necklace/box) to one of the nomads. Then I told the Work Committee about selling the necklace and I told them I promised I will never do any business again. I said I met a nomad and he asked me if I had any goods to sell and I told that nomad that I have a kau necklace/box and sold it to the nomad for some meat and one ball of butter. I told the Work Committee I had already eaten those things and asked them if there was any tax I had to pay for that. The Work Committee said that it didn't matter. There was no tax for meat and butter. Then after that, the government treated me as someone under surveillance [tatog] [a bad class classification]. Sometimes they asked me to do some work such as going to dzonshu, near Nyimajanga, to build a bridge. While building the bridge, I broke my leg and the government gave me about 40 yuan. For 7 years after that I didn't work. That was the only money I ever got from the government. During the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུག; རུ་ཁག; ch. 队] A large administrative unit in Tibetan communes that consisted of several villages. The full name for brigade was &quot;production brigade&quot; (tib. ཐོན་སྐྱེད་རུ་ཁང; ch. 生产队), although most Tibetans just used the abbreviation &quot;ruga.&quot; In Tibet, communes/brigades were initiated primarily in the late 1960s.">brigade</a>, I got nothing. After that, I heard that if a person broke an arm or leg while doing government work the government will pay some money for that. At that time I did not get a chance to attend any meeting about that, but I heard about it and I asked the government whether I could get money. The government told me that I could get money, but I never received any. Then I also heard that in the past, those who paid business taxes to the government got repaid later. When I asked the government about whether I can get the money I paid as taxes, they said that they already paid me, but I didn't get any money.   

**Q:**  When you were a Tibetan government soldier, what was your salary?   

**A:**  At first I received nine <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དངུལ་སྲང] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system, 50 of which equaled 1 dotse.">ngüsang</a>, then I got 18 ngüsang every month. That was for buying tea and meat and butter. Then there was 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley per month from the government. Usually every year my family sent me some clothes or some money to buy clothing. From my salary, I bought tea and butter and so on. My family had to send me 2 rolls of woven woolen cloth. Sometimes I sold the woolen cloth and drank beer with friends with the money.   

**Q:**  Tell me about life in the army. Were there canteens?   

**A:**  Usually the soldiers cooked by themselves. We ground our barley and roasted it, and if there was a water mill to grind it, we used to do that or if not, we did it by hand. If someone didn't know how to grind it himself, he had to hire another person to grind for him. When I stayed in the border, we had our own military camp and didn't stay in villages.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese caught you and then let you go, what did you think at that time?   

**A:**  I thought we lost a part of Tibet, but didn't lose the part with Lhasa. So I thought that the Tibetan government would fight with the Chinese and at that time I would get my revenge. I was not afraid of the Chinese.   

**Q:**  How were you treated?   

**A:**  They treated me very well. They didn't beat me and didn't ask questions. They said they weren't like soldiers; they were like beggars. They were very poor. When we came from Lhodzong to Lhasa, we saw lots of Chinese soldiers riding horses and also walking. The walking ones were very tired. One time we met a walking Chinese soldier who was very tired and we walked with him to Lhasa. The Chinese guy told me that he had parents and a family and I thought that the Chinese must be like a Tibetan soldier in that he joined the army as a tax. Those Chinese soldiers were not like today's soldiers. The old soldiers seemed very good, but today's Chinese soldiers will beat anyone they capture and ask questions.   

**Q:**  What was the structure of the Riwoche regiment, how many soldiers? And what kind of military officers were there and where did the soldiers come from?   

**A:**  We were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Regiment.   

**A:**  Why did they name it <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a>?   

**A:**  It was named according to the letters in the alphabet. Ja was one of the 30 consonants. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> for a long time. Under the Depön, there were 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and 4 gyagpön. One rupön was called Druggye [Tib. འབྲུག་རྒྱལ]. He was born in Lhoka Maltro Dechen Chökhor [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་བདེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. I don't know the name of the other rupön, but he was also from the same place. I was originally from Lhagyari [Tib. ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི] which is now called Chusum [Tib. ཆུ་གསུམ] County. I don't know the name of the other rupön, but he was from the same place. I was under Rupön Druggye. There were 25 shengo. Each shengo had two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅུ་དཔོན] 1. A minor military officer in charge of a squad of ten troops in the traditional Tibetan Army. 2. A minor official.">jupön</a> [squad leaders] under him. Each shengo had two jupön under him for a total of 25 soldiers. One squad had 12 and the other had 13.   

**Q:**  Where were the soldiers from?   

**A:**  Most were conscripted as a tax. A few were hired soldiers. Some of the sons of soldiers were hired by others to serve, but these were few.   

**A:**  Did the soldiers come from all the places in Tibet?   

**A:**  Our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Regiment was from E Lhagyari and from Nyan county [Tib. གཉན], Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར], Lhüntse [Tib. ལྷུན་རྩེ] and Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར]. Actually, Nyan belonged to Lhüntse. So most of the soldiers were from 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> in Lhoka. Some were obliged to send 2 soldiers, some 25. Some were also sent to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment and the Gusung Regiment. When I joined the regiment, there were said to be soldiers from Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས], but really there were none. Samye was said to be exempt because the Samye people worked on the construction of the Samye Monastery and they had a hard time. We had a total of 529 soldiers.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers would stay in the main base?   

**A:**  Most of them would stay in the main regimental base with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> in Riwoche. The rupön stayed in Riwoche, the depön sometimes would tour the other locations of the troops. Each <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> had 4 shengo and they stayed wherever their soldiers were. The same with each shengo. He stayed with the 25 troops under him at his location.   

**Q:**  What kind of place was Riwoche?   

**A:**  Riwoche had 2 monasteries up on the mountain. Under these there was the Riwoche temple called Lhagang Thanggyama [Tib. ལྷ་ཁང་ཐང་རྒྱ་མ] and below that was our regiment.   

**Q:**  Was there a river flowing in the middle?   

**A:**  No. The monastery, the temple and the regiment were in one place. The regiment was on the south side of Riwoche and two monasteries were on the north.   

**Q:**  Where did the peasants live?   

**A:**  There were just a few scattered <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དུད་ཆུང] Literally &quot;small smoke.&quot; A type of peasant/serf/miser in traditional Tibetan society that belonged to an estate/lord, but did not hold tax-base land (tib. ཁྲལ་རྟེན). They usually were poor and survived by working for others or leasing land from treba (taxpayer) households or sometimes from their estate.">düjung</a> living around the regiment. They didn't have land and didn't have to work much as a tax, but they would work for the county called Rigya Lanyer [Tib. རི་རྒྱ་བླ་གཉེར] doing jobs like sweeping, etc. The bigger <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> lived in other places.   

**Q:**  When you went to Nangchen from Riwoche, was there only one route or what?   

**A:**  There was only one route. If one crossed a mountain pass one would reach Riwoche. When you crossed the iron bridge, Jagsam [Tib. ལྕགས་ཟམ], you reached Nangchen which belonged to the Siling territory [Qinghai Province]. It was directly north. The Jagsam bridge was terrible and swayed back and forth when you went on it. After awhile you got used to going on it.   

**Q:**  When you come from Nangchen to Riwoche, did you have to cross the Jagsam?   

**A:**  There was also another route in the upper part of the valley via a pass called Potokha. In the past, when I was in Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན], we heard the Chinese were coming so I and 25 soldiers were stationed at that pass. We stayed there all night. This pass was the border where the other side was Chinese and this side was Tibetan territory. When we were there at that pass, there were also a lot of militia from Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས] and Khyungpo Tengchen. So there were two routes. When you reached this Potokha pass, you could go to Nangchen, Khyungpo Tengchen, and Riwoche. This pass was directly north of Riwoche. Below Potokha there was another hill. We were stationed on it.   

**Q:**  When you had to go guard that place, did you have to cross the pass?   

**A:**  We didn't cross the Nangchen pass but stayed on the top of the small hill. The next morning the Chinese crossed the pass and arrived at the bottom of the hill on the Tibetan territory side. At about sunrise, I and another soldier went to watch and I saw many people down there. I told my partner Jonden [Tib. འབྱོར་ལྡན], "The Chinese may have reached here." He said, "They might be the people who have come to help the Khambas, but as we looked down we saw that the Chinese had left their horses and mules on the upper part and they were down there carrying their guns, which were shining. I said, "Shall I shoot?" He said, "Don't shoot for a while." Then the Chinese were coming just beneath us and we fought with them.   

**Q:**  Can you draw a map of Riwoche indicating where the monasteries were located?   

**A:**  No, I can't. I never draw things.   

**Q:**  When the troops were scattered in many places, in which places were the soldiers of the Riwoche regiment stationed?   

**A:**  Many were at Khyungpo Serta [Tib. སེར་རྩ]. It was one day from Khyungpo Tengchen. Later the regiment was merged into the Riwoche regiment and we stayed in Tengchen for a long time. Between Tengchen and Serta there is a pass called Sharla and I stayed there with 25 troops. From Khyungpo Tengchen to Riwoche was 3 day trip on horseback. From Sharla to Tengchen was one day on horseback. There were always 25 troops at Sharla. If you went down from Sharla there was Jönkha [Tib. བྱོན་ཁ] where there were more soldiers than on Sharla. From Jönkha to Riwoche was half a day.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were stationed there?   

**A:**  There were 2 shengo [50 troops] at Jönkha. At Jagsam there were 100 troops all the time. From Jagsam to Riwoche was 3 days on foot and it was near to Nangchen. Later, when we heard that the Chinese soldiers were coming, we went there to the place where I had been guarding, the place called Garmageru of which the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> belonged to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  How near was it to Jagsam?   

**A:**  It was a long distance on the opposite side. Later, when we were about to make war, we didn't stay at Garmageru and we were merged with Riwoche and we were sent to Jagsam.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there in Garmageru?   

**A:**  There were 25 soldiers. We also left 25 troops at Poyü [Tib. སྤོ་ཡུལ]. Later when we heard the Chinese were coming, they were recalled to Riwoche.   

**Q:**  Why did they call them back?   

