# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0048.02  
##  : with Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Tibet, China  
**Date of Interview:** 3 November 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Benjor  
**Name:** Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 78  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dorje Tsering [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་རིང] was a Tibetan soldier. In this interview, he discusses in detail the 1950 Chamdo war and the fighting his regiment did in Kham in the Riwoche area on the Qinghai border. He also mentions how he was captured and then released and how he met Lhalu in Giamda on the way back to Lhasa as well as how he was taken by Commander Phulungwa to Lhodzong to get 140 loads of ammunition. He also discusses the life of a Tibetan soldier in Kham at that time.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0048_02/H_0048_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  [Note: The first part of this tape is missing, so the following translation starts about 2/3rds of the way down in the Tibetan audio.] ... The Depön called the soldiers when it was said that the Chinese are coming in order to make a smaller defensive position.   

**Q:**  When you were at the defensive position, if you encountered Chinese how were you to send a message?   

**A:**  When we encountered them, we would fight and we would immediately send a messenger on horseback [Tib. ཨན་ཨདྲུང] back to Riwoche where the main base was to inform the Depön. All the main military officers stayed there.   

**Q:**  Did you have to wait for an order?   

**A:**  When they received the message, they would consult and the messenger would come back right away and they would send reinforcements.   

**Q:**  Since it was a distance of 2-3 days, in case the Chinese came were you allowed to fight?   

**A:**  If there were 10 or more Chinese we were allowed to open fire on our own. If there were less than 10, we were not allowed to open fire [had to wait for an order]. I heard that the Chinese said that there were soldiers under three depön and they should send an equal number of soldiers. They sent about 3,000 Chinese although there were just a small number of Tibetan soldiers. The war took place in a gorge and we were on the hill so we were able to kill many Chinese. It seems that their plan was to leave, but when they looked through binoculars and saw the horses of the military officers saddled around the Jagsam Monastery, they thought the Tibet troops were about to flee so they didn't withdraw.   

**Q:**  At that time, where were you guarding?   

**A:**  We were at Jagsam. That is where we fought. We shot from the mountain top and we also shot after crossing the bridge. I thought sooner or later I would die. I never thought of being able to return. I prayed to the Dalai Lama and thought I should kill 5-6 Chinese before I die sooner or later. I didn't have any other thoughts.   

**Q:**  If there were many Chinese and if you had to withdraw, was there a place to withdraw to? Did you have an order to withdraw if you had to?   

**A:**  There wasn't any place to withdraw. Finally, we lost the mountain top and Jagsam. The Chinese came in two units. One came via Jagsam and the other came via Photoka in Khyungpo. Our main regiment was attacked from 2 sides. As soon as it was said the Chinese were coming, the Depön Phulungwa fled. After the Tibetan troops lost these battles, they scattered. We fled for a week without having tsamba to eat. Because we had no food, we couldn't sleep. So all were weak and it was as if we were drunk. We just drank some water and went ahead.   

**Q:**  You said that there was a monastery at which the Chinese looked through binoculars. How many soldiers were there at that time?   

**A:**  At Jagsam Monastery, there were supposed to be 100 soldiers but there were just 25 soldiers. Then we, 25 soldiers, were sent there. At that time, we saw that the monks were serving tea to the soldiers. When I came near the bridge, I had some soldiers with me. When the Chinese came, these troops opened fire. There was a lot of shooting and I became temporarily deaf. Then all of a sudden I looked around and all our troops were gone. I was alone. The Chinese had crossed the bridge and had gone. I took my gun and crawled to the monastery. At the monastery, the monks poured me tea. The monks said stay here today; the Chinese won't be coming back. I said no I'm not staying. I saw the Chinese arrive at the bridge. So I fled into the forest area behind and above the monastery. Then if the Chinese arrived at the monastery I could hear them.   

**Q:**  Did the Tibetan soldiers in the monastery stay there permanently or were they just staying at that time?   

**A:**  There were 25 soldiers who stayed in a small regiment regularly near the monastery. Then we arrived at that time.   

**Q:**  When you withdrew, did you have to go through the monastery?   

**A:**  There wasn't any other road than via the monastery. Just after we crossed the river, we would reach the monastery. The Chinese had crossed the river in rubber rafts at the lower part of the river and then went to block the road. So the monks knew that and they served tea to the [Tibetan] soldiers. Then I said that the Chinese had crossed the bridge, so you guys stay if you want to but I am leaving.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the 25 soldiers staying there?   

**A:**  It was said to guard the place from Nangchen like nowadays the People's Liberation Army guards places.   

**Q:**  What was the main duty?   

**A:**  If there was a disturbance and the Chinese came, we were supposed to fight with them and the regiment would send some reinforcements. At that time there were no militias at Jagsam. At Photoka, however, there were militia. The militias at Photoka were a result of the 9th Panchen Lama. He had a lot of Chinese troops with him so it was to stop them. There were about 1,000 militia from Tengchen, Markham and Khyungpo Karnag Sersum [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་དཀར་ནག་སེར་གསུམ] at the time of Panchen Lama. Then the Panchen Lama passed away before going up to Lhasa and his belongings reached Nagchu and were left there. Later, the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama was born in China and the Chinese came up.   

**Q:**  Did Depön Phulungwa have any wireless equipment?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  What were the duties of the soldiers who were scattered to different areas in groups?   

**A:**  One was to fight the Chinese. One was to help the miser to destroy any bandits that came. In Kham there were many bandits.   

**Q:**  Were the Chinese on horseback or on foot?   

**A:**  When the Chinese first came they were on horseback. But they left their horses on the hill and came to fight on foot. The Chinese left a lot of horses on the Nangchen Mountain. At first we didn't see the Chinese who were below, but we saw their horses on top. I told my friend, "Oh the Chinese are probably coming because there are horses on the mountain." He said, "Oh those are probably just Khamba nomads." The Chinese had binoculars and good equipment like that, but we didn't.   

**Q:**  How many bullets did you have?   

**A:**  100. When I was fighting at Jagsam, my bullets were exhausted so I fled to the other side of the bridge. There a soldier gave me another 100 bullets.   

**Q:**  How did he get the other 100 bullets?   

**A:**  He was a coward and didn't have the nerve to fire so he gave me his bullets. So again I fired at the Chinese. I shot all 100 bullets but only 5-6 hit the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Was your weapon a 305 English Carbine?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you have hand grenades?   

**A:**  Yes. It was round and had a string you pull. When you threw it, you had to run back 25 steps and then lie on the ground. We also had a Bren-gun and a machine gun. We also had another kind of machine gun called bagbag [Tib. སྦག་སྦག]. These guns were with the main headquarters in Riwoche. We also didn't have any hand grenades, as these also were with the main headquarters. So the guns we had were all 305 English Carbines.   

**Q:**  Were all soldiers issued 100 bullets?   

**A:**  Yes. This was given at the beginning, but during the war the main headquarters had an armory and we would take out as many bullets as we wanted.   

**Q:**  Did you have a bunker?   

**A:**  Yes. These were made before. But they were no use because when we got in the bunker and tried to shoot, we got surrounded (flanked) and it was easy for them to catch us.   

**Q:**  Did they build bunkers at the Riwoche regimental headquarters?   

**A:**  There were no bunkers at Riwoche. My fellow countryman who was a servant of a shengo used to say, "This year the Communist Chinese will come, so we should eat, drink and die. When the Chinese reached Riwoche and they came in formation from the Thangyama Temple, he fired until his bullets ran out and the Chinese had to withdraw. Later, when his bullets ran out, the Chinese grabbed him and pulled his arms and shot him in the chest and killed him.   

**Q:**  All the others fled and he was left alone, right?   

**A:**  He stayed there alone and that happened to him. When we lost Jagsam, we didn't go back towards the regiment. We went up the hill and then went from hill to hill, because the places were held by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did you receive a message? What was the reason for not going to the main base?   

**A:**  From the place where we were, a strong group of Chinese troops went down and some of them came out via Khyungpo Potokha. So we heard that our regiment had been suppressed so we couldn't return to the regiment.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you mainly guard the road where the regiment would go?   

**A:**  We were guarding the mountain top of Nangchen. The upper part of the bigger mountain belonged to Nangchen and mountain on this side was ours. Up north from the jagsam bridge was a mountain. We were stationed there.   

**Q:**  When you got down from the mountain, you reached Jagsam, right?   

**A:**  We had to cross the river and then we reached Jagsam.   

**Q:**  Was this the main road to Riwoche?   

**A:**  Yes. That was why we were on guard.   

**Q:**  How many days did you have to travel from your defensive position to Riwoche?   

**A:**  We had to go for 4 days.   

**Q:**  Were there soldiers stationed on the way to Riwoche?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Jagsam was located in between your defensive position and Riwoche, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, we were staying in the monastery.   

**Q:**  When you were fighting, did you hear that the Chinese had crossed the Gyamo Ngülchu [Tib. རྒྱ་མོ་དངུལ་ཆུ] River?   

**A:**  A group of Chinese arrived from Chamdo and after they took Riwoche, two [Tibetan] regiments went down to Chamdo and later we met some of those Chamdo soldiers fleeing at Lharigo. They told me that the Chinese attacked at night all of a sudden and the Doji fled and the Trapchi soldiers' armory was burned to destroy it. [Trindorla: A shengo came to burn the armory with a small tin of petrol saying it was Ngabö's order.]   

**Q:**  Otherwise, you didn't do anything else, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Later, you reached Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་དོང], right? Did you send soldiers to find out what happened in Lhodzong before you reached there?   

**A:**  No. We didn't. When we arrived at Lhodzong there was an armory from the old society. At Shopando we met Phulungwa Depön. He said now we have to go back to Lhodzong. There was a government armory there and we had to go back to get it. We were 7 soldiers, one of whom was an instructor. We swore among ourselves to die if need be and flee together if we could.   

**Q:**  Did Phulungwa himself swear this?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. Our instructor told the Depön that it would be good to take us because we had sworn an oath. So we went to Lhodzong with Phunluga. At this time it was not easy to transport the armory's things. After we reached the place called Dzido, the Khambas had sided with the Chinese and wouldn't give us transport animals for the 140 animal loads of guns and ammunition we had [280 loads]. So we carried these loads from Lhodzong to the first stop at noon, and then we didn't get any pack animals anymore and we were caught at Lhodzong.   

**Q:**  How did they receive this order?   

**A:**  We were taken by Phulungwa and he might have received the order from Ngabö and those people. When we were at Lhodzong, we heard that the Chinese were coming. We were saying that we could stop the Chinese from that mountain top if they came in during the day because the entrance to Lhodzong was a valley flanked by rocky mountains. So we thought that we could fight there and hold back the Chinese advance. We set ourselves up on a hill overlooking the path to Lhodzong. However, that night the Chinese had already reached there and we saw that Phulungwa Depön had fled on foot.   

**Q:**  He knew the situation before that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The three of us also fled. Each of us rode the Depön's horses and there was a mule on which we loaded a Bren-gun. At that time, they were firing guns, so the instructor targeted his gun and we were also ready to shoot. At that time, the instructor and another soldier were caught and the instructor scolded us to hand over the guns. If he hadn't told us to hand over the guns, I had thoughts of killing some Chinese before handing over my gun as sooner or later I would die. At this time, Lhalu had reached Lharigo. We met up with Lhalu at Kongpo Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ] when we were coming up to Lhasa after the Chinese came [to Chamdo]   

**Q:**  What did Lhalu say?   

**A:**  He didn't anything. He just gave each of us 40 yuan in salary.   

**Q:**  Did you have horses when you were in Lhodzong?   

**A:**  We had the Depön's horses, but when we were caught, they robbed everything. When we reached Lhodzong, the Khambas sent horses.   

**Q:**  When you were at your defensive position, did you have a horse?   

**A:**  Yes. We had our private horses, but later we didn't even have a bowl. When we were caught in Lhodzong, the Chinese said, "You can become a soldier [in the People's Liberation Army] if you like or you can also go home and do whatever work you were doing in the past." They gave us a pass.   

**Q:**  We have heard that at Riwoche Phulungwa was afraid to fight with the Chinese and when he tried to flee, Tibetan soldiers stopped him on the road and he gave them a bribe to let him go. Is that true?   

**A:**  No, that wasn't true. He just ran away all at once.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers did he take with him?   

**A:**  He might have taken all of his regular servants and his wife and kids and fled. From Shopando he sent his wife and servants to Tibet and he returned with us to Lhodzong with some of his servants. From Lhodzong, we were caught and locked up for 3 days with Phulungwa, and then he was taken back to Chamdo. At that time, we were thinking that even after the place was lost, soldiers might come down from [central] Tibet and we could fight again and take revenge. I was thinking it would be better to commit suicide rather than dying under the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Thinking back now to the Riwoche fight, do you think you could have won by doing things differently?   

**A:**  I think there was no way we could have handled the Chinese easily. They had a lot of troops and we had few. And they had good weapons and we didn't have many weapons and only a small amount of bullets.   

**Q:**  If you had had many people and many bullets could you have won?   

**A:**  At that time the Chinese were not that strong because they had come from a long distance away and they were all exhausted, so if we had many people and many bullets we could have. But it might be that the Tibetan Government lost the religious territory [Tib. ཆོས་ལྡན་ཞིང་ཁམས] of Tibet because of [karmic] hindrance. Otherwise, on a man to man basis, if we had the same equipment, one of us could handle 10-15 Chinese. But because of the karmic hindrance, they entered Tibet.   

**Q:**  When you were in the Chamdo war, were your wives and children also there?   

**A:**  Yes. When we were in the regiment, our wives and kids were with us. But when we went the border guard post duty, we went alone. The new soldiers didn't have wives and a few others didn't, but most had a wife and 2-3 kids.   

**Q:**  Did the regiment look after your family when you went?   

**A:**  No. Some soldiers were rich and others were so-so.   

**Q:**  What was your salary per month?   

**A:**  The household who hired us [Tib. གླ་བདག][to serve as their corvee tax soldier] would pay us 18 sang per year and also give a set of clothes.   

**Q:**  Did they give you the clothes once a year?   

**A:**  No. They give it to us twice. There were 2 longer rolls of nambu for making a chupa and 1 short roll of nambu for making a shirt and trousers. Then the regiment gave us 2 khe of barley per month and 9 sang to buy butter, tea and salt every 2 months. Later they gave us 18 sang every month. At this time I was single so I mostly sold the nambu. I couldn't eat 2 khe of barley so I also sold it and drank chang (beer) and it was really a happy time. The married ones were better off since the wives would weave nambu and blankets. We single soldiers were poorer.   

**Q:**  Was it considered better to have a wife or not?   

**A:**  If you had a wife and kids then in times of war you were not courageous. We single ones were brave, thinking, we don't care even we die today.   

**Q:**  When you fled, did you take your wife and the children?   

**A:**  The soldiers who were at the battlefield got separated from their wives and children. The soldiers in the main base ran away along with their wives and children, loading their possessions on their horses.   

**Q:**  At that time, when you fought, you fled after using up all the bullets, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Didn't they leave you ammunition in Jagsam?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. If they didn't send them from the main base, there wasn't any ammunition there.   

**Q:**  Didn't they send ammunition?   

**A:**  They didn't have the time to send any because the Chinese attacked at night and took the place. So there was no time for the soldiers to go there [to Riwoche] to get the bullets.   

**Q:**  The message couldn't reach there because it was a 3-4 days-long journey, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes. The fighting took place during the day and continued until late that evening and then the Chinese took the place. Otherwise, the Chinese didn't have very good weapons and when they were firing cannons, the shells would roll on the soft pasture and sand and didn't explode. It was not like modern cannons. The cannons were made from aluminum and could be carried on the shoulder.   

**Q:**  Comparing with the Chinese, how were the weapons of the Tibetan soldiers?   

**A:**  Our Bren-guns and machine guns at the main base were very good because all of them were imported, but they were left at the base and it was like the proverb, "I have 100 horses in my homeland." [Tib. ཕ་ཡུལ་ལ་རྟ་བརྒྱ་ཡོད] [but none on hand]   

**Q:**  In the main base, how many machine guns were there?   

**A:**  There was one machine gun and one bagbag machine gun and 2 Bren-guns. The machine gun had a wheel and held 100 bullets.   

**Q:**  Did you have many bombs?   

**A:**  Probably we didn't have many. I don't know how many things they had. We were just taught how to throw them by practicing throwing stones, but they didn't use the real bombs for training.   

**Q:**  Did they show you the bombs?   

**A:**  They didn't. All of the weapons and ammunitions were kept in the armory which was called the jikhang [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁང]. The door to this was locked.   

**Q:**  Were there soldiers trained to use the machine guns?   

**A:**  Yes. There were some and they would use the guns for training.   

**Q:**  Did they teach you to use the machine guns?   

**A:**  No. There were some soldiers who used it and they did not teach shooting Bren-guns to all the soldiers.   

**Q:**  How many people were there who learned to fire Bren-guns?   

**A:**  There were 15-16 soldiers.   

**Q:**  How many were trained to fire the machine gun (bagbag)?   

**A:**  There were about 9-10 soldiers and when they practiced, those people would practice separately.   

**Q:**  Those people who used the machine guns would stay in the main base, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

