# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0069.01  
##  : with Tseden [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Chushül, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 2000  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gyatsho  
**Name:** Tseden [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟེན ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 71  
**Date of Birth:** 1929  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee tells about being born into a düjung family in Chushü and how he became a servant that herded cattle for the Yuthor Household when he was 14 years old. When he was 21, he was sent to become a Tibetan soldier in the Jugnyi Drugna Regiment and later in the Police Regiment. He remained a soldier in Nedong where Kabshöpa was banished and imprisoned. Later, the interviewee was sent to Lhasa for the next two years where he was taught not just different English drills, but how to fire a machine gun as well. After the subject returned home and began farming once again, he then became the tsugdrang of the Mutual Aid Team and the dütrang of the rukhag. He instructed the masses in production and delivering the Donation Grain. The subject also talks about road construction in Chushü and how he saw the Khambas and the PLA fighting. In addition to this fighting, the interviewee also mentions the fighting and the between the Nyadre and the Gyenlo. The subject also tells about the present gentsang system and complains that people still didn't have the right to choose what they want to plant and how they want to plant, obviously displeased with how the xiang makes the decision.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0069_01/OR_0069_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Yes, I was a trenyog. I had served for the Yuthor [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོར྄] Household. Since I was about 14 years old, our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] ordered me worked for him. Herding cattle was my job.   

**Q:**  What was your household? Was it a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དུད་ཆུང] Literally &quot;small smoke.&quot; A type of peasant/serf/miser in traditional Tibetan society that belonged to an estate/lord, but did not hold tax-base land (tib. ཁྲལ་རྟེན). They usually were poor and survived by working for others or leasing land from treba (taxpayer) households or sometimes from their estate.">düjung</a>?   

**A:**  My household in that time was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དུད་ཆུང] Literally &quot;small smoke.&quot; A type of peasant/serf/miser in traditional Tibetan society that belonged to an estate/lord, but did not hold tax-base land (tib. ཁྲལ་རྟེན). They usually were poor and survived by working for others or leasing land from treba (taxpayer) households or sometimes from their estate.">düjung</a> and my parents served for others. We had a very small house. Since I was 14 years old, I herded cows for the family. At morning, I collected dungs of cows, feed them and afternoon I feed them again. In the summer, I herded those animals.   

**Q:**  Who was your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a>?   

**A:**  Yuthog.   

**Q:**  This village is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> [Tib. ཞོལ] village of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] County. Where is the Yuthor?   

**A:**  This household was a shungyupa. There were five households who would obey the order of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. The Yuthor household leased one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>. This household paid leases but they also had servants. This shiga was belonged to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a> Lamoshar, [Tib. རྨེ་རུ་ལ་མོ་ཤར]. This household had to pay lease. After I grew up, they told me to do such as a stable boy, cooking helper, or sending messages and working on the dzong's field called [Tib. ཕྱག་འདེབས] There were lots of works needed to do. If there was a traveler, I went to send messages for arranging animals to move his belongs. Sometimes, our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> went to Tshapanang, [Tib. ཚལ་པ་ནང] or Tashitse, [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་རྩེ]. I went to get back the horse corvee. Sometimes government messengers [Tib. a drun) or soldiers needed animals and I also went to get back their horses. I walked to there and got back horses the place where they went. If I went to send messages. I did this work many times. All of those jobs had to be done by those five households in this area. Since I grew up as an adult man, I was told to farm for the household. I had plow their lands, watered their lands, and harvested for them. Sometimes if they did not have enough people, I would be told to send messages or something else.   

**Q:**  Did your household have lands at that point?   

**A:**  We had a field for working for them called Leshing, [Tib. ལས་ཞིང] that had been leased in return for a fifty days' work. But I worked for the household whole years. I plowed in the spring and so on. I think I do not have to say specifically what I had done in there for the household. When I was 21 years old, I heard that the Communist was going to arrive at Tibet. In the tax document, [Tib. ཁྲལ་གཞུང] of Tibetan Government, probably had that item in which they could collect soldiers in some cases. So they collected new soldiers and established new army troops such as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a>, [Tib. གྲོང་དྲག] Regiment where they collected soldiers from better condition households. They also collected conscripting soldiers as corvee tax from other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> households. That was conscripting one soldier from 12 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་རྒྱུགས་པ] A type of bound peasant/miser/serf whose lord was the government rather than an aristocrat or monastery/lama. They usually had sizable land holdings and were primarily responsible for providing the corvée transport and riding animal tax for the Tibetan government&#x27;s transportation system. Often translated as, &quot;Government taxpayer serfs.&quot;">shungyupa</a> and one soldier from 6 don of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a> which was called Jugnyi Drugna,[Tib. བཅུ་གཉིས་དྲུག་སྣ]. My master [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] was a sibling of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> Samkhar [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར་བསམ་མཁར] household. But they only had 1 gang and 3 phü [Tib. འཕུལ]   

**Q:**  How many kal of lands for one tax unit?   

**A:**  I guess one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> had about 70 or 80 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of lands. My <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> got his share from Samkhar household and my master had a small <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> in upper area in Samkhar's land. His original household had five gang and another household called Samdong shar [Tib. ཟམ་གདོང་ཤར] had four and half gang. My master with these two households together had about 12 gang and these three households were required to send one soldier. So I was sent to be a soldier. It was a way to collect soldiers in order to protect from Communists.   

**Q:**  What was Jugnyi Drugna?   

**A:**  It is the name of the tax for conscripting soldiers where 1 soldier was conscripted from 12 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> and 1 soldiers from 6 gang of gerpa. The tax was based on the land and the land was divided into gang. The bigger gang had more lands and the smaller had less land. My master only had one and half gang, but his original household had many gang, so I was sent to be a soldier. After I became a soldier, I was sent in Tsethang, [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] and I was trained with others in there. They said there were over one thousand. Probably the number was close to two thousands. Our training teachers were soldiers of the Gusung Regiment from Lhasa and our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> was Gabde [Tib. དགའ་བདེ].   

**Q:**  How did you feel when you were collected as a soldier?   

**A:**  I was little afraid to be killed in wars because at that time I had my parents. In addition, I had a wife. We just got married. So I was worrying about my safety. But my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> ordered me to go, so I could not say I did not want to go.   

**Q:**  What did your family say for about it?   

**A:**  We did not have choices to say something because my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> ordered me to do it. I was sent in a coracle from here to Tsetang. We stayed one night in Lumba [Tib. ལུམ་པ], and another night in behind of the Tranang [Tib. གྲ་ནང]. We stayed two days on the road and we arrived in Tsethang in the third day.   

**Q:**  Who paid for the coracle?   

**A:**  It was paid by the association of the representatives of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, Duji, [Tib. འདུ་སྤྱི] in Chushü. I did not know the reason, but Kabshö Chögyel Nyima, [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཉི་མ་ཝས་བནིཤེད་ཏོ་ལྷོཁ་ནེདོང, [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང]. People were saying that his banishing was caused by the war of Sera. There were some soldiers came from Nyan, [Tib. གཉན] and Dzayü, [Tib. རྫ་ཡུལ] areas. One hundred soldiers were chosen from our troop and sent to Nedong. I was one of them. We were not asked to build it, but there was a house. I heard that this house was a square prison room in which it only had one span of a person's outstretched hands from right hand's fingertip to left hand's fingertip, [Tib. འདོམ་གང་གྲུ་བཞི]. We were sent to Nedong of Lhokha to look Kabshöpa. It was close to the Tsethang. We went there but we did not have to look at him. We lived in an old house. This house was belonged to a big household before. We opened some new doors and one squad of ten soldiers [Tib. བཅུ་ཤོག] lived in one room. We stayed in there.   

**Q:**  How did they give you the military training?   

**A:**  At that time, Tibetan military used English. Then in a summer, Gyelkhar Nangpa, [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་ནང་པ], an lay official who used to be the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> Gongkar, [Tib. གོང་དཀར] Dzong, came to our troop and took half soldiers from our troop to Horbachen [Tib. ཧོར་སྦྲ་ཆེན] in order to do against with Communists if they came. In the same year autumn, we got our salary and told us that we would be sent to Lhasa in the day after tomorrow.   

**Q:**  What did you get for the salary?   

**A:**  We got grain as our salary. I could get two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain per month.   

**Q:**  Was it usual salary?   

**A:**  Yes. One soldier had two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain and one ball of tea. At that time the shape of tea leaves was ball, not brick like today we have. And we had 25 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དངུལ་སྲང] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system, 50 of which equaled 1 dotse.">ngüsang</a> per month. At that time, we could impose pack animals from local people in order to move our things. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> had horses to ride but we came by walks. We were told to cross the river at the a ferry site, Gepadru [Tib. གད་པ་གྲུ] and arrive Samye before the sunshine, but when we crossed the ferry side it was sunset and because we all had our food and bedding with us and we put those things on animals. There was a house in the bottom of the mountain where usually lived the people who sailed coracles. We cooked tea and ate a simple food in this house. Most people had already gone. Our group had about 5 or 6 people with some animals. After we had food, we continued our trip at the whole night. No one of us had gone on the road, so we did not know where we were. We heard there were nine sand mountain passes and nine valleys in which means that there are many mountains and valleys. Sometimes we needed to climb hills and sometime we had to go in valleys. Sometimes there was good road but sometimes the road was not so good. Then we arrived in Samye, [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] in the next morning and then we went for the pilgrimage in Samye. Then we sent messages for the horse coevee and pack animals. Some soldiers got horses or donkeys, but our group got yak. The next day, at dawn, we crossed the Gökhar la, [Tib. རྒོད་འཁར་ལ] mountain pass. Before crossing the pass, we had a lunch in the upper area of Samye where had a family. We just ate some food quickly without loading our belongs from yak. In the old society, it was called Tsal Dechen [Tib. ཚལ་སྡེ་ཆེན] but today it is Tagtse [Tib. སྟག་རྩེ] County located in there. When the sun went down behind of the mountain, we arrived in that village. At that time most soldiers already arrived in there but a few did not.   

**Q:**  You did not have to make line while you took the trip, did you?   

**A:**  No, we did not have to. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and mounted troop were riding horses and went before us, but we came later alone. There were no leaders with us. We stayed in Dechen about 15 days. Then they chose some soldiers from us in order to train how to use machine guns. It had one hundred soldiers. These soldiers were sent to Lhasa. I went to the Nyamön Regiment that located where there were two stone lions [Tib. རྡོ་སེང་གེ]. However, there was no one care for us about 8 or 10 days. We swept some rooms by ourselves and lived in there. Then one day a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> who was said to be living in the house called Sharjikhyab [Tib. ཤར་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ] and a young lay official called Sechung [Tib. གསར་བྱུང] came to our regiment and began to train about machine guns, [Ch. ji qiang].   

**Q:**  Was it the first time you got guns?   

**A:**  Not really. We had guns when we were in the Tsethang. However, those guns were almost useless guns. At that time, the guns could shoot but bad quality. In addition, soldiers got different guns. Some soldiers got the Chinese gun called Gyashang, [Tib. རྒྱ་ཤང] and the other got the gun which goes nine bullets [Ch. jiu zi pao]. After we arrived in Lhasa, we got the English 303 carbines. Everyone in our troop got such guns, but even though there were one hundred soldiers, we only had four machine guns. In the day the young <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and lay official taught us how to use machine guns. We trained about it about two or three guns.   

**Q:**  At that time you had very serious discipline, did not you?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time while we were training, they used English. If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> ordered us made a line, we made a line and if he ordered us lied down on the ground, we lied down and if he ordered us to shoot the guns, we shot it without bullets. If you did not know what they were saying, then you would confuse what you should to do. They used English, so if you know its meaning, you would understand what you should do.   

**Q:**  Were your teachers Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes. One was a young <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and the other one was a young lay official. I heard they went to Britain to get trained. We know where their houses were in Lhasa. Before the soldiers of Gusung Regiment had taught us some, but it was only the language training that we would probably use. A group of soldiers left in Nedong to look after Kabshöpa. After we stayed in Lhasa a time, they came to Lhasa. They said the Chinese had already arrived at Lhokha. They said, "The Chinese officer and his wife arrived at Lhoka and the Chinese told us to return to Lhasa, so we came back to here."   

**Q:**  Did they fight with?   

**A:**  No, they did not mention at all. I heard that probably because Tibet did not have relationship with England, Liushar Thubten Tharpa, [Tib. སྣེཨུ་ཤར་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐར་པ] and Surkhang Wangchen Geleg, [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] and their partners invented the Tibetan military language. They translated the English into Tibetan. We heard that they translated it into Tibetan in order to indicate Tibet did not relate with England. They translated some of them but we did not know why did they do it. We only had the right to listen what the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] said. But they were not able to translate completely into Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Did you know why they try to show Tibet did not relate with England?   

**A:**  I did not know, but people were saying that they wanted to show Tibet did not relate with England. Later this troop was divided into Police Stations in Lhasa. At that time, the main Police Regiment was in the [Tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང and its stations was located in the house called [Tib. ཀོང་པོ་དྲོ་ཁང] in Thephungang, [Tib. thal spungs sgang, and <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a>. All of our hundred soldiers' troop was divided into those police stations and I was sent to Shöl Police Station.   

**Q:**  Was your troop divided into each police station?   

**A:**  Yes. It was like as you see some policemen stay in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> street today. It was not exactly same but was pretty similar. There were small wooden huts on the streets and the policemen stayed in it. After one's duty was over, one another policeman would change him, but they had to stay on duty in the hut day and night. Most of them came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, [Tib. གཙང] areas, especially the Tö [Tib. སྟོད] area. We were in Shöl. That station was located in the corner of the hill of right side of Potala Palace. Did you notice a small shop was opened in there today?   

**Q:**  Yes, I have seen it.   

**A:**  The station was in there. At that time, there was one room in the first floor and one room in the second floor. One another room was built closed with it. Our duty was stay in there. At that time, the lay official <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Chabdrel Tshang, [Tib. ཆབ་དྲེལ་ཚང] and Tsidrung Garjang, [Tib. མགར་བྱང] and Jangma Khangsar, [Tib. ལྕང་མ་ཁང་གསར] were our leaders. They were the in charge and they would hold meetings for us and order us what we needed to do. On the other hand, this police station was an office under main Police Regiment. There was also a shengo of the Police Regiment called, Nyima, [Tib. ཉི་མ], who came from Tö. After we worked as policemen a time, the Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ] War was engaged and lots of Tibetan soldiers fled into Lhasa. When they fled back to Lhasa, four or five soldiers held as a group and plundered from others. So some soldiers had lots of wealth that carried by animals. On the other hand, some soldiers did not have anything. They even did not have a bowl to drink. About that time, each of us got a Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>, a pair of boots, a mammot skin cap.   

**Q:**  Was it a set of military uniform?   

**A:**  Yes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> was kaki color. The boot had white woolen legs with lather bottoms. Later they collected those clothes from us and let us returned to our homes. We were told that we did not have to fight. You know, Gabde collected those things from us and we handed in our weapons to them. I stayed in Lhasa a short time. It was a summer. It was probably April of that summer.   

**Q:**  What did you do?   

**A:**  I did nothing. In the last winter, the Dalai Lama went to India. He left from Lhasa at night. We were on the road of outside of Shöl.   

**Q:**  Did you know about it at that night?   

**A:**  No, we did not. We knew about it later. However, we heard the bells' sounds that made from inside of bags. But we did not know who was taking trip. We knew Dalai Lama went to India later and some Lhasa people were crying. Then in the April of the summer, Lhasa people were saying that Dalai Lama and PRC officials would arrive in Kyangthang Naga [Tib. ཀྱང་ཐང་ན་ཁ). In that case, those kudrak wives dressed nice clothes, hung expensive jewelry, took tsampa mixed with butter and chang offering [Tib. ཕྱེ་མ་ཆང་ཕུད] and went to Kyangthang Naga to show welcome. We saw after the celebration in the place, the Dalai Lama went to his Summer Palace [Tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] and Zhang Jingwu went to Lhasa by riding horses. They received <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and flower wreathes. Zhang Jingwu was taken to the house of Yütog [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག] House.   

**Q:**  Was there a hotel?   

**A:**  No, he was taken to the house of Yütog Household. While he and his partners were entering the city, they were taking lots of pictures included the Potala Palace. After that time, I returned to my home in rural area because I was already told to go home. After I returned to my home, the life returned normal again. I plowed lands and paid corvess taxes.   

**Q:**  How long have you been a soldier?   

**A:**  I had been a soldier for about two years.   

**Q:**  Did you return to your home during the two years?   

**A:**  Yes, I returned one time.   

**Q:**  When was it? Was it in the time when you were in Lhokha?   

**A:**  Yes, it was.   

**Q:**  Did you have to ask for leaving to your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, I had to. It was the rule that I offered one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and asked for leaving. He would give you a time limit and you had to return on time.   

**Q:**  Could you tell me how did they train you (in the regiment)? For example, what were you doing from the morning to evening?   

**A:**  In the morning when they whistled, we get up and do the exercises for hands and feet and practiced (the English) numbers.   

**Q:**  What kinds of food did you have?   

**A:**  No one gave us food. We cooked by ourselves, but the squad had a cook. He boiled tea and we cooked food for ourselves. Every soldier handed in the share of tea and the cook boiled black tea. If a squad had good relationships, they could cook together, but every body in the squad had to offer their share of food. The military training was included the way of "stand at attention", "stand at ease", "left face", "right face", and so on. Sometimes we were told to lie down on the ground and practice the shooting gun. At that time all of those were trained by English.   

**Q:**  How about the discipline? Was it strict?   

**A:**  Yes, it had a very tired discipline. Each squad had a jugpön. And 50 soldiers had a shengo. One hundred soldiers had a gyagpön. But the basic unit in the military was squad.   

**Q:**  Was it okay to you to go to the market to buy your needs?   

**A:**  Yes, it was okay.   

**Q:**  Did you go to the market with your military uniform?   

**A:**  Yes, we only had that set of clothes. So we had to.   

**Q:**  Did the local people know you were soldiers when you went on the market?   

**A:**  Yes, they knew.   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  It was the clothes that the soldiers were wearing.   

**Q:**  Were they afraid to you?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. You know some soldiers were not so good and looks like almost going to do something bad to the people.   

**Q:**  Did you have bad person in your squad?   

**A:**  Not really. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅུ་དཔོན] 1. A minor officer in charge of a squad of 10 troops in the traditional Tibetan Army. 2. A minor official.">jugpön</a> could handle all of his soldiers in our squad. He used to be a monk. He could manage us. But local people were afraid to us. As if someone wears blue dressing today, the local people will call the person "teacher" [Tib. རྒན་ལགས], at that time even though one was a common soldier, the local people would call him "military officer" [Tib. dmag dpn lags].   

**Q:**  Did you get your salary on time?   

**A:**  Yes, we did, but we heard that some troops did not give the salary on time to their soldiers. When we were in Lhasa, I knew two soldiers in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment. One was in the new camp [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ] in Lhasa and one was sent to Lhalu, [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ]. They had to come to Lhasa for getting their salaries. Sometimes they did not get their salaries on time from the government. We did not meet such situation. Usually military regiment were located far from Lhasa, their salary was more likely to be delayed.   

**Q:**  You got grain and cash as your salary from the military troop. Did you get some supports from your home?   

**A:**  No, I did not.   

**Q:**  You had some cash salary. How did you use it for?   

**A:**  I bought my clothes. The military uniform was not enough for me to wear. Actually, there were two kinds of soldiers. The condition for soldiers was depended on who sent you to be a soldier. If I was a member of a household and I was sent by this household, I might get some extra food from this household, but usually this household did not have to do anything for the soldier. If I was not member of this household but they hired me to be a soldier for them because they did not have person to be soldier, they would pay me a salary. Usually people used to pay 40 or 50 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> per year. So the second kind of soldier had two salaries: one got from military regiment and the other got from his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> who hired him.   

**Q:**  If you entered into the military, your family could get extra lands, right?   

**A:**  No, we did not.   

**Q:**  How about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་རྐང] A &quot;military gang.&quot; A category of land that obligated the household holding the land to provide a corvée soldier for the Tibetan Army. This could either be one of its own family members or someone hired to fulfill their corvée obligation.">magang</a> of land for providing a corvee soldier to the army?   

**A:**  We did not have such lands. It was for the soldiers that serviced before us. There were lands for the military services. In the old society, the lands were divided into the government, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a> and the monasteries, [Tib. གཞུང་སྒེར་ཆོས་གསུམ]. And there were separated lands for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་རྐང] A &quot;military gang.&quot; A category of land that obligated the household holding the land to provide a corvée soldier for the Tibetan Army. This could either be one of its own family members or someone hired to fulfill their corvée obligation.">magang</a>. It was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> for corvee soldiers. For example, if a household had two magang for corvee soldiers, this household had to send two soldiers. One was required to Gusung Regiment and other to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment. They had specific lands to plant but they were required to send specific number of soldiers. However, the soldiers send from 12 gang was an extra corvee tax. They said that Tibet was supposed to have 30 military regiments from "k" to "a" characters of Tibetan and this requirement was indicated in the original tax documents.   

**Q:**  Was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འུལ་ལག] A generic term for corvée labor that had to be performed for one&#x27;s manorial estate/lord without pay. One kind of ula required people to go and work and another kind required the provision of transportation animals.">ula</a> related to the lands?   

**A:**  Not.   

**Q:**  Was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འུལ་ལག] A generic term for corvée labor that had to be performed for one&#x27;s manorial estate/lord without pay. One kind of ula required people to go and work and another kind required the provision of transportation animals.">ula</a> depended on the lands?   

**A:**  We were not such <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> households. It was an another category. Usually if is one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འུལ་ལག] A generic term for corvée labor that had to be performed for one&#x27;s manorial estate/lord without pay. One kind of ula required people to go and work and another kind required the provision of transportation animals.">ula</a>, one had lands for it. This household usually may send one person to pay the corvee labor, but if it was busy, this household might have to send two ula. But we were not such category.   

**Q:**  When you returned to your home, the revolt was not risen yet in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was not going to rise the revolt in Lhasa. At that time Zhang Guoha (should be Zhang Jinghu) just arrived in Lhasa from that place (India).   

**Q:**  How old were you at that point?   

**A:**  About 25 or 26 years old.   

**Q:**  How about your feeling? Did you feel sad or happy?   

**A:**  At that time, the Chinese men were very strange for me. Before that time, we heard many bad stories about them, so we did not know what they were going to do. I was illiterate. If I could read, I would learn about them from newspapers before they arrived.   

**Q:**  Did the military regiment hand over you to your home when you returned?   

**A:**  No, they did not. They told us that we could return home. That's all. It was just like a dog was undone from the tying. Some people found something jobs in Lhasa. A few entered into other military regiments. For example, one soldier I knew entered into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment and one another entered into Gusung Regiment. But I returned to my home.   

**Q:**  How did your family say to you when you arrived in your home?   

**A:**  They had nothing to say. They said it was okay to be home because they did not have to worry about my safety.   

**Q:**  Did you continue to be a farmer?   

**A:**  Yes, I did.   

**Q:**  Did your family have lands that same as before you had entered into that military regiment?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you do?   

**A:**  I plowed or watered for our lands. I farmed on the land.   

**Q:**  Did the way to do farming have changes since you entered into the regiment?   

**A:**  Not, it was same as before. But at that time people were saying that the Chinese and Tibetan (governments) were working together. After I returned to my home, the two governments had worked together for a long time. After three or four years later, I went to build motorable road from Lhasa to Gyama, [Tib. རྒྱ་མ] area.   

**Q:**  Was it a duty?   

**A:**  The upper organizations asked to our master to send labor workers and he told me to go.   

**Q:**  Was it the road between Lhasa to Kongpo?   

**A:**  Yes, it was part of it. We built the road. At that time, they collected many labors. The labors came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> county, Gongkar county, Nyemo county, and many other counties. It was the first time to build motorable road in that area.   

**Q:**  Did you get the salary?   

**A:**  I heard that we had high salary, but we lost some in the middle. There were soldiers of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> with us. The head of this project from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> to Lhasa was the Dzasa Labrang Nyingpa [Thönpa] [Tib. བླ་བྲང་རྙིང་པ]. A <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> called Lodrö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a>, [Tib. blo gros rnam rgyal, was the head of the road project from Chushü to Lhasa and his assistants were two clerks of <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Lekhung. Each <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> and county sent their labors. They picked a few people as leaders of small group of people form the common labor workers. I worked four months. One box had one thousand <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a>. Boxes of dayang were sent to there, but we got a few. People were saying that most of those dayang lost in the middle.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> for a day?   

**A:**  If you worked very hard, you could receive 18 or 19 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> a month. It was the biggest number. Sometimes we only got 16 dayang per month. I worked in that project about four months. Because it was a project that worked the two governments together, Chinese gave money and grain, but Tibetan life styles were not same with them, so we took food from our homes for the first month.   

**Q:**  Then did they give you rice?   

**A:**  No, they only gave <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a>. Sometimes they were not able to deliver enough tsampa for workers. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ] The name of the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">Künphel</a> la [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས], the Dalai Lama' personal favorite attendant , [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ] got some bean's tsampa from Phenpo, [Tib. འཕན་པོ] area. It helped us pass 20 or 30 days. At that time the food was very shortage. I (we?) had eaten leaves of potato and radishes.   

**Q:**  When was it?   

**A:**  I do not remember when was it. But it was during the Tibetan and Chinese governments worked together.   

**Q:**  Do you know what kinds of things the two governments worked together?   

**A:**  Mainly they built roads. The Chinese gave money to Tibetan Government and the Tibetan Government offered grain from their stores. At that time, some grain was given to the poor without money. Later the government of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> was established and those <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> in the county were given positions in the new government. Then some of them involved into the revolt. For example, there was a groom of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> Phangdong household. He was given a position of uyön. Later this household was involved into the revolt and lost this position. At that time, many Khambas of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> men arrived in this area and they said they were protecting the Buddhism, but they made lots of troubles to the local people.   

**Q:**  Where were you when the revolt was risen?   

**A:**  I was working as a trenyog. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>'s main camp was established in Gongkar, [Tib. གོང་དཀར] county and one regiment was arranged in Jagsam, [Tib. ལྕག་ཟམ] (in Chushü). And one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> lived in the county and stationed guards [Tib. ས་སྲུང]. Once at a night, about 30 Khamba men arrived in our village with their horses. We were ordered to offer food for them and grasses and fodder for their horses. They were shooting guns. But at the next morning, they disappeared from our village. At that night, they also collected some needs from our village. When the revolt was risen, the main regiment [stopped recording for a while]   

**Q:**  Did they go to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> took their flags and went to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> men?   

**A:**  Yes, they were part of the Chu<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a>ndru. They hired local people's animals when they needed, but all of them had their own horses. However, a person with me was plowing on the field at the morning. We saw that five or six people as a group were taking trip on the road near our village from Lhasa. The cook of our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> came to send food for us and he/she said that a war was engaged in Lhasa yesterday and the war was lost. I said, "Oh my!" He/she said, "It is true." About later morning, lots of people were riding their horses and coming from Lhasa. In that case, the flags were pulling on the ground. No one raised it on the air. Everybody was talking about the lost war. There were two masters in the household. One was man and the other was woman. The man's home was in the upper area of this village. In the afternoon, we left <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsampa</a> for our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཛོ] A cross between a yak and a cow/ox.">dzo</a> and gave some potato and radishes to people. Then we fled to upper area where one of our masters was. Some of us stayed in there, but the other fled into upper area. There was a shiga in upper area. It was called, Karyü [Tib. དཀར་ཡུལ]. (We went to this shiga.) We saw from that shiga that the bridge on the river behind us was broken in order to block the Chinese regiments. At that time, there was a motorable road even though it was not so good. (At the night,) the flashes of trucks were lighting (in the bridge area). Sometimes we could see strong lights but sometimes we could not. The trucks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> was blocked in there and they were repairing the road. We again fled to the mountain valley of this area and stayed in there. Our animals were put on the mountain. There was a monastery in the side of that mountain. We climbed near the mountain and we saw a war was fighting. The sounds of guns, artilleries and bombs were very loud from the bridge area. We stayed in there two days.   

**Q:**  Who were fighting in the Iron Bridge area?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> were shooting from this side and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> men were shooting from the other side. Our mistress [Tib. སྦྱིན་བདག] asked a person to go to look what was going on. He did. Did you see those threshing grounds near this village? At that time, there were fields there. He came back and he said lots of artilleries were set up on that field by PLA. He also said that the PLA told him that those people who fled on the mountain should return to their homes because it was safest. PLA send that message. There were lots of people hid in the mountain areas. So we returned to our village. After we arrived in there, it was true that there were lots of artilleries were set up on fields. It was amazing.   

**Q:**  Did they take note for your returning?   

**A:**  No, they did not.   

**Q:**  How did you feel? Did you feel that everything was finished?   

**A:**  Yes, I thought the Chinese were going spread all over there. At that time, we did not know Chinese and we were afraid of them. We totally did not know their policy. After that event, cadres arrived in our village and they educated us. They were doing their propaganda and seizing those people who they wanted to seize. At the beginning, the county government was established in Takar. Some people were put into jails in that area, but we were continually farming on our lands. After those masters were seized, the policy of (the new government) was that "who plant the lands, who could have it." [Tib. སུས་བཏབ་སུས་ལེན] So the production of the harvest belonged to servants after the master was shut in.   

**Q:**  Was it the reform?   

**A:**  Yes, it was sort of reform. The reform was begun. However, our master was not very rich. Sometimes he needed to borrow something from others because he had to pay lots of taxes. He had kind of livelihood problems.   

**Q:**  Did he treat you (servants) well?   

**A:**  It was pretty normal. Sometimes he treated very well but sometimes he treated us very bad. It was hard to describe him by one sentence. Then the land was divided into people in later 1959.   

**Q:**  How many lands did you get?   

**A:**  At that time, I had five people in my household and each person was given three mu of lands, so we had fifteen mu of lands.   

**Q:**  Did you get animals?   

**A:**  I got one horse and one cow. Before that time I did not have animals in my home.   

**Q:**  How about the house?   

**A:**  I was living in a small house (or room?) and I got that house. At that time, I was appointed as a tsugdrang.   

**Q:**  What were the jobs for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 组长] Team leader.">tsugdrang</a>?   

**A:**  Every household was given lands and then organized several households as a group. This group was not so big. Usually it had about fifteen to twenty households.   

**Q:**  Was it the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང] Type of cooperative production unit started in 1960-61 as a precursor to full communes. In farm areas, it consisted of 5-6 poorer families who would be joined with one or two better off families who would then cooperate in all aspects of farming, although each family would keep all of its yield.">Mutual Aid Team</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, it was. And I was the tsugdrang. I led our team to manage our lands. Moreover, I had to go to the meetings and transmit the policy to the masses. I also transferred the requirements and criticisms of masses to the upper organs, [Tib. གོང་རིམ]. At that time, the upper organs could except criticisms and care for about it. The masses listened to leaders and leaders were paying attention to the masses. They were talking about like that, "Correct mistakes if you have made any and guard against them if you have not." [Tib. ཡོད་ན་ཡོ་བསྲང་དང་།མེད་ན་དྭོགས་ཟོན] In 1962, I was told to be the uyön of this xiang.   

**Q:**  What was the name for this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 乡] An administrative unit that contains several villages. It is sometimes called a rural township in the literature on China. Several xiang are part of a xian (county).">xiang</a>?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> Xiang. Before that time, a Peasants Association [Tib. ཞིང་པ་མཐུན་གྲོགས་ཚོགས་པ] had been established in there for three years. Then it transformed into <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 乡] An administrative unit that contains several villages. It is sometimes called a rural township in the literature on China. Several xiang are part of a xian (county).">xiang</a> and I became a uyön of this xiang.   

**Q:**  What did you do in your that position?   

**A:**  The policy of upper organs transmitted to lower organs. We held meetings for group heads. In such meetings, we transmitted the new policies and collected new information included plowing, fertilizing, and watering on lands. We searched how many jobs we had done and how many jobs we needed to do. My jobs were thing like that. After a time about in the 1965 the Culture Revolution was begun. At that point, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> was not established yet. However, they established kind of groups, [Tib. ཤོག་ཁག].   

**Q:**  How many groups did you have?   

**A:**  This was a big village, so it was divided into three groups. It was the basic foundation of rukhag.   

**Q:**  Did those groups have names?   

**A:**  No, but it was called the first group, the second group and the third group. At that time, Yang Yinhua was the leader in this area. He ordered people cut bushes on the mountains and dug sod in order to make fertilizer. After they dug the sod, it was burned for fertilizer. He ordered us did lots of useless projects. Today we know it is very important resources to us, but we had destroyed those things.   

**Q:**  Digging sod was for fertilizer?   

**A:**  Yes. We were forced to make bones into chips for fertilizer. We were also ordered to kill bogs and buried it for fertilizer. While we were doing such things, the Culture Revolution was risen.   

**Q:**  What were people mainly doing during Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  The upper organs were saying that people should expose the highest people in power who were going on the capitalist road. At that point, there were two groups. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> group thought they were the best group and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> group thought they were the best group. In the county setting, there was a yard for elephant when they were taking trip. This yard was covered the roof and became a big hall. The big character posters were put on the wall of this hall. People were refuting this person and that person was going on the path of capitalism and the two groups were arguing. People were criticizing something like that, "The adverse current [Tib. ཆུ་བོ་གྱེན་ལྡོག] of May was wrong. Zeng Yongya made mistake to point the artilleries to the Lhasa Jokhang."If today Gyenlo put posters on the walls, Nyamdre put poster on it, in the next day. As the result, the walls of the big hall were covered double and triple by the big character posters. At that time, Wang was the Party Secretary of this qu and Xu was the Vice Party Secretary. They were good men but the policy they were practicing was wrong. Lots of people were writing and putting the big character posters. There were many different people in the (county) government. Some cadres were saying something like that, "I did not get good salary", "I did not get promotion," and "I was not been given position." The cadres were arguing something like that topics. The cadres were teaching something to the masses, but they did not know what actually was going on. As the result, the power of Wang Secretary was taken away. Most people in Takar village were members of Gyenlo and most people in this village were members of Nyamdre. At that time The Second Brigade of Construction [Ch. gong cheng erdui) built their houses and lived in there. It was located behind of the yard of County Department of Armed Forces, [Ch. wu zhuang bu].   

**Q:**  What was the Second Brigade of Construction for?   

**A:**  They were building motorable roads. It also called Bridge Building Brigade [Ch. qiaogong dui] sometimes because they were building bridges. They live in Lhadong Shanka, [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ] now, but while they were living around the place where the Big Buddha [Tib. ལྷ་ཆེན་པོ] statue was carved on the rock and repairing roads, the Cultural Revolution was risen. Most of them were members of Nyamdre. Only a few were members of Gyenlo. We were also against with Gyenlo. At that time the Second Construction Brigade had many strong people. They used to wear red boots. So, Lhasa people called them "the Red ones" [Tib. དམར་ཁོག]. They demonstrated in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Were they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. Takar were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> faction. The Department of Armed Forces moved guns from their apartment to a store and they were robbed by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> at the night on the road.   

**Q:**  Was the Department of Armed Forces <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, the Department of Armed Forces was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a>. They were going to hide guns but were robbed on the road. Most people in Takar were members of Gyenlo. There was a new cadre in that area. His name was Karma Geleg, [Tib. སྐར་མ་དགེ་ལེགས] who came from Tselmey, [Tib. ཚལ་སྨད] area. He was the head of Gyenlo in this area and he was saying that he was going to support the Ane Gongmey Gyelmo, [Tib. གོང་མའི་རྒྱལ་མོ] in Nyemo County. The qu government in this area was set up in an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> that was built by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a>, [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] Household. Dawa la, [Tib. ཟླ་བ་ལགས] a member of Road Maintenance Squad, [Ch. yanghu duan] of us, was a member of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a>. He met Karma Geleg in the building of the qu government. Dawa la was just going to climb the first step of the ladder, Karma Geleg shot a gun to him and he immediately fell down on the ground. We immediately went into the house. When I was arrived in there, I saw Karma Geleg was killed in inside of the building. We did not know who shot guns to Karma Geleg. No one knew about it but both of them died in there. Then Nyamdre held a memorial meeting for Dawa la in the county setting. However, no one held memorial meeting for Karma Geleg. At that time, the Party Secretary of Takar Qu was Wang. His wife was born in a Lhasa and at that point, she was in this County. They two fled into Lhasa at that night. The men used to be the highest leader for this area. Before that, when Panchen Rinpoche took trip in this area, he was the person who received in this area. However, during the Cultural Revolution, there were lots of troubles.   

**Q:**  Were there two groups in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> (of Chushü)?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. The local people became two groups and the cadres became two groups. But later some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> members, both cadres and masses, transferred into the Nyamdre.   

**Q:**  Do you mean that many cadres used to be members of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, it was true. There were many strange things were happening. Some people were saying they did not get administration positions. You know, some people needed positions like president of the qu, a department or office. Some people were arguing that they did not get promotion their salaries. All of those information was put on the big character posters.   

**Q:**  What was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> doing?   

**A:**  We were saying we were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> and a war was almost going to engage between the two groups. Later (the government) implied that the Nyamdre had been done correctly.   

**Q:**  How long did it take place?   

**A:**  It was kept very long time. The person who lived in my home was the quzhang and the Part Secretary. His name was Pema, [Tib. པད་མ]. I went with him to Takar Qu. I also went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a>'s meeting in the Old People's Square [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ཁ] in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  Yes, I did.   

**Q:**  When was it?   

**A:**  It was later times (of this movement). The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> held a big meeting in the Old People's Square. Then all members of Nyamdre and soldiers of the Military Headquarters [Ch. junqu] demonstrated together in Lhasa. Soldiers took artilleries with its shells when we were demonstrating. After this action, the situation became safe.   

**Q:**  Do you remember the name for the leader who held the meeting?   

**A:**  I did not know who was the leader in Lhasa. Some people gave lectures but I could not see clearly who were giving lectures because there were lots of people.   

**Q:**  What did they say on the meeting?   

**A:**  They said we should expose the people who went on the path of capitalism, but should not fight inside of the worker class [Tib. བཟོ་པའ་གྲལ་རིམ] because it was useless actions. And they delivered some posters but I am an illiterate.   

**Q:**  How many people went to Lhasa for the meeting? Were you as representative (of Gyenlo)?   

**A:**  Yes, we were the representatives. At that time it was considering a dangerous action. The Cement Factory was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> group and people were saying that they were blocking the road even though I did not see them (when I went to Lhasa). No one know it was true or fail but were saying that they put members of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> into it, the machine that grind the stone. It was just a saying. No one saw it.   

**Q:**  Did you ride trucks to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, we went by trucks.   

**Q:**  No one blocked you on the road?   

**A:**  No, but we were extremely worrying about it.   

**Q:**  Later the Red Guard was established, right?   

**A:**  Not, it was established in the beginning. It was in the beginning (of the movement). There was one Red Guard in our village. He died several years age. He went to be soldiers (of PLA) and then got job in Flour Factory [Ch. miam fen chang] (of Lhasa) and he made the long march to China to see Chairman Mao. To be the member of Red Guard, there was an age limited, but many members of Red Guard older then the limited age. For example, I was older then the age limited, but there were two groups and they needed members, so I was given an armband.   

**Q:**  The armband of Red Guard?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the duty of Red Guard?   

**A:**  Exposing the people who went on the path of capitalism was the main duty.   

**Q:**  How about the destroying the "demons and monsters" [Tib. ལྷ་འདྲེ་གདོན་བགེགས]?   

**A:**  Yes, it was also a duty of Red Guard.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go family to family for searching something?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Searching the monsters and the demons, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Searching the monsters and the demons and antiques and if found antiques, the paper <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> was put on the owner's head and took him on the street for demonstrating. People were playing drums and swinging the flags on the air (when they were demonstrating).   

**Q:**  Did you go on the street?   

**A:**  No, I did not.   

**Q:**  Oh, were there many things that happened in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> during the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  Yes, there had a very serious situation.   

**Q:**  Road Maintenance Squad was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a>, was not them?   

**A:**  They were members of Nyamdre. At that time its leader was Chönpel Sonam (Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་བསོད་ནམས).   

**Q:**  There were not many masses to be members of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a>, but most Gyenlo members were cadres, I guess.   

**A:**  Yes, it was true. Most masses were members of Nyamdre. Many cadres were members of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a>, but later most of them transferred into Nyamdre.   

**Q:**  Did they transfer voluntarily?   

**A:**  Yes, it was voluntary.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> did not make troubles to them to be members of Nyamdre, did they?   

**A:**  No, they could transfer in any time.   

**Q:**  (In your memory,) which one was the most serious fighting between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་ཤུར] The name of a town, district and county at the confluence of the Lhasa and Tsangpo Rivers.">Chushü</a> area?   

**A:**  In the county. The county setting had serious situations.   

**Q:**  What happened, for example?   

**A:**  Arguing.   

**Q:**  Some sort of meetings would be held in there, right?   

**A:**  No, there was no one holding meetings. People just went to put new big character posters and then argued about the meaning of the poster. We said we were correct but they said they were correct. So we were arguing for about it.   

**Q:**  Did they fight each other in there?   

**A:**  No, we did not fight at all.   

**Q:**  Later the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> was established, right?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> was established in 1966.   

**Q:**  You said there were three "groups" [Tib. ཤོག་ཁག] and later it might become three rukhags, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it became three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> but people could enter the rukhag that they liked. It was their personal choices. Since 1966, I did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch.] The head/leader of an office.">dütrang</a> of our rukhag.   

**Q:**  This position must be very hard, I guess.   

**A:**  It was very hard. I even changed diapers for infants who did not have parents. In addition, I had to listen very carefully and then I had to say it to the masses very nicely. It was very hard. As you know, at that time, the livelihood was depended on the work points and my household did not have enough work points to pay that I should pay. So I had to pay back money to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> several years. At that time I fed some pigs and sold it to the Pig Factory. Because I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch.] The head/leader of an office.">dütrang</a> of the rukhag, I had to pay back the money at the first in order to lead the other masses paid back money if they were required. If I did not pay back, the others did not want to give the money that they had to pay back. So, in that case, I had meet big hardships.   

**Q:**  Did you pay back to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> every year?   

**A:**  Yes, I had to pay back every year in several years. Since my children grew up, the hardships of my livelihood became smaller.   

**Q:**  What was the duty of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch.] The head/leader of an office.">dütrang</a> of a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a>?   

**A:**  Leading the masses included planting the fields, attending the meetings, transmitting the policies, sending labors when the government asked. But farming was the main job. It was very busy days. Because our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> was very big, I had to go place to place. And there were many different things to do. So, it made me very busy. At that time, we had to hand in the patriotic donation grain.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were two different teams. One is called "working hard" [Tib. དཀའ་སྒྲུབ] and "working great" [Tib. ཆེ་སྒྲུབ]? What did these mean?   

**A:**  If the government wanted to open new fields and make original fields bigger, they collected labor workers from all <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a>s and it was also called "Shock Team" [Tib. འཕྲལ་སྒྲུབ་པ], and sent them to one rukhag in order to open new fields or for something else. It was not exchanging labors. So many rukhags lost lots of their benefits. If they made this policy carefully, this area probably had big developments. However, they did not research carefully and began the project. For example, a canal was built from the foot of the mountain of Tshabanang area to near the Harasa village. It made us very hard, but this canal was a useless project. It did not give one drop of water for the fields. Moreover, while the project was doing, it was a very cold. We were ordered to do many like that project.   

**Q:**  Was there a person who charged the Shock Team?   

**A:**  Yes, a headman would be sent from the county government. At that time, it was called "working hard and working great", means working hard at first in order to get happy life in the future. It also means forcing to hard work in order to make benefits for the masses, but actually it did not make benefits escaped some lands. At that time, opened or made bigger some lands. Of course, it made benefits to the masses, but it made benefits to a few <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a>, not for every single rukhag.   

**Q:**  Who would give the work points to them?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> gave work points to them and later had to offer to them the grain.   

**Q:**  Was there two teams in which was called "working hard" and "working great" ?   

**A:**  No, it was one name. It was also called Shock Team in which the most able labors were collected into it. Because the able labor were collected into it, there were not more able labors to harvest and it took long time. Then the upper leader criticized to us but they collected able labors for whole years even it was an autumn. Whatever we were working hard day and night, it was hard to finish our own work quickly.   

**Q:**  You mentioned an elephant yard in Chushü. What was it?   

**A:**  In the old society, the elephant was moved into here (Tibet) from there (India). I heard there were two elephants. After they arrived in Tibet, they needed a place to stay over night on the way, so this yard was built for the two elephants. It did not have a roof. It was the place where the county office building was built today. I heard that one elephant died on the trip, but I saw one elephant arrived in here. This elephant was in Lhasa when the revolt was risen. Before there was a grain store of Tibetan Government and the elephant yard was built close to this store. Later the elephant yard was put roof on it and made it a big meeting room (hall).   

**Q:**  You are an expert about farming. There are three different eras; the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང] Type of cooperative production unit started in 1960-61 as a precursor to full communes. In farm areas, it consisted of 5-6 poorer families who would be joined with one or two better off families who would then cooperate in all aspects of farming, although each family would keep all of its yield.">Mutual Aid Team</a> era, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་ཁག] A brigade (in a commune).">rukhag</a> era and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགན་གཙང] The new economic system that replaced the communal system in the early 1980s. It literally means &quot;complete responsibility&quot; (system). Under this new system, the commune/brigade&#x27;s land was divided among individual households under a long-term lease arrangement and households were given complete responsibility over their own production.">gentsang</a> era. Could you compare the three eras and point out which era people were more emphasizing farming production itself?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང] Type of cooperative production unit started in 1960-61 as a precursor to full communes. In farm areas, it consisted of 5-6 poorer families who would be joined with one or two better off families who would then cooperate in all aspects of farming, although each family would keep all of its yield.">Mutual Aid Team</a> era and current policy were pretty similar and it is the best way for farming because the land was given to households. Farming became private sector, so every household managed their lands very carefully. On the other hand, today, even though the land belongs to ourselves, we did not have right to make decision what kind of crops should be planted on our fields. Before we were told that we have right to plant what we want to plant on our fields, but we lost that right. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 乡] An administrative unit that contains several villages. It is sometimes called a rural township in the literature on China. Several xiang are part of a xian (county).">xiang</a> and village government decided what we should plant. They are practicing the way of planting by an area of multiple plots of land [Tib. གླིང་ཞིང] rather than individual owned plots of lands. You know, even though I do not want to plant that crop in the area, after the government decided to plant a crop, we had to plant it. We do not have choice. The masses do not like it. But if we do not plant the specific crop, we will be punished. It is not good. Today we do not have a team in order to exchange our Mutual Aid Team, but it is similar with the Mutual Aid era. We could ask help from others when we need and it is the group as the Mutual Aid Team. We want to plant the crop that we think it is the best crop to plant. But we could not do it now. It is very hard for our farming. For example, we had a kind of red wheat. The seed of the red wheat has been taken from China by Pema Secretary. At the beginning, it only had a small envelope of seeds. Then we planted it in our area and it produced good harvest. This red wheat has been developed from one small envelope to all of this area. Only a few households probably do not have it, but I believe that most households have the red wheat. But since last year, it was prohibited to plant. They said that the red wheat was pig feed of Japanese. They offered another wheat seeds to us and forced us to plant it on our fields. Some households got good harvest but the price of the wheat has been going to decrease. The seeds can be divided into two different categories. One is light seed and the other is heavy seed. The light seed can be put more water but the heavy seed needs less water. (It should be opposed of his saying.) The red wheat can be put into the light category but the new wheat seed can be put into heavy seed category. The wheat should be planted according to the water condition. But we do not have the right to choose seeds. We have to plant same crop in a same area. On the other hand, our people in this village are very familiar about farming. And usually our lands could produce good harvest. We are managing our lands very carefully. Normally we sweep grasses in our fields at least one times.   

**Q:**  Thank you very much!   

**A:**  You are welcome.   

**Q:**  One more question. How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am 71 years old.   

**Q:**  You are ever healthy.   

**A:**  Until now, I have good heath condition.   

**Q:**  How many people do you have in your household?   

**A:**  We had five people.   

**Q:**  How about your livelihood if you compare with other villagers?   

**A:**  We are in the middle.   

**Q:**  Thank you again!   

**A:**  That's my pleasure.   

