#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0013.01  
##  : with Lhatsun Labrang Chandzö [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུན་བླ་བྲང་ཕྱག་མཛོད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 5 October 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Lhatsun Labrang Chandzö [Tib. lha btsun bla brang phyag mdzod  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 64  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lhatsun Labrang Chandzö [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུན་བླ་བྲང་ཕྱག་མཛོད] was a well-known and capable monk who worked as a manager/steward. In this interview, he talks about how the Chinese initially came to Tibet and about some of the early disputes over the Tibetan Army and flag. He also talks about working as the salt tax collector in Western Tibet and how he came to do the accounting in the Tea and Salt Office in Lhasa. He then talks in detail about his involvement in the People's Association of 1952.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0013_01/H_0013_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  It has been many years now and it is possible that you may have not thought much about the 1950's so let me ask something, in 1950 the Chinese came to Chamdo, right? At that time, the Dalai Lama was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and then the 17-Point Agreement was signed and then in 1951 the Dalai Lama came up to Lhasa and then after that the Chinese came to Lhasa gradually increasing in numbers. Then around 1952, I think it was Water-Dragon [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག] Year, there was this People's Association, I can't say for sure that it was that year, however at this time how did this the People's Association begin and why did it begin?   

**A:**  I don't think there was anything specific in the Agreement about the Chinese army coming in strength to our country, however, they did come in large numbers. Not only that, but when they came they said that Tibet has a large territory and a sparse population and that they have come to do great things and after everything is done then they were not going to stay but return. Anyway they came and no matter what they said, they had already shown their character at Chamdo. So they came from everywhere. After a month or so they acted worse and worse. At first, they came slowly, walking. Later when they came in force, they used the transportation system, saying that they need to build roads. Even when the roads were made, unlike the traditional system where various places had responsibilities [for transportation], they said there were too few people. Even when animals were used, the traditional system had criteria for those who do and do not provide. They didn't pay attention to this saying that those from there can be used. When they were told that some can be used but others cannot based on their land tenure documents [Tib. བཀའ་གཏན], they did not listen. Even when it was concerned with system of corvée horse and pack animal stations [Tib. རྟ་ཟམ་ཁ], this happened, for example, if 1 station has 100 pack animals, the way he [the Chinese] dispatched things amounted to 200-500 loads at once. They were told that it cannot be transported at once. For example, if there were 200 pack animals and if there were only 100 saddles [Tib. སྒ་སྟན], when they were told that it had to be sent that way and that without saddles the loads could not be transported, they would put things in cloth bags and put the loads the pack animals like loading donkeys tying them in all sorts of ways [rather than on saddles]. There was no question of agreeing or not agreeing. They just forcefully did it. Then usually when we travel there was a specified daily distance to cover. Not only did they go beyond that limit, but they wanted it done fast. So because of this some horses, poor things, who were not in good shape couldn't manage and would stumble. Since they could not go anymore, the horses legs would be cut off from the joint, thrown away, and then they would leave. If a horse couldn't travel it had to be left right there at that place without doing things so the animal could recover. They did that in a malicious manner. So as the months went by, things got worse. Then they started saying that they wanted to put a flag on <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> [Potala] and the Lhasa Tsuglagang. Then regarding the armory in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> [Tib. གོ་མཛོད], they said that a country can't have two armories that armory had to be joined with the Chinese one. They also said that one country can't have two military regiments, so the military regiments had to join with the Chinese ones. The uniforms had to be Chinese. So like this, [the people thought] and even the Dalai Lama, his power, though it may have been written in the Agreement that they would not be allowed to interfere, but they wanted such and such appointments, even when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were to be appointed, and then they were interfering in all sorts of things. So the very fact that even now they were doing such things, later on, we could not keep on doing this like the proverb says, "We cannot keep on travelling the whole night." [Tib. ནམ་རིང་འགྲུལ་གྱིས་མ་རྟེན་པ]. So it was true that the government had discussed with them like the proverb, "To approach the fire even if it burns you." [Tib. མེས་འཚིགས་མེར་གཏུགས], however, they did all kinds of recklessly things that sort of weren't within the Agreement, [so people felt] that things would not be good in the future for the country and the people and so the people felt that they should do something since they [Chinese] were not listening to what the government had done. At that time, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were there and they were advising them a lot but they were not listening and behaving like lawless beggars [Tib. སྤྲང་དོ་ཁྲིམས་མེད]. So in 1950 the people were alerted, and in 1952 they thought whatever may come, something has to be done and they first met at Jaralinga [Tib. སྦྱར་རག་གླིང་ག]. Do you remember it. The one that was behind Tse? Yes, in that area some people did meet in 1950, but it was not well established and then the Chinese bribed some of our people, the poorer ones, the one's without mind, one who only cared for a full stomach. They incited them and with all the talk the meetings were not able to take place definitely. Then in the 4th month I went up to Tö Ngari [Tib. སྟོད་མངའ་རིས]. At that time, I was doing some work for the Tsanda Tsasho [Tib. རྩ་མདའ་ཚྭ་ཤོ] (the salt collector). The Tsasho has to arrive in the 11th-12th month, however by the 2nd month, 25th day, the Tsasho's accounts had to be done with for the Tea and Salt Office [Tib. ཇ་ཚྭ་ལས་ཁུངས]. That had to be done. So because of that, around the 11th month I arrived and the Chinese power had already increased. The People's Association had not managed to definitely meet and there were a few of us among the People's Association leaders. Mainly, there was Chandzö Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས]. He was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Me (Mey) College in Sera Monastery">Sera Me</a>, but he was no longer a monk. He had previously been the Tratsang Chandzö. Then there was this person who had been the Sera Me clerk named Tsha Trunyila [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལགས].   

**Q:**  Tsha Trunyila?   

**A:**  Yes. I think his mother was a maid servant in the Tsarong household.   

**Q:**  Yes. My father said something to that effect.   

**A:**  So he was there. We were very close. Then there was Jayan Dawala [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཟླ་བ་ལགས] from Drepung Loseling. Jayan Dawala was a monk in Drepung Loseling. So from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> there was Drubto [Tib. གྲུབ་ཐོབ] Rimpoche, a lama. He was part of Gomang. Later he may have lost his celibacy and was not in the monastic order. From <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>, there was a Chöndze nicknamed Nepalese boy, Betru [Tib. བལ་ཕྲུག] I think and Kamekang [Tib. དཀར་མེ་ཁང] Chöndze, then there were some I don't remember. Then there was a leather worker [Tib. རྔོ་བཟོ] from Kyire [Tib. སྐྱིད་རས]. So everybody thought that we must do something and meet. So the first beginnings occurred as soon as I arrived from Tö. Since we were friends, when someone arrives from someplace, people bring tea and welcome you - so in the 11th month, I think it was on the 30th, that’s when I arrived and Tsha Trunyila came to my quarters. He told me the news around Lhasa and what the Chinese were doing. I had come from Tö and the Chinese had already come there via Ruthok [Tib. རུ་ཐོག]. There were like 9 groups [Tib. ཚོ་པ] in Drongba [Tib. འབྲོང་པ] and there was talk about the Chinese and [unclear]. So [we thought that] now whatever it is, the People's Association should discuss it and do something since if it was up to the government then things won't go [be done]. So in this manner the meeting took place. That year there was a meeting and finally in 1952 we had a definite meeting. In 1951, in the 10th or 11th month, I think it was the 12th, we had the meetings. So at that time there was a great emergency [Tib. ཛ་དྲག] with great demands for the dismantling of the arms and armory. It was said that we can't do things immediately since it was time for the New Year Ceremony and then the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] Prayer Festival begins. So it was decided that for the time being it was better to post a letter saying that we are going to make a request. In the 11th month, I think it was the 12th, around the 10th or so, the meeting was taking place. It took place at Gönsebshar [Tib. དགོན་གསེབ་ཤར] located at the back side of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a>. It was outside. Then later we rented a room in Shide, saying that we now have to come out openly. Then it was rented and preparations made and the Chinese heard about the meetings. Immediately, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག] The main administrative office in Lhasa that was headed by the &quot;mayor&quot; or mipön.">Nangtsesha</a>, I think they [Chinese] even requested the Kashag, gave an order saying that we could not meet.   

**Q:**  The letter was from the Kashag?   

**A:**  I think the Kashag ordered the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་དཔོན] The mayor of Lhasa during the traditional era. The head of the Nangtsesha Office [tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤར].">mipön</a>. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག] The main administrative office in Lhasa that was headed by the &quot;mayor&quot; or mipön.">Nangtsesha</a> gave an order to all the house managers [Tib. ཁངཉེར] in all parts of Lhasa. I think it was around the 10th or so. However we said that we must post a letter and we did it on the 19th day of the 12th month. It stated that we have a request to make that concerns both the Tibetans and Chinese [Tib. རྒྱ་བོད་ལྷན་རྒྱས་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ]. However it is time for the New Year and then soon it will be Mönlam, an occasion when the three big monasteries are going to gather. so nothing can be done during this ceremony. So during Mönlam and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a>, we will make the request. So such a letter was posted. We posted in all the alleys of Lhasa and even told the police not to tear it down but to guard it. The people who did the posting were two groups of 12 people each. So it was posted. Then New Year was over, so it was Mönlam. During Mönlam, in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>, there were some disorderly young monks [Tib. རྡབ་བེ་རྡོབ་བེ། ཆ་བེ་ཆོ་བེ] sitting in the place called Dabwog [Tib. འདབ་འོག] who <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> some songs with the words, "Having firewood we don't have time to burn dog shit; Having the Dalai Lama, we don't have time to get liberated." [Tib. ཤིང་འདི་གཤགས་པ་བཞག་ནས། ཁྱི་སྐྱག་བུད་ལོང་མི་འདུག། ཏ་ལཻ་བླ་མ་བཞག་ནས། བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་གཏོང་ལོང་མི་འདུག]. Then there was another song regarding the petition letter but I don't recall that one. Then on the 6th day of the 2nd month we handed in that petition. It was agreed that the Chinese would come to the Kashag and the petition would be submitted at the Kashag. So we approached at 10 but they never came. So we waited and waited. They didn't come at 10, neither at 11 or 12, nor 1 or 2. I think it was around 3 that they talked among themselves [Kashag], I think this was in the old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> [old Sandutsang house]. Then the Kashag went to the main Chinese leader, so we had to go there to hand in the petition. So we went there at around 4. For a while no heed was paid to us and the Kashag and the Chinese discussed this. Then when we finally [went to give the petition]-we were about 16 people, [they looked] to see what identifying marks we had, scars on the face, whether we had gold teeth or not, any wounds. All those were listed. Then they took photos from the front and from the side and from a distance when we moved about. By the time we delivered the petition it was already sunset. The petition itself had 4 articles and 2 addendum for a total of 6 articles. The first one concerns the status and power of the Dalai Lama and even in the 17 Point Agreement there was no change in that. Now the Chinese are saying he has to do this and do that. So Mao Zedong must sign his name telling them not to interfere the Dalai Lama's power. The second, was about the Chinese coming into Tibet in great numbers. The reason they gave was that they have come to guard the places [Tib. ས་སྲུང]. To this day no country in the world has forcefully come to bully us and to this day we have guarded our own Tibetan lands. Even now we do so, however, this year the Chinese came and they did so in great numbers. Our country is large with a sparse population, our economy is not based on the machine but on animal and human labor and so there is danger of famine in the country. The reason for this is that the Chinese are buying when plenty and selling when scarce [Tib. འབེལ་ཉོ་དཀོན་ཚོང], for example they bought butter and barley paying a unprecedented price and some people who had these, sold them thinking only about the money. So later when the things run out like the rope breaks, then it really breaks and the poor will have no means to buy nor count on anyone. If this happens, then in the first place there is danger of famine and secondly, a danger for the people. The main point of the 17-Point Agreement was the friendly relation between Tibet and China and except for about 50 officers and soldiers in Lhasa, not one Chinese <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོ] A unit in the traditional Tibetan currency system. 10 sho equaled to 1 sang and 10 karma equaled one sho.">sho</a>uld stay in Tibet. They should be withdrawn and they should all go down. It had been demanded that the Tibetan armory be merged with the Chinese but our strength was such that we were not in a position to wage war. If it were otherwise, we would not have allowed you to come and let you just settle here. Basically, since we happened to be a country, our army and arms were just for defending the Dalai Lama. Therefore we are not large enough to be merged, but also we, the People's Association, will not allow that. Besides that, on the matter regarding army uniforms, it is part of the country's customs and it is also said that our culture and religion are to remain as before. Now you are saying this and that and we the People's Association cannot rest in peace and so we want our own uniforms. Likewise, the matter of hoisting military flags on the Potala and other places is unprecedented. Especially, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Potala is crowned by prayer flags and hoisting flags there is unprecedented. So this is not acceptable. Then, regarding the three big monasteries, the money of the people are in the hands of the traders. The traders take the loans by giving interest and then they do trading. What they trade in is the main product of Tibet, which is wool. Usually we sell this in India from where the Americans buy it. The reason we sell has nothing to do with any religious and cultural faith or ties we have with America. It is purely a business deal where we buy things from that side and since we don't have anything to pay for except wool, that is what we trade in. So this year the Americans said that the Tibetans are having good relations with China and they stopped buying this wool. So you either have to buy the wool and pay the price that the Americans were paying or you have to talk to the Americans about buying it. So that was the 5th point, right? Then we wanted a clear letter stating that they will not interfere in the religious income and offerings of all the monks. So this petition was handed over and that night when we returned home it was almost dark. Then at around 2 [morning] the low level workers patrolling and delivering the messages, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐོར་འཆག་པ] A low level government worker who patrolled the streets and delivered messages/notices for the office of the mayor [tib. མི་དཔོན] of Lhasa.">korchagpa</a> [Tib. སྐོར་འཆག་པ] were knocking on the door. Everybody was wondering what it was all about. Upon inquiring, they said that the Chinese had made a request last night and so from tomorrow on during the period from sunset till dawn, nobody is allowed to go for the circumambulation around the Lhasa city (the Lingkor [Tib. གླིང་སྐོར]). If they do, they will be shot. They also said that people should not be loitering about nor should there be any commotion. So at the time the Nepalese and others who were selling cotton materials, the Chinese bought them all and they made an astounding number of bags and filled them with sand and barricaded their doors and windows and roof tops. So at that time the Nepalese and the Muslims had a prosperous business. We were only talking peacefully and those of us who went to make the petition didn't even carry a needle. Likewise there was nobody fighting or doing anything. But the Chinese were frightened for no reason and alarming themselves like the proverb, "The rabbit frightened by the sound of something falling into the water." [Tib. རི་བོང་ཅལ་འདྲོགས] and immediately thought about these things all by themselves, these destructive thoughts and made barricades. Then before the Tsongjö [Tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] Festival was over, on the 27th of the 2nd month, we received the petition back and they said that an investigation [Tib. བཀའ་ཞིབ] will be made. It was to be done a day or two after the Tsongjö. No. I don't think it was after the Tsongjö, I think it was the 27th. So on that day we received the reply that the investigation will be made. At that time, I think it was at the old Deshib [Tib. སྡེ་ཞིབ] Office. The room from the entrance to the inner office was a small chamber. At that time, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, Shasur, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> Khenjung, the three of them. There were 3 Chinese officers and 3 interpreters. They were inside. Facing outward from the door there was the one with three legs, Sten-gun or Bren-gun. Likewise another one at the outer door. On one side [of the outer chamber] were 7-8 soldiers and another 7-8 on the other side. There was something about 10 on each side, or something, but there were not quite 10 each. Anyway, we had to go in the middle regarding our petition. So they said that you people are meeting and there is really no need for that since the government is doing everything. However, since you have met, tell us how you met since you need to make a statement. So since they said that a statement had to be made our leader (tsogtso [Tib. ཚོགས་གཙོ]) was Chandzö Thamjö Sonamla. He said, "This petition was made by the people by consensus without discussion [Tib. མ་གྲོས་བསམ་པ་གཅིག་མཐུན] and since we have to make a statement, please send an edict [to everywhere] because the petition is submitted by all the Tibetan people in the snowland region covering "From the upper regions where the plant cardamom is harvested to the lower regions where Chinese women weave satin."[Tib. སྟོད་རྒྱ་གར་ཛ་ཏི་དབྱུགས་པས་རྡུང་ས་ནས། སྨད་རྒྱ་མོ་དར་འཐག་ས]. To this they said, "The last time you all met, was an edict issued [everywhere]? So you all better make a proper report. You think you can just easily make petitions and don't think that we don't know how to reply. Did all the people come like a startled flock of birds who all flew away and arrived at once?" So, Tsha Trunyila was there, they were all knowledgeable people and they said, "Yes, it is as your excellencies, the lamas and the lords [Tib. བླ་མ་དཔོན་པོ] have said. The last time we have not specifically requested an edict. It is from all the people, because of the way the Chinese behaved, at first starting a famine, instead of the people fixing the price, they gave their own price. 1 load of cow-dung at that time cost 14 to 15 Ngüsang. When we were young it was 3 sho, then it went to 1, 2 ,3, & 4 sang and later it used to be about 30. Chinese just paid 100 sang for 1 load of cow-dung without anybody asking for that price. Then they [Chinese] complained the Nangtsesha saying that the Tibetan people were doing like this and so they must be beaten/punished. At that time, I think one mipön [Tib. མི་དཔོན] was Kungö Tashi Berala and the other most probably was Shakjang [Tib. ཤག་བྱང] and they were made to whip the cow-dung seller who was from Phembo. There was no way of saying yes or no. The poor fellow, the Phembo cow-dung seller was even lashed. At that time 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley grain was 60-70 sang, the [Chinese] paid 3 to 4 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> mainly to the large institutions like Drepung Jiso, Labrang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and others. So they bought when it was plenty and sold when it was scarce so that the people would starve. Ever since the beginning of the country of Tibet, there never was anything such as dying from famine but now there was such a danger. Secondly talks like the merging of the armory and the army and the danger to the Dalai Lama's power, we cannot bear it. Secondly, what they have said is that they came for the benefit and development of the general populace of Tibet, that they have belief in what the people had to say. And since we were people from the various provinces, that is why we have made this request. Then they said, "In this organization are only the people involved? Are there monks and which monasteries? Are there army personnel and aristocrats? So what they [Chinese] needed was that [such information]. So we said, "The army was not involved, no monks from the three great monasteries and no aristocrats and that it is only the common people who are making the petition." Finally, they asked us how it all began. We said we first met, relating what I had already earlier mentioned, about the meeting when I had come back [from Tö] on the 30th [see above] and so that was how we both first met at my house. So at first there were the two of us and then there was Chandzö Thamjö Sonamla, who was older and had more experience and so we said that we must do something like that and we went to invite him. Then one by one people gradually joined. We never told people to come and the people just came on their own accord. Then Sambo said, "Well, as long as you have identified the main leader of the meeting the investigation is done and in a few days when we meet at the office we will call you and let you know our verdict. So it was decided very quickly. Then the verdict took about two months. So during this time there was the [association] of the 13 traders called Asia Sog Seeshen [association?], Tsongkha Juksum [Tib. ཚོང་ཁག་བཅུ་གསུམ] it was a government wool trade and I had to go as a representative to Kalimpong for a while. So those who were there received the verdict. So I had come to Kalimpong and when the work was completed, most of the people were sent down and I, as earlier stated, went to Tö via Phari. So that is how the People's Association first began. The verdict stated that the People's Association meeting began and it created suspicion between the Chinese and the Tibetans. This has been harmful rather than being beneficial [Tib. ཕན་མེད་གནོད་སྐྱེལ]. The meetings were done without having any knowledge of the situation and so later such meeting are not allowed and we will supervise you outwardly, internally and secretly [Tib. ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གསུམ]. Regarding the complaints, it is a situation where you people have never handled it before and have no understanding and so it seems it is something that you did not know anything about and so there is no punishment, but in future it will not be allowed. So it was something like that.   

**Q:**  And then it was no more?   

**A:**  Yes, it was decided, at least this part. In 1953 and 1954 I'm not sure, since I was away in Tö and there was some talk of Kamekang Chöndze going to go to America or something to the effect, and so Chandzö Ngawang Tempala [Tib. ངག་དབང་བསྟན་པ], Tsha Trunyila and a few of them were arrested and put in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང] 1. A major open market in Lhasa in the traditional era that was near the Jokhang and traditionally sold miscellaneous foodstuffs and new and old goods. 2. The location of the of the Police Regiment, which was also sometimes called the Tromsikang Regiment.">Tromsikang</a> [Tib. ཁྲོམ་གཟིགས་ཁང]. This affair was settled and the matter was over.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for their arrest?   

**A:**  The reason was that they said that they were going abroad. Other than that there was nothing new. Regarding the meetings that we had, the [investigation] was finalized on the basis that in the future there will be no such get togethers. In the room called Ewang [Tib. ཨེ་ཝམ] in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙུག་ལག་ཁང] The famous temple in the center of Lhasa that also housed important government offices, like the Kashag. The Jokhang is part of this temple.">Tsuglagang</a>, this happened at that time. The decision was made in Ewang. There was also an Abbreviated Assembly Meeting, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu in which the decision was made. At that time what we have requested, that was it. The various points we had made if you can convince the Chinese then that is it. If they don't listen and continue talking like that then we as the People's Association cannot bear the difficulties. So this is what we had said and then left it at that.   

**Q:**  Now in the People's Association it was not just the people, but there were people from the monasteries, right? From the government side <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> Phala, was he working with you or not?   

**A:**  He was not openly [Tib. དངོས་སུ] there. No, not there. So that is what the Chinese were looking for. If they got [such information] then they had the idea of immediately doing it [arresting, punishing]. Later, it was said that the 2 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were inciting the People's Association and they insisted that they resign. So at that time there had to be, we had a head and a tail, and whatever the superior said to do this or that and so actually internally speaking there was something [a connection], it's not like today. So internally speaking there was something.   

**Q:**  What about the three great monasteries? On the one hand the Chinese were saying that the religious estates will remain. So at that time what were the monasteries thinking? Did they have any involvement in the People's Association?   

**A:**  There were no specific representatives as such. However, we made the petitions and the copies were handed to the various monasteries. When we did, Drepung did not accept the petition and returned it. Sera and Ganden accepted the petitions. They have accepted and internally probably, they were there, but not openly.   

**Q:**  Was there any involvement from the outside, in Kalimpong, etc, certain groups?   

**A:**  No. At that time there was none, but in Kalimpong, a little later, I think it was Kungö Wangdula [Tib. དབང་འདུས་ལགས] and others, sent some printed things.   

**Q:**  Yes, later the Dedön Tshogpa was started.   

**A:**  Yes. At that time I had to go to the Changtang and at Tö, I had the salt collector work (Tsanda Tsashö) work and also the Dapa [Tib. མདའ་པ] Dzong work. However, when we met from all the various regions the people had to come. I had a lot of people. I personally had about 50,000 people [members signed up]. Later when I was in the prison at Shigatse, I had a wife by the name of Drömala [Tib. སྒྲོལ་མ་ལགས]. Her sister, you will know, Ama Kendenla [Tib. སྐལ་ལྡན་ལགས] at TCV.   

**Q:**  Well, I have been in America for many years.   

**A:**  Yes, you can't help it. She served as TCV steward for many years. She, poor thing, had great determination. She was able to go to my quarters and burn [the papers]. If this was not burnt and if all the names got into the Chinese hands, then it would have been a disaster. So, thinking about this, while I was in prison at Shigatse, I sent her. So at that time, Acha Kendenla went. Achala Kendenla died this year. She burned the papers. It took her 6 days and nights. It was not only this, but I had other papers. They were all burned. Along with that, I had 2 land tenure documents [Tib. འབྱེད་ཁྲ་ཤེ་བམ]. Altogether I had 49 land tenure documents. Then were all burned together.   

**Q:**  How did you happen to be in jail?   

**A:**  At that time, I was the acting representative Rice Procurement Office. In 1958, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> had begun. That year in the 8th month they came to Shang to take out arms. So at that time, the rice procurement work was government work; it was part of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Office. I was Lhatsun Labrang's Chandzö and our lama was staying at Lhasa. Previously there had been some trouble between the government and Sera and since Kyabji [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྗེ] [Lhatsun] Rimpoche was old, so if he just stayed like that it was very difficult since Chushigandru had already started their camp at Drigu and revolted. So whatever it may be, not only had they started, but they had also gone to Shang and took the arms and so it was only a question of time before it was going to come and if that happened, then he would have difficulties. Besides, he was aged, so I thought that for the time being, until things settled down, it may be better if Kyabji Rimpoche went to India and stayed there. I came down in the 4th month on the 9th day or so, from Shigatse to Lhasa. At the time I was going to Lhasa, the Chinese and our side, Chushigandru, which had people from all the three provinces [Tib. ཆོལ་ཁ་གསུམ]. Well they had a clash and around Markyang [Tib. མར་རྐྱང] there were some dead bodies left around. At Lhasa I told Rimpoche that for the time being if he went for a pilgrimage to India it would be good. Later things will get worse and then it will be difficult. Previously also there was commotion and he had not been happy and you are also old aged, and so for the time being if you stay in India for a while it is good. So I went to bring him and he at first said it was good idea as it was the birthplace of the Buddha, his place of enlightenment and where he taught, so it is unfortunate that I have not seen it and if I saw it, it would be very good. Will I see it? I said, "Yes." Then he said it was good idea and told me to come tomorrow. I went the next day, but the night before others may have said something because then he said that for the time being it may be better to postpone going for a while, and then go after the New Year. I thought by then it may be difficult, but I never thought that it would have occurred so soon. I said that it may be better to go now since there were 25 vehicles of the government that were being hired for transportation. At that time they were renting it to go between Sharsingma and Yadong. So there were government vehicles and whatever the fare it would be paid. So it would be good to take a few important items and go to India. I will ask about the transport fare you will have to pay. Of course, he said. Anyway, Kyabji Rimpoche was not able to go. So I had to leave since the rice procurement work necessitated that I be there when the nomads brought the salt and pay them. With the salt via Walung to Zar [Tib. ?] and Tingkye [Tib. གཏིང་སྐྱེས] it was exchanged for rice which went to the Laja Office. I had to load about 2,000 pack animals with rice. For this reason I went to Shang, Gyatso [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ], Panam [Tib. པ་སྣམ]. All together there were about 13 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> from which the "capital" [Tib. མ་རྩ] had to be collected from some government granaries [Tib. བཀར་འབྲུ], and some other places we had to sell it. So anyway, at Hre [Tib. སྲས], Zar and Tingkye, Shigatse and Shang, Gyatso, Namling [Tib. རྣམ་གླིང], Lhangam Phünsum [Tib. ལྷ་ངམ་ཕུན་གསུམ] (Lhatse [Tib. ལྷ་རྩེ], Ngamring and Phüntsoling [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་གླིང]), I had to go to all those places. I just managed to get to Shigatse in the 12th month. Then around the first and second months, the situation was not at all good - something was going on. Then at Shigatse they were not even allowing people to pass. Then we were wondering what happened. Unlike here, we couldn't telephone. The lines were all cut. We had a telephone line, but that too was cut. Then there was talk that the local [Tibetan] government was lost. Then in the 3rd month, on the 12th day or the night of the 13th, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> Regiment was surrounded when they were reciting the Drölma prayer. The soldiers were arrested and just before nightfall they took them to the Chinese garrison. So we didn't feel like staying, but and were just sitting around. I think it was the evening of the 12th. On the morning of the 13th, I got up and our Drölmala had a little boy who used to get up early. I was just washing. The sun had not arisen. He [the boy] called out "Bala, Bala" [father, father]. What is it? I said. He said "A lot of Chinese have come, what is it"? "Where are they" I inquired. "They just arrived", he said. The boy was around 8 years old or so and I was just wondering what it was all about. Just then, they entered the house. There were 170 soldiers. At Shigatse our Gadang Regiment's Depön Numa was there. Likewise, the Shigatse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] Refers to Shigatse dzong as well as the 2 heads of the Shigatse dzong while the Panchen Lama was in exile. After he returned in 1952, the 2 heads of Shigatse dzong were just called Dzongpön.">Jidzong</a> [Tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] was there. Before they did anything, they first came to my house and arrested me. I had quite a few arms, since I had quite a lot of servants who had to sent to various places. These were given. I also had some arms laying around and these were lost right there and then. There was nothing I could do. There were too many soldiers. So I said "Why do you want to take my guns"? They said that the local government had lost the battle and so in order to make sure that there would be no trouble we are taking the arms. Later they will be returned to you. They swore in the name of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama. These <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> soldiers spoke Chinese. I didn't think I would get them back, however they were wrapped and sealed, supposedly to get them back later . Anyway they were lost. Then I had a pair of binoculars which belonged to a friend. They said, "Guns, all Tibetans have. You have in your possession a pair of binoculars. No doubt you are a leader. You kept these to spy on the People's Liberation Army, to see what they were doing and where they were going. This is a great misdeed. You have to go right now." So I said, "These binoculars belonged to my father's fathers. Two or three generations ago. Did they keep this to spy on what you are doing today? In our Tibetan custom, the father's wealth is given to the son, and he in turn gives them to his son and so on. This is our custom and our right. So it is not the way you think. Where do you think I bought it? This is too much. If this is the case, then I'm not even going to give you the guns. If I have to go, then I will go, give me the guns! Anyway, I lost the binoculars with them [guns] . They didn't take me. Anyway all that was lost. The guns and the ammunition. Then in the heap of cow-dung and the loads of barley and salt, they stuck an iron rod to see what was in it, if maybe there were arms. Usually I have about 14 guns and later when the Chushigandru were to go to Drigu they said that they needed guns and asked if I could see if I could get some. I thought that we would be staying here and won't have much use for the guns, so except for 4 guns, I sent them. So that day I lost all the 4 guns. After they have taken the things, we had some tea and then they came again. At Shigatse I had a large granary [Tib. བཀར་ཁང]. I had it because I needed to keep salt, rice, and trade items, the grain fund [Tib. མ་རྩ] from Panam, Düjung [Tib. འདུས་བྱུང], Namling. All these were sealed. I got the worse end of it because they did not make any distinction between my personal goods and government goods and everything was sealed up. The others, like the Jidzong, did not have their private belongings taken. So while they were sealing it, I had about 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལག] A traditional Tibetan unit comprising of ten transport animals. This term was normally used for mules and donkeys.">lag</a> [10] of mules. On the evening of the 12th, the night of the arrest of the Gadang Regiment, no, it was the day before, the night of the 11th, I received a letter [Tib. མདའ་ཡིག] from Chushigandru saying they wanted to come here. So I thought that would come about and as they approached from there and the Chinese met them from here, I thought I would make my get away so I bought 2 horses. I thought I had better make my escape on a horse since I had only mules. So I managed to sell the mules. Other than that, I lost everything. So after they sealed the granary they arrested us and took us to Shigatse. The reason this happened was because of what the People's Association did in Lhasa. Later it was said that there was a spy who did all this. Later, as I heard more and more, it is said that there was a spy from down there [Lhasa]. So that's how the 1952 People's Association made the petition.   

