# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0036.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Changkhyim (Tregang), Thubden Tsempel [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བཀྲས་ཁང), ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་འཕེལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** New York, New York, USA  
**Date of Interview:** 9 March 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Changkhyim (Tregang), Thubden Tsempel [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བཀྲས་ཁང), ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་འཕེལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 73  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Changkhyim [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བྲས་ཁང)] was a monk official in the Tibetan government and the brother of Tsipön Shakabpa (of JKTS) in Kalimpong. In this interview, he first discusses the political climate of Tibet in 1956 and then after the Dalai Lama's returned from India. He talks about the March 10th conflict, and the fighting between the Khambas and the Chinese. He describes the arrival of Chinese officials and workers and his role in introducing them to Tibet. He also discusses the formation of the Tibet Autonomous Region, his work for the Tibetan government and Chinese manual labor policies. He concludes with discussing the Youth League, the Women's Association, and Chinese spies.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0036_02/H_0036_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  The next day, around dawn, the message came saying that it was alright to go. So His Holiness went crossing up and down various hills, and there was a reception at the border itself. The Indian government representative Menon was there. So since then, we have been guests of the Indian government. [laughter both]   

**Q:**  In '56 His Holiness came for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[hind. Buddha Jayanti] The 1956 celebration in India of the 2,500 anniversary of the death (nirvana) of the Buddha.">Buddha Jayanti</a>, and was it Mao or Zhou Enlai that said that the reforms were going to be postponed for as long as possible or something? There was such strong talk.   

**A:**  Yes, that's what people say. Almost like if the Tibetans didn't want it, then it was alright not to do it. It had a pleasant ring to it.   

**Q:**  So this was when he was in India?   

**A:**  Maybe when he arrived in India.   

**Q:**  Upon return, many workers were recalled. That took place soon after His Holiness's arrival in Tibet? Or before that?   

**A:**  It was much before. They were withdrawn before '57. In the intervening period, His Holiness went to India and so the talk began that there would be no reforms. They began to make things gentler [Tib. འཇམ་དུ་བཏང] and the workers were reduced.   

**Q:**  What was the reason they did that?   

**A:**  His Holiness was probably in India, and so it must have been a policy decision that for the time being nothing was going to happen in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Or was it that revolts had already taken place on the Kham side from 1955 onwards?   

**A:**  I can't say for sure, but most probably it was the Indian visit. It was decided that he would go to India.   

**Q:**  Later when they said that the reforms would be postponed, did the political situation get better? Or were the Chinese making preparations? Was there some imminent problem?   

**A:**  They were not actually implementing [a harsh policy], but they were increasing their military capabilities. After His Holiness returned, the Chinese began to make harsher [Tib. བོམྲོ་ཏང] statements. Before I left, the following was one of the problems. When we went to the meeting of the Tibet Autonomous Region, there were some meetings that His Holiness attended and others without His Holiness' attendance. So we went to the meeting and one day I went to a meeting, and they said it was a labor day. That meant that before the meeting, all had to perform labor [Tib. nyetsö]. This labor involved the cutting of unnecessary trees just below the Shugtri lingka and the planting of new ones. So I went to the meeting and I said, "What? Labor?". "Yes," they said. I thought to myself and said that "Until now, I have never performed labor and I will not go." When I came out, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> Khembo Gusho Thebkyela, a young man, was arriving. He was a good person. He asked me wasn't there a meeting today so where I was going. I said that they said that there was labor today and they said we had to do tree labor, and I was not going. We were together in China. Then he also said that he was not going and that he was never going to perform labor. So we both returned. Later I learned that they cut tress and transported them and did a lot of work. So they started a lot of labor. For example, in front of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> there are the manure heaps [Tib. ལྷུཔུང], and they said that these had to be cleaned. So from that time on, I never went to any meeting and I and the Chinese were then at odds [Tib. khönsong]. And so I took leave. This was around '57. I was very close to Tsögo and he was good to me. He wrote me a letter. He was one of the secretaries of the Tibet Autonomous Region. He wrote to me privately and said that if I did not come to the Tibet Autonomous Region meetings, then it would be harmful for my future work. So I must come. I met him later and told him that I would never come. I said, "Until now, I have never carried wood and manure." He used to affectionately call me Khen-Rimpoche and he said, "Khen-Rimpoche. Khen-Rimpoche, don't talk like that. Just see how it goes. Because later there definitely will be criticism." I said, "Why would there be criticism?" He said that "They will say that you are not working and just sitting like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, and cannot do labor." I just said, "This labor thing- I will never, ever do it." Otherwise, Tsögo and I were very close. So it was a great loss.   

**Q:**  Earlier, you said something about how they made a differentiation.   

**A:**  That was in 1959. The moment the uprising began when the people rose, since His Holiness was to be invited [to the show], from that day there was a meeting in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and all the government officials were there. When it was said that the Chinese were acting like this and so we had to be careful, and when the meeting representatives were chosen- it seemed like, it looked like some people may have shown unpleasant looks at those who were close to the Chinese. Maybe that was the reason, but the next day and the day after they went into different camps. The same night of March 10th, the Chinese asked them to come to Tibet Autonomous Region and [said] "We will protect you." So the Chinese took them. So that's how it happened. There were those who went on their own as well as those who were asked to come by the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did you go to this meeting? Where was it held, and were most government officials there?   

**A:**  Yes, I was at the meeting and it took place in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> at the Shabden Lhagang. Most of the officials were there, but some were not. The people's representatives from among those who were demonstrating were also there. This was the first time that people's representatives sat with the officials, although earlier there were people's representative during important matters. But not in such situations.   

**Q:**  How did the representatives come to be there?   

**A:**  People were shouting [demonstrating], right? So among them, it was said that it was not helpful for everyone to come, so they should send representatives. So they choose among themselves.   

**Q:**  So who were the ones who spoke?   

**A:**  There were people there. The kalön were there and all the officials were there. It was said that such and such things have happened, e.g., that the Chinese had asked His Holiness to come to the show and although there was a plan to go, the people came and said that they could not go. People like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang went and told the people to return, and to not demonstrate like that because they would go and talk with the Chinese. One reason was that Phagpalha Khenjung was killed, and so everyone was in a burning [angry] state. The kalön were able to go and talk [to the Chinese] and return- which was good. However, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Sambo had no luck. He was stoned on the head and taken to Dekyilinga. From there they took him to the Chinese hospital and that's how he got to be with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Wasn't the talk with the Chinese later?   

**A:**  No, that same day. I remember it clearly. I was in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Where were you staying?   

**A:**  At no particular place. That morning I went to the Drungja ceremony and there was no commotion. Then when it was over, the crowd was increasing.   

**Q:**  Where did the Drungja take place?   

**A:**  At <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> in the Nyiyö room.   

**Q:**  When you went to the Drungja, there was no commotion?   

**A:**  When I went there, there was no commotion. However, it seemed one or two Sendre Khembos had come. A few of them were there. Then a few of our military commanders [Tib. depön] were there. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> was there along with Sambo. I saw them at a distance. Then we went for the Drungja. It started exactly at 9 a.m. Then tea was served and when we came out, a lot of people had arrived. There was a lot of noise and people were shouting. I wondered what it was. There was no place to go in since the gates were closed. The main gate was closed and the people were not allowed in. The officials were inside. Many monastic khembos had arrived. Then it was said that Chamdo Phagpalha's brother was killed.   

**Q:**  You were not able to go?   

**A:**  No. The gate was closed. So many people had come so the soldiers had to close the gate. It was not a situation where one could return home. One couldn't right? Everyone had to stay. There was danger that one could get beaten if one returned, right? So one just stayed like this- among the trees, and just observing what was going to happen. And thinking that it was good that such chaos arose, but also thinking that what happened to Phagpalha Khenjung was bad. So I stayed like this. Then the kalön went to talk with the Chinese and they returned, and then a meeting took place.   

**Q:**  Earlier you said that a meeting took place at the Shabden Lhagang. Did the main kalön speak first? Surkhang was the kalön.   

**A:**  Yes. They said what the situation was and that we must be calm. That relations with the Chinese had not been broken and that the people should return. So some people did return and some of us went home that evening. Earlier that same day, the representatives were chosen and the next day the meetings took place in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Kangyur Parkhang- upstairs. In that meeting it was strongly stated that Tibet was independent and that we could not live under Chinese imperialism [Tib. ཙེཝང]. That we must petition the United Nations and that it must be sent through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> in Kalimpong. So a wireless message was sent to that effect. Many documents showing that Tibet was independent were looked into. During this, Tsarong <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was there too. So smaller groups were made [Tib. ཙོགཆུང] with some looking into the documents. I was working in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Legung, so I went to the meetings until 2 p.m. and then left for work. I would go to the Trapchi Legung, bring money and give it to where I had to give it. So at that time, the situation was reaching an emergency level.   

**Q:**  At one meeting, I don't know which, but Dzasa Mengyiling spoke and then Tsarong spoke. Which one was it?   

**A:**  It was the one we were going to. Our meeting was headed by Tsarong and Mengyiling.   

**Q:**  So what was said?   

**A:**  It said there was nothing else to do, but Tibet is an independent country and so we want our independence. That the Chinese must leave Tibet. So that was it. That we cannot always stay like this with the Chinese, if the Chinese cannot think properly. So there were a lot of activities with talking and making letters [petitions], and that most importantly we must do something for the protection of the Dalai Lama, especially at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> where the Dalai Lama was staying, and at the Potala, and the Tsuglagang. So it was very hectic.   

**Q:**  Maybe it was the Kagö Magchigang and Dzadra Magchigang?   

**A:**  Yes. They said that we have to have these. Yes, these were all being done from down there [Shöl Parkhang] and the Kashag was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and then they had to be consulted [Tib. ཉེསང་ནང་ཀྱི་ཡོརེ]. Now, there is a reason why His Holiness left and you may have heard it. The reason was that the Chinese turned their cannon on Norbulinga and fired two or three shots. So this hastened His Holiness's leaving.   

**Q:**  Previous to this, there must have been some talk of leaving?   

**A:**  Previous to this, I doubt there was. The reason being that when His Holiness left, he had nothing with him. Not even some bedding. If there were preparations [Tib. ཕིབདྲི], it would be necessary to have these things, isn't it. Besides how many diamonds and items since the time of 13th Dalai Lama were there, and how many things were presented to him as offering [Tib. ngöten]? Pombo Kudrepa [the Dalai Lama senior attendant] himself told me much later on [in India]. He said there was a cloth bag in which many of these items were kept. He said [in regret], "Now, if this was brought out, how nice it would have been? No, we didn't even bring such things." [His Holiness] brought nothing, just a bowl.   

**Q:**  I heard that [the] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> [deity] was consulted and Nechung said that it would be good to leave within three days.   

**A:**  Yes, one did hear something like this. But we would not know. We [don't know the happenings in the] Dalai Lama's chamber [Tib. སིམཇུ]. We stayed down there [Norbulinga]. Unless we were told, other than that we were in the dark.   

**Q:**  Now, Samjola and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> went to Chushigandru.   

**A:**  That was a long time before. They went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> to tell them that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> rebellion [Tib. ཁམྲིག་སིངཇ] should be stopped and also to alleviate the anger of the Central government. So the reason for the meeting was to alleviate the anger of the Central government and cease the Khamba rebellion [Tib. ཏྲུཡང་གོངབ་དང་ཝ་དང་ཁམྲིག་སིངཇ་ཇ་པ].   

**Q:**  Were they sent by the Kashag or was there a meeting?   

**A:**  Meeting?   

**Q:**  Were you there?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How were they chosen?   

**A:**  I don't know. Maybe the Kashag. The two went and the Khambas were not surrendering their arms. When they went there the idea was to have the Khambas surrender their arms and stop the resistance. But once they got there, things seemed to get bigger with them. A military camp was started at E Lhagyari with an office. Additionally, from abroad they were probably getting arms - but we didn't know, right?   

**Q:**  The two stayed and never came back right?   

**A:**  Yes, they never returned to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for staying? What did you hear? Did they stay there or was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> not allowing them to leave?   

**A:**  I don't know...   

**Q:**  Some questions are very brief. Yesterday you said that you gave <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> 100,000 [? of] barley.   

**A:**  Most probably, if one includes what was given earlier and later, 100,000 dru khe.   

**Q:**  So this was given for the occasion of the Panchen Lama's arrival?   

**A:**  Yes, because from down there [China?] many horses and mules were arriving. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> had to do a reception [Tib. ཏོནཆེན་ཛེགོ]. Labrang had to give - it was like welfare [Tib. ཀྱོབསོ]. Probably - what I myself gave was done slowly [installments], but 50,000 was given from my own hands. The rest was given gradually. But by then I had already arrived down [at Lhasa?]. One cannot transport it all at once, right? You have to have a sanction to take grains out of the granaries[Tib. ཏོནཆོག་ཀགྱ].   

**Q:**  Was this requested from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> or did the government give [it] as some special case?   

**A:**  I don't know. It was an order from the Kashag. I got an order saying that my work was such and such, and [to] give so much to Tashilhunpo. Likewise, Chinese government officers were coming, and military officers. And they had to be supplied, and so I was told to give to them [grain]. Most of it all went for animal feed. There were many animals. I was also told to "introduce" [Tib. ngöjor] the various government and military Chinese personnel to the various dzongs. I was the representative of the Songjong (Surjong) Kashag. A side office of the Kashag was established called Surjong Kashag with ministers Ngabö and Shasur. [Shelling says Songjong means Surjong- a room called surjong]. Under the two there was an office. It seems that when the Chinese were arriving they appointed workers. I was in Tsang. I stayed for one year. After one year I wrapped [up] the work. I said I was leaving and they said alright.   

**Q:**  The Songjong Kashag was just established for this work, right?   

**A:**  Yes, with two ministers. So our work was under them and we made requests directly to them and not the Kashag.   

**Q:**  So based on this work you met many Chinese officers, right? And you said that you came with bodyguards to the various granaries.   

**A:**  In the Shigatse area there were many "tax-collectors" - what was called Bhabtho. So I asked them to come to me with the documents and tell me until then how much grain they had taken out and how much they had stored. Some knew exactly, giving an account of how much they had stored, how much the government had used, etc. Some didn't know exactly. So I had to go to some of these areas. At that time, since I had to deal with the various Chinese leaders around Shigatse, I told them that I had to be away for a month or so. They said, "Oh, if you do that then it's excellent. We also want to send one or two persons with you to tour the areas," and they asked me to take them with me. So I said that I had to consult down there [Lhasa?]. I immediately sent a wireless and they said it was good and to take them. So the Chinese sent two persons with the rank of Kawdrang and under them about 10 soldiers. They didn't bother with the granaries since that was not their work. They just went to see the places and make relations. For example, they wanted to know what Sakya was like. How many monasteries [it had], make relations with the people, give their flag and pictures of Chairman Mao and Zhu De. So it was just diplomacy and they didn't make any trouble.   

**Q:**  They didn't come to look at grain and things like that?   

**A:**  They didn't. We had no connections with them. They wanted to come with us for their own safety. Since they had come to a new land, they hoped that there would be no trouble with them if they travelled with one of our government officials. [repeated] They came wherever we went and they were good. When they had good food, they used to call me over. If I had better food, I used to call the two Kawdrang over. At that time it was interesting. It was said that there was freedom of worship, right? I'm a Buddhist, right? If I got to a place, I visited the monastery, [and] provided 100 butter lamps. They used to come along and give scarves [Tib. ཁཏ]- though they didn't go so far as to provide butter lamps. Aside from the images displayed there were images put away. Sometimes these were taken out and we got to see them. So I saw the images, then the two Chinese officers saw them. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> sent them a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་ཚན་པ] The name for officials of the 5th rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">letsenpa</a> official as an interpreter. We put the images on our heads, right? Then they said they wanted to put the images on their heads and on the heads of the soldiers. They said that "The policy of the Central government of religious freedom is very important, and among us we have one soldier who is a Muslim. So see, we also put the image on his head too." So they were very diplomatic at that time. In this way we toured and it is said that in one or two places, the leaders didn't feel like meeting and the people were alarmed. This was told to me by the Tashilhunpo interpreter, but I never had any problems. If there were problems, then I had to do something to protect them, right? This never happened. So it was all very good.   

**Q:**  I want to ask you in detail about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Rampa arriving in Shigatse when the Panchen Lama came?   

**A:**  That was called the ceremony of gift thanking, or congratulating for his arrival [Tib. ལེགས་འབུལ]. Usually, we would offer cookies and other things at the ceremony. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Rampa</a> was the representative of the Tibetan government for doing that. At that time, he had the Kashag's Secretary [Tib. གདྲུང] and the Kashag's aide [Tib. gandrön] with him. My Uncle Taring was also with him. He was the gandrön. And there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> Sey [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་སྲས] and Künsangtse Rindor La [Tib. kun bzang rste rin rdor]. He was also probably part of the Kashag. There was also Donwang Khenjung [Tib. དོན་དབང་མཁན་ཆུང]. Altogether there were 4-5 Tibetan government officials.   

**Q:**  At that time, parties were given, right?   

**A:**  The Tibetan government held an elaborate ceremony congratulating the arrival of the Panchen Lama, and the Tonchen [Tib. སྟོན་ཆེན] was also given where a very large pile of cookies was given to the masses who used to grab for it. The offerings and alms were also made and given in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Monastery. The Tibetan government also gave a big party to the Chinese officials and the Labrang officials. It was given according to the Chinese way of displaying many tables. After that, the Chinese government also gave a party after the arrival of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Rampa. Every thing went on very well.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese pay the fee when transporting the things?   

**A:**  Yes, we used to send the letter to the dzongs saying that they should provide the fodder and grain to the Chinese, and it was written in the letter that if the Chinese didn't have pack animals, the local people should help them. The Chinese paid the standard transportation fee to the people.   

**Q:**  What was the rate at that time?   

**A:**  I don't remember that. At that time, they treated the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> very nicely.   

**Q:**  There was [a Tibetan government] reception in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and the Chinese also had a reception, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Chinese had a very elaborated reception and all the Tibetan government officials and the Labrang officials were invited to all the Chinese revolutionary ceremonies and festivals at the Jidzong.   

**Q:**  Yesterday, when I interviewed you, you said the petition of the People's Association had come out in books. In what kind of books did you see that?   

**A:**  I don't remember that. It has been many years, and I was also not attentive about those things.   

**Q:**  How did they talk about setting up the Tibet Autonomous Region at the beginning?   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama went to China, the State Council [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང], the kalön, and the Panchen Lama and Labrang Officials talked about that, and it was for helping Tibet. It was said that Tibet was unable to develop, so for the purpose of developing Tibet, the Chinese would help the Tibetans and [they would] set up the Tibet Autonomous Region together. Under this leadership, it was planned to set up the work units for doing construction. It was a political matter. They had a lot of talks, and the General Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] and the Director of the Financial Office [Tib. རྩིས་དཔོན] were also there. At that time, I was just the one in charge of the money, and I had to send the money to be exchanged, and deposited and withdrew the money. At that time, the Chinese didn't let us stay idle, they also made us to go for an inspection tour [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར] and made us give a lecture. Tibetans are carefree and we want to go for a walk when we come to a new place. But the Chinese didn't let us do that. They said that we had to go somewhere when there was no work in the office.   

**Q:**  I heard from some people that setting up the Tibet Autonomous Region was because it was written in the 17-Point Agreement that the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] would be set up. If it would be set up, it would be a military organization, so later on,   

**A:**  You can look in the 17-Point Agreement. You can find many books in Dharamsala. One of the main points in the Agreement was that it was written, "According to the Common Program [Ch. gong tong gang ling]." They had put the content of the Chinese constitution into the Agreement, but people didn't know about that. If we would have to do everything according to that, many things would come out. So regarding this matter, they discussed many times. Since the Dalai Lama had arrived at Beijing, we couldn't be very tough. They [the Tibetan government] just had to act in accordance with the Chinese and didn't have much freedom. The Dalai Lama [had] already arrived in China. So in case the Chinese told him to stay there, there wasn't any choice but to stay there. At that time, I was not involved in politics. But later, the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས་གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. They made a joint system for helping Tibet and the offices were set up jointly. The representatives of the Tibetan government were called the local Tibetan government. They didn't call us the Tibetan government. [Then Labrang] was called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Nangmagang. The other part was called the Chamdo Liberation Committee [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. Chamdo had already become a place captured by the Chinese. It was regarded as not belonging to the Tibetan government. They were powerful in political matters and they didn't have anything to do with the local Tibetan government. They were saying that they were suppressed by force. So the Tibetan government didn't have any to send representatives from Chamdo. Chamdo themselves sent their own representatives who were all pro-Chinese. Actually, our people were good people and they were enthusiastic deep down in their minds. But they didn't have any choice but to do what the Chinese told them to do.   

**Q:**  Yesterday, you said that you worked in the Transportation Department and you also had to attend the meetings in the Tibet Autonomous Region and they divided you into 8 groups. Tell me about this in detail.   

**A:**  I have a long story to tell you about this. Before the Preparatory Committee was set up, the preparations should have been done. At that time, Chen Yi came up as the representative of the State Council. Before he came, it was said that we had to prepare for setting up the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region. At that time, they set up a temporary Secretariat Committee [Tib. འཕྲལ་སེལ་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལྷན་ཁང] [which] consisted of Ngabö and Khentsab Lobsang Samden [Tib. མཁན་ཚབ་བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན]. From the Chamdo side, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] and there was a Chinese Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji] called Liang Kezhang. He was a highly politically educated person. There wasn't anyone from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> on that committee. At that time, they talked with the Tibetan government. Tsögo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲས] An honorific term for the son of an aristocratic family, e.g., Sambo Sey (the son of the Sambo family).">sey</a> [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ་སྲས] and Janglojen sey [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་སྲས] were appointed among the clerks. Rimshi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Rampa</a>, Rimshi Sumdo [Tib. རིམ་བཞི་སུམ་མདོ] and I were appointed to prepare for the reception [Tib. སྣེ་ལེན་གྲ་སྒྲིག]. We were in charge of the reception and giving parties. We were the heads and we were told to find staff members. There were also Chinese cadres and we had to work with them. At that time, it was said that the local government and the United Front Bureau [Ch. tong zhan bu] should consult and make the budget for the receptions and parties. We just had to listen to the suggestions made by the Chinese because they were familiar with that work. After the Preparatory Committee was set up, we held many receptions and parties. We did a lot in preparation for the parties. We selected about 60 girls and boys from among the Youth League for the party receptionists.   

**A:**  At that time, the Chinese themselves had trained the waiters and waitresses. We made all the plans for giving the parties, and the materials that we had in Tibet were used. The Chinese also brought the dry sea foods and beer from China. They also brought a truck full of live pigs. It was really funny, when the pigs arrived at Lhasa, all of them felt giddy and they were also like humans, and they vomited and laid down. And they slept for 1-2 days. At the party given when the Tibet Autonomous Region was established, the Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama, and Chen Yi were at the first table placed at the most upper part of the tent. The party was given in the Shugtri Linga [Tib. བཞུགས་ཁྲི་གླིང་ག] where a very large tent was put up. There were 120 tables placed in that tent. Each of the tables had 10 people. The government officials above the county level were invited to the party and there were also the Chinese cadres, the Labrang officials, and the representatives from Chamdo. At that time, we had to give 5 big parties for the Preparatory Committee. After that, when the Preparatory Committee was formally established, there were 14 departments [Ch. qu]. The second day after the committee was set up. A meeting was held that the Dalai Lama also attended and they made the announcement of the State Council's appointment of the department chairmen [Ch. qu zhang] After the departments were set up, we didn't have any idea what work we should do, but we just went through the motions of going into the office because we were sent by the Tibetan government. Our office was located in Janglojen's house. The Chinese cadres were experienced and they told us what to do. We were told that we should develop the transportation of Tibet and build roads. If we didn't develop the transportation, the economy would not get developed. Similarly, we should build bridges. The Chinese had their own plans and the plans were submitted to the General Office [Ch. ban gong ting] of the Tibet Autonomous Region. They would then discuss about this and they wouldn't approve it right away, and they said that the resolution [Tib. གྲོས་ཆོད] should be made at the meeting. So as I mentioned above, it was divided into 8 groups and each group had a group leader [Tib. ཚོགས་གཙོ], and our group leader was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>. Before the general meetings were held in the big meeting hall of Tibet Autonomous Region, the groups held their meetings in different places. The places were all arranged by the General Office. We just had to elect the group leaders from among us. The agenda was given to the group meeting and we had to discuss whether the plans were beneficial for Tibet or not. And we were told that we could make remarks if there were some errors, and that we shouldn't talk much after the work was done. There were also Chinese in the group meetings. At the beginning, all people said that the plan was good. After that, Sambo made the report to the office of the Dalai Lama and Zhang Guohua and the General Secretary Ngabö. In that meeting, the committee members were seated at the front and we, the department chairmen, were seated at the back side. After that, a meeting would be held and in that meeting, they would approve the suggestions and remarks that were made in the group meetings. Then they would say that they had made the corrections in the plan and that we also had to make the corrections in our own agenda, and we just went through the motions of making the corrections. Then, we were told to raise our hands for the approval. As I mentioned before, the department chairmen didn't have the right to raise their hands. At that time, a meeting was held once every three months on different matters. When the plans were put into action, there were advantages and disadvantages. So we made suggestions regarding those matters at the next meeting. Until the fourth meeting, it went on well and we used to take home the document. After the 5th and 6th meeting, they didn't let us take the documents home.   

**Q:**  What document was that?   

**A:**  That was the copy of the agenda of the meeting. When he had made the remarks regarding the matters that would have some harm on the fundamental welfare of the Tibetan government and people, the group leader would say that they had eliminated those things. And they had raised their hands and approved that. But when we were going back, as I told you before, they took back the documents. Later, when the real resolution was passed down to the groups, the matters on which we had made remarks were not eliminated. They remained the same as what they were when they had originally made the plan. After that, I was surprised and I thought that if they did that, we had been just going through the motions of holding the meeting [it was useless]. We were really stupid. We should have known that it would be useless to make the remarks when they took back the documents. Actually, it went on well for a year. After making remarks 3-4 times, people got the idea and they didn't make any remarks. Until then, some people didn't know about that and they were still making their remarks. In the beginning, the Chinese regarded the cadres very highly. But later the cadres were told to do manual labor.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  It was about 1957. When the Dalai Lama went to India and came back in 1956. At that time, the Chinese made the cadres do manual labor. But people like me, who were tough [Tib. རྫབ་ཆེ་བ], didn't attend [do] the manual labor. At that time, Tsögo, who was the General Secretary of the General Office wrote us letters saying, "You should look at your future and cooperate well with attending the evening gatherings and [doing] the manual labor." He was careful in sending me the letter and when I met him after that, I told him, "I am not going to attend and do manual labor." He said, "Come on, it doesn't matter. We have to act in accordance with them." I told him, "It doesn't make any difference whether we act in accordance with them or not. Things are almost finished. I don't trust the Chinese." Tsögo was a very good and a stable person. I told him, "You should think about [this] carefully." He said, "One day let's have a nice talk regarding the future. I will come to see you and we can put our opinions on the table." I said, "O.K." He used to come to me, and I also used to go to him and talk in bed [with us] sleeping with our pillows head-to-head. Please don't write about Tsögo, the Chinese might know about this. Those are the kind of internal talks and I am afraid that it might affect our two children who are in Tibet.   

**Q:**  At that time, people divided into two groups, where some didn't like the Chinese and some were on the Chinese side. How were the people thinking at that time?   

**A:**  According to my opinion, it was dependent on one's future. If people looked at the future of the Tibetan government, they might think that there wasn't any future because there was a big gap between the power of the Chinese and the Tibetans. So they might think that it would probably be better to depend on the Chinese. This is where people were standing on the Chinese side.   

**Q:**  You worked in that office for 4 years and then you said that you had other work in the Tibetan government. What was your work after that?   

**A:**  After that, I worked in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Legung,that is the armory and the mint of the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  How many times did they call you to do manual labor? Was it just one time?   

**A:**  No, it wasn't. They made the cadres work frequently. The cadres were also told to clean the heap of fertilizer piled in the front of the Potala Palace. They said that it was not good for the [people's] hygiene. At that time, I heard that Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] and Tredong Khenjung [Tib. bkras gthong mkhan chung] attended the manual labor [work]. I didn't go to that place. Later, I heard that they were made to take out the manure fertilizer. That was terrible. I asked for leave and didn't go there. In 1958, I left that work. I think I worked for three years in that office.   

**Q:**  Was there a fixed time for doing the manual labor?   

**A:**  They probably had a fixed time for that. At that time, we had to study the Chinese constitution and we were also called to watch movies. All the movies were propaganda, like the Americans didn't treat them well, and about the enthusiasm of the people and about heroes. Among the departments of the Tibet Autonomous Region, we also had the Financial Department [Tib. ནོར་སྲིད Ch. qu]. We had to request economic support from this department and go there many times to talk about getting a budget for the expenses. And they also [had] some arrangement to do some reception [work] for the offices who had some relations with us. They were very tactful with doing these things.   

**Q:**  After the departments were set up, they probably also held some political meetings, like regarding the Khambas?   

**A:**  Yes, a meeting was held "to mollify the Central Committee and to cease the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a>'s disturbance" [Tib. ཀྲུང་དབྱང་དགོངས་པ་དྭངས་ཐབས་དང་ཁམབའི་ཟིང་ཆ་འཇགས་ཐབས]. At that time, the Chinese told the Kashag, "The Khambas are carrying weapons, doing reckless things and preparing for war. This is a violation of the law. The Tibetan government should eliminate them." So the Kashag said this in the meeting and asked for the opinion of the people attending the meeting. The Kashag said in the meeting, "We will send people to advise the Khambas to not act like this." Some people were talking very strongly at the meeting, saying, "Although they [Khambas] were acting like this, actually, we can't stop the Tibetan people from safeguarding their own land." Tsögo attended the meeting as the Tsipön and he heard this. But they [Tibetan government] were unable to tell those opinions to the Chinese. The Kashag heard about this, but they just acted tactfully and told the Chinese, "The Tibetan government sent representatives to talk with the Khambas." <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola were sent there. They went there to tell them to remain still and to get rid [Tib. གཏོར] [stop] of their preparation for war.   

**Q:**  Was that the Tibet Autonomous Region's meeting?   

**A:**  No, that was the Tibetan government's meeting. The Tibet Autonomous Region was joint with the Chinese. So if a meeting would be held, the Chinese would also attend the meeting. The Tibetans couldn't hold the meeting exclusively.   

**Q:**  For what reason did the Dalai Lama go to China?   

**A:**  He was invited to attend the People's National Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མེ་ཚོགས་ཆེན] and meet the Chinese leaders like Mao Zedong. At that time, the Dalai Lama attended all the meetings of the People's Congress.   

**Q:**  If it was exclusively for the meeting, then many other people didn't need to go with the Dalai Lama.   

**A:**  That was for the dignity of the government where many officials would follow the president.   

**Q:**  In 1952, an inspection tour also went to China, right?   

**A:**  That was just a small group, and Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] was elected as the group leader [Tib. ཚོགས་གཙོ]. His assistant was Dingja [Tib. ལྡིང་བྱ]. Under their leadership some of the government officials were organized and went to China. When the Dalai Lama went to China there was a complete retinue. In addition to that, the Chinese also invited an inspection tour [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར], and your father also went there. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Surkhang was the group leader of that inspection tour. When we didn't have much work, we also had to go on the inspection tour with them.   

**Q:**  You were among the retinue of the Dalai Lama, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was your duty at that time?   

**A:**  The Kashag had their own political work and the private office of the Dalai Lama also had their work. The Tibetan government needed a steward because when the Dalai Lama would meet with Mao Zedong, he had to present a gift to him. For this there were two stewards [Tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད], Mindrubu Khenjung [Tib. སྨིན་དྲུག་སྦུག་མཁན་ཆུང] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Mentöpa [Tib. བླ་ཕྱག་སྨན་སྟོད་པ]. The paymaster. Phala Phogpön, and I were the stewards in charge of the money, and the two of us had two clerks from the Laja Treasury working as secretaries. At that time, we couldn't use Tibetan currency in China so we deposited money in the Chinese bank in Lhasa and made some account to be ready to withdraw the money in China. The Dalai Lama didn't stay for extra days on the way because the People's Congress was going to be held soon. So he didn't have time to grant an audience to the monasteries and the people on the way. On the way, he returned all the offering money that the people offered to him, but when some individual offerings were unable to be return, we collected them and took them with us - and our boss was Liushar. When the Dalai Lama arrived at Beijing and met the leaders, he presented the gifts that he took from Tibet. When he had to give some donations to the schools, we just wrote a check and sought the signature of Liushar and gave it to them. We were served very good food and for the officials above the fourth rank, we had cars wherever we wanted to go. The other officials were taken in groups. We wanted to have leisure time, but they didn't let us have that. Even when we would go to get a hair cut, the Chinese would follow us and pay the money. It was very exciting when we were taken to the shops, but they didn't let us stay there for some time. We were taken for inspection tours. Before the inspections, we had to listen to their lectures for an hour. In the lectures, they told us about how the Guomindang could not manage the country before the Communist had liberated China, and during the Sino-Japanese War, how the people had a hard time and the economy also declined. After the liberation, the people's livelihood improved, and the elderly had their residencies and the children got their education. When we were taken for the inspection tours, they divided us into teams and each team had an interpreter. It was kind of very strict and we were told that we were not allowed to talk with the workers. They said, "If you talk with them, they will become distracted and the machine will be broken." Whenever the Dalai Lama would attend the meetings in the Tibet Autonomous Region, the officials above the 4th rank had to attend the meetings and we had to go through a security check. In the meeting, the Dalai Lama would be seated on the stage and it was very imposing. At the time of the Tibetan New Year, the Dalai Lama came to the Tibetan government office called the Dalai Office [Tib. ཏ་ལའི Ch. ban shi chu] [in Beijing]. All of the Tibetan officials had brought their Tibetan uniform gowns, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a>, and their caps [Tib. ལས་ཞྭ་ལས་གོས] from Tibet. The New Year was celebrated elaborately. After that, a New Year's party was given to Mao Zedong and the Panchen Lama, and the Tibetan Dance and Song Group [Tib. ཟློས་གར་ཚོགས་པ] was also there and they <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> the Tibetan opera songs.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay?   

**A:**  Among the retinue, there were the kalön, a General Secretary and the financial director [Tib. drung rstis gnyis], the treasurers, and the cooks of the kitchen of the Dalai Lama [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ]. Upon that, the Sakya Dakchen [Tib. ས་སྐྱ་བདག་ཆེན] Phuntso Phodrang [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་ཕོ་བྲང], Gyalwa Karmapa [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཀར་མ་པ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> Jung Rimpoche [Tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང་གཅུང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ], several abbots of the three great monasteries [Tib. གདན་སའི་མཁན་པོ], tutors to the Dalai Lama, and some of the tshanshab [Tib. མཚན་ཞབས], the monks who assisted the Dalai Lama in debate practice, were also there. At that time, the master tailor [Tib. ན་བཟའ་ཆེན་མོ], Gyalten <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. རྒྱལ་བརྟན་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], who is still in Dharamsala, and Kungö Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. སྐུ་ངོ་ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ], were also there. Finally, it was decided to establish the Tibet Autonomous Region, and it was established.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you get together in the evening and play cards?   

**A:**  Yes, it was very loose at that time. We didn't have any problems about those things. Very good food was served and when we felt a little bit sick, the doctors gave us good treatment. All of the medical treatment was free. Even for the servants who didn't have good teeth, they were removed and they made dentures for them. All of the clothes were supplied, and we just had to order whatever we wanted, like overcoats and Tibetan fur gowns. We were treated very kindly.   

**Q:**  When you went shopping, did the Chinese give you money?   

**A:**  They just gave us money once, but we were treated very specially when we would go shopping, and the public was not let in at that place then. They were going through the motions of showing a very pleasant attitude. I was really surprised.   

**Q:**  Did you have the chance to go alone in a relaxed manner?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. In the beginning, it was a little bit difficult. Whenever we would go out for a walk, the Chinese would always come with us. The Tibetans were kind of mischievous [Tib. སྤྱོད་པ་ཉེས་པོ] and whenever there were Chinese coming with the group, they would purposely scatter. And some of them would go to the east and some of them would go to north, which made the Chinese unable to cope with us. Therefore, after that they didn't come with us. Some people drank a lot of beer at dinner and got drunk. After dinner, they drank some more beer after going home. So they got some criticism on this matter, but they listened to that. We also played cards and made commitments for giving picnic parties with the money they lost in playing cards. After arriving in Lhasa, some people had to give parties.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa, how did they established the Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོགས་པ] and the Women's Association [Tib. བུད་མེད་ཚོགས་པ]?   

**A:**  Mrs. Taring will know all about these things. I don't have any idea about that. They insisted on telling me to come as a "friend member" [Tib. ཚོགས་གྲོགས] of the Youth League because I was not a youth and I was in my 30s. So I went there as a friend member. I heard that they also had many plans for developing the area and planting trees. So I didn't go there. I just attended the meeting twice and then I asked for leave. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> Khenjung [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང་མཁན་ཆུང] went there until the end, but most of the people of my age asked for leave I guess. They were very tactful in saying things like we should plant trees and improve the hygiene.   

**Q:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsen La [Tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས] and Temajog [Tib. བསྟན་མ་ལྕོགས] shot each other in Norbulinga. According to what I heard, it was because they had left documents at home. What did you hear about that?   

**A:**  I heard that they burned the document and then they shot each other. It is just hearsay. Anyway it is true that they died. It is possible that they left documents at home when the meeting was held all of a sudden.   

**Q:**  What was the character of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsen La?   

**A:**  He was a person who was doing his own work nicely. He was not a carefree person like us, going to picnics and gambling like playing the mahjong [game] called Bagchen, dice and Shonpe [Ch. xuan phai], a type of long thin card. He never gambled. He just used to have the meal and go for a walk or stay there doing his prayers. He was a nice person and all the people trusted him. Some of the monk officials used to sing Tibetan opera songs. But he never did like this.   

**Q:**  Drönyerchemmo [Phala] was said to be doing some secret things and he had to make very important decisions. Was he a brave person? Did he have that kind of character?   

**A:**  He was very brave and broad-minded. When the picnic and parties were given by the government, he used to gamble and remained relaxed and at ease [Tib. ལྷོད་ལྷོད]. So it seems like this kind of person who remains relaxed and at ease probably would not be able to do that work. He used to mix with other people and talk. His family was also very big and had many relations. At that time, the Chinese probably knew about him and there could have been a danger them arresting him, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, probably, the Chinese didn't know about him?   

**A:**  Who knows. At that time, a Chinese spy was always coming to him who spoke fluent Tibetan, and there was a person coming to me. The person who was coming to me was from Batang and he was called Tashila. We were together in China. At that time, the Chinese arranged a person to watch each of us.   

**Q:**  Was that when you were staying in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, all of us had a person watching us. They just came as friends. Coincidentally, the person who was coming to me happened to be a very good person. He never asked me any questions. He just drank tea, ate bread and stayed relaxed. It seems that he had to tell them that he came to me. I heard that some of the Tibetan spies said that the secret agents just had to tell Dr. Brare [?] of the [Indian] Secret Agency [Tib. གསང་བའི་ལས་ཁུངས] that so and so came to see that person, and gave them some information which was half true and half untrue. That would have been enough for them.   

