# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0036.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Changkhyim (Tregang), Thubden Tsempel [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བཀྲས་ཁང), ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་འཕེལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** March 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Changkhyim (Tregang), Thubden Tsempel [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བཀྲས་ཁང), ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་འཕེལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Changkhyim [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བྲས་ཁང)] was a monk official in the Tibetan government who was the brother of Tsipön Shakabpa (of JKTS) in Kalimpong. In this interview, Changkhyim describes his life in the old society as part of a monk-official household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང]. He talks about his work collecting taxes on commodities in Phari, his work in the Ritual Office (Tib. ཤབདེན་དོདམ [ཞབས་བརྟན་དོ་དམ]), his work in one of the offices of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. He also discussed the initial return of the Panchen Lama to Tashilhunpo/Shigatse in 1952 and providing grain to the Panchen Lama and the People's Liberation Army in 1952-53 on orders from the Kashag. Additionally, he discusses his role in the 1959 uprising and how he was sent by Phala to the Indian Consulate in Lhasa on 7 March 1959 to inform them that the Dalai Lama may have to flee from Lhasa and to ask for permission from the Indian government for the Dalai Lama to come to India. Then he discusses the flight of the Dalai Lama to Lhoka and India.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0036_01/H_0036_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1950, Chamdo was lost, and the Dalai Lama stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and sent representatives to China. Later, the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa. Where were you staying in the year 1950?   

**A:**  At that time, I was the wool tax collector [Tib. བལ་ཤོ] in Phari, so I had to stay in Phari. When the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, we had to serve him and do whatever we had to do in the area of Yadong and Phari.   

**Q:**  Did you hear anything about Zhang Jingwu coming to Lhasa at first, and that the Chinese were not satisfied about that? And the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> who were receiving them in Lhasa?   

**A:**  When I was in Phari, Zhang Jingwu came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and he met the Dalai Lama. I didn't know anything about that.   

**Q:**  When did you come back from Phari to Lhasa?   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama came back from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, I went along with the personal baggage of the Dalai Lama up to Lhasa because there were many personal belongings and they needed a government official to take care of them. So I was appointed as the officer in charge of the baggage. I took the list [Tib. ལག་འཛིན] of the things in the baggage and all of the baggage pieces were had seal placed on them.   

**Q:**  Did you go back to Phari after that?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay there?   

**A:**  I stayed for about 2-3 years, and then I went back to Lhasa when my work was over. In 1951, when I was in Phari, I was told that the Panchen Lama was coming from China, and that he would come to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Monastery and some of the troops who were going to the borders were coming from China. [And I was told that] there would be some other soldiers coming to Shigatse so we had to supply them with a large amount of grain to use for their eating <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and for fodder for their horses. There were 14 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates working with me, and we were told to go to the dzong and estates and check to see how much more grain was stored in their storerooms [Tib. བཀར་འཇུག], and to supply Tashilhunpo Labrang with the amount they needed. We supplied Labrang with about 100,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of grain. We were told to supply the Chinese with as much as they wanted and the Chinese said that they were going to pay money for it. At that time, we just took receipts from the Chinese, but I don't know whether they paid or not. Anyway, at that time, I sent a letter to the counties saying that they should help the representatives of the Tibet Autonomous Region and the Chinese when they travel back and forth. I was told that my main office should be set up in Shigatse. At that time, I talked with the Kashag through a wireless set and I was given the code.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that in 1956?   

**A:**  No, it was in 1951 when the Dalai Lama had left <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> for Lhasa.   

**Q:**  You said the representatives of the Tibet Autonomous Region. The Tibet Autonomous Region was set up in 1956.   

**A:**  Oh no, it wasn't the Tibet Autonomous Region. I meant the representatives of the Surjong Kashag [Tib. ཟུར་འཕྱོང་བཀའ་ཤག], where <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Ngabö, Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] and another kalön [Dombor] had their office in the corner room with windows on both sides called Surjong in the Jokhang. It was kind of a special committee for dealing with the Chinese and the [Panchen Lama's] Labrang. I was the representative of this committee and went to Shigatse, and I was told to get the grain prepared. In case the grain was not enough, I could buy grain from local places and pay the cost of it. But there was a lot of grain stored and it was enough to supply them. In some of the counties there was grain stored that was not mentioned in the deposit list. We cleared all of the accounts and found that there was a large amount of grain still remaining. At that time, I went to all the places like the E Nyingkar [Tib. ཨེ་ཉིང་མཁར] estate. I had to entertain the Chinese and there was a Chinese representative in Kunkhyabling [Tib. ཀུན་ཁྱབ་གླིང]. He was a very nice person, and he used to come to me and I would do whatever they needed help with. I also contacted the Chinese representatives living in Yabshi. When I reported that I was planning to go to the county and estates in person, the Chinese requested that I take two of their representatives with me for an inspection tour. I asked the Kashag about this through the wireless, and I was told that I could take them with me and that they had their own bodyguards. It took about two months to go to all the counties, and then I came back to Shigatse. When the Panchen Lama came, I had to attend the ceremonies of Labrang. At that time, Kalön Rampa came to Shigatse to welcome and thank the Panchen Lama for coming [Tib. ལེགས་འབུལ]. He also made offerings to the monks in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and gave a party for the officials of Labrang. At that time, the fourth rank official, Taring Rimshi [Tib. རིམ་བཞི], was with him as the liaison [Tib. gandrön].   

**Q:**  Just before that, in 1950, did you go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>?   

**A:**  I went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and I also stayed there for a while. I was not among the retinue of the Dalai Lama. When I received the order from the Kashag or the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> to go to Yadong from Phari to do something, I had to go there.   

**Q:**  In the 17-Point Agreement, it was written that the Tibetans should help the People's Liberation Army when they came to Tibet. Therefore, did the Kashag send edicts to all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates to help the People's Liberation Army?   

**A:**  The Kashag probably sent an edict. When I was in Shigatse, I also sent letters to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> saying that they should help and guide the People's Liberation Army well, and help them with the horses, pack animals and whatever else they needed. At that time, when the Chinese transported the grain that they were given in Shigatse, they paid a good amount in transportation fees. They didn't cause trouble to the miser. They were very kind to the miser.   

**Q:**  How did they pay the transportation fee, did they impose it like the horse corvée and the pack animal corvée taxes?   

**A:**  They paid according to the going rate for transportation at that time.   

**Q:**  Was there a rate at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, they paid the standard rate. So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> didn't have any comments.   

**Q:**  At that time, you had to supply the Chinese. Did you also have to supply <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> [Labrang]? Didn't they have a whole set of estates and those things?   

**A:**  Yes, it was a big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and they had many estates. But the Panchen Lama came up all of a sudden and he had a large retinue. They also had a lot of animals because they came through Siling [Ch. xi ning]. Therefore, the Tibetan government thought that they might need some support, or the labrang might have requested that. I am not sure. Anyway, it was offered as support.   

**Q:**  In 1952, the People's Association rose up. Where were you staying at that time?   

**A:**  I was staying in Shigatse.   

**Q:**  I heard that the people from Tö Shelkar [Tib. སྟོད་ཤེལ་དཀར], Shigatse and Gyantse had also written some letters for the People's Association. How did people in Shigatse think in regards to the People's Association?   

**A:**  I didn't hear anything about that in Shigatse. At that time, the Chinese called a meeting that I attended as the representative of the government. There were also officials of Labrang, the Shigatse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] Refers to Shigatse dzong as well as the 2 heads of the Shigatse dzong while the Panchen Lama was in exile. After he returned in 1952, the 2 heads of Shigatse dzong were just called Dzongpön.">Jidzong</a>, Lobsang Gyentsen [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་ཚན] and Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] there. At that meeting, the Chinese gave a lecture saying, "The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were not doing well, therefore they were made to resigned." I don't remember them saying anything regarding the People's Association. When the Chinese made that announcement, I found that the people probably had a kind of pain in their minds, so nobody said anything at the meeting and the meeting was ended after serving tea and some cookies.   

**Q:**  When did you come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I came to Lhasa at the beginning of 1953.   

**Q:**  What were you doing at that time?   

**A:**  At that time, my job in Phari was over and I was appointed as the official in charge of performing rituals [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་དོ་དམ]. In the past, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> used to have that position. Later, it was decided to send a Khenjung instead of a drunyichemmo to handle the post. So I was appointed to be in charge of performing rituals. There was a separate office for that and I had to nominate its three staff members that I needed, after which the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> would appoint them. We had some sources of income, like land taxes, and when the income was not enough to perform the rituals, we had to buy the other things that we needed to perform the rituals. Our main duty was to ask the lamas to do a divination, and ask the oracles of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> and Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] to go into a trance and ask them to prophesize whether there would be any hindrance for religion and politics. The lamas and the oracles would make suggestions regarding what kind of rituals should be performed. The Yigtsang used to give us the list of the rituals that should be performed. When we were new, we didn't know how to do that. But we could read some old documents and find out how to do them, and we could find out which monastery would be the best for performing the rituals. Then we had to think carefully and make a detailed list for the particular monasteries for performing rituals [Tib. སྒྲུབ་གཞུང]. After that, we had to make a budget for how much money we would need to do that. At that time, Tibet produced some rice in the Pemakö area [Tib. པད་མ་བཀོད] which was enough for the first ritual. When we performed the second and third rituals, the rice and other things would run out, and we had to make a budget for buying those things. We had to ask the Kashag for the money and the Kashag would get the money from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Legung . I was the official in charge, and I worked on the documents and went to the Kashag and the Yigtsang to make the reports. I also assigned the staff to do the other work. We also appointed a steward who took care of things when we were absent.   

**Q:**  How was the political situation in Lhasa after the Chinese arrival? What was the people and the government officials' way of thinking?   

**A:**  In the beginning, the Chinese were acting very tactfully, so the people were thinking that the situation would be okay. Later on, gradually, it became worse.   

**Q:**  In the years 1951, '52 and '53, the Agreement was already signed. So did the Tibetan government work according to the content of the Agreement?   

**A:**  Yes, the government was supposed to do that. But we didn't get to the places where they were doing that. There was a particular political group [Tib. སྲིད་དོན་ཚོགས་པ་ཟུར་དུ] doing those things.   

**Q:**  When the Kashag was working, the people rose up and did many things, and the trouble regarding the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> also occurred.   

**A:**  I heard that there were just some representatives of the people. There probably weren't many people rising up. At that time, I might have been out of Lhasa. So I don't remember this clearly.   

**Q:**  Weren't you in Lhasa at that time?   

**A:**  Probably not. I don't remember that. I just heard that there was Lhabju [Tib. ལྷ་ཕྱུག] from Shigatse and Alo Chöndze; there were three people. And the Chinese said that those people should be arrested. They were just arrested in the police station, and later they were released. They submitted a petition which was widely known and I saw things in a lot of books about that. Their point was that Tibet was independent and we would not accept the 17-Point Agreement .   

**Q:**  At that time, how did the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> oppose the Chinese? It seems that the two of them did something different than the Kashag.   

**A:**  I was in Shigatse. I heard that when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> talked with the Chinese, they said everything frankly without using any kind of pleasant sounding words. So the Chinese didn't like them. At that time, the Kashag was acting tactfully, but the sitsab told the Chinese frankly that they shouldn't do this and that.   

**Q:**  What did they actually say?   

**A:**  I swear by the Three Jewels that I didn't know about this. I just heard that they said everything very toughly. I remember that one of the causes was that the Chinese said that we should change the military flag, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> said that we couldn't change our flag. So the Chinese became agitated. It was just hearsay and I was not there.   

**Q:**  Were they saying that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were standing with the People's Association?   

**A:**  I don't think so. The People's Association was mentally supporting the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>. The sitsab probably didn't come out openly and support the People's Association. Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] might know about that.   

**Q:**  I heard that when the Panchen Lama came up, there was a lot of trouble with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> regarding the seating arrangement of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama.   

**A:**  At that time, I was in Shigatse. I heard that Labrang said that they wanted equal height for the Panchen Lama's throne [equal to the height of the Dalai Lama's]. Ngawang Rigdrol was the tsendrön and he knows about this. When the Panchen Lama arrived, I had to receive him because I was the representative of the Kashag, and the Shigatse Dzong was also there. The Panchen Lama arrived on the other side of the river the day before he arrived at Shigatse. He was in a mule drawn palanquin. Before that, the aristocrats of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> were acting kind of show-offish. There was a Labrang official called Talama. He was wearing a monk's robe, and he took two mounted servants carrying pistols. When I saw this, I was also agitated. There were probably 2-3 officials who were also show-offish. The other Labrang officials were good. On the next day, when the Panchen Lama arrived, the Tibetan government officials were standing on one side and the Labrang officials were standing on the other side. I talked with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་རྫོང] Refers to Shigatse dzong as well as the 2 heads of the Shigatse dzong while the Panchen Lama was in exile. After he returned in 1952, the 2 heads of Shigatse dzong were just called Dzongpön.">Jidzong</a> and said that we might not be granted an audience with the Panchen Lama on the way, so we could just offer the ceremonial scarf from a distance. When the Panchen Lama arrived, the Lord Chamberlain [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] [Drönyerchemmo] of the Panchen Lama dismounted from his horse and was planning to come over to receive our khatas. Then the Panchen Lama probably told them to stop the procession, and his mule drawn palanquin stopped there. He called us over and granted us an audience right at that place, and gave us a hand blessing. So we were very glad and said that the Lama was very good because he treated us specially. After that, all of us Tibetan government officials attended the tea ceremony and on the next day, an elaborate procession of the Panchen Lama was held. All of us attended the ceremony and everything went on very well. When we attended the ceremony in Tashilhunpo, all of the Tibetan government officials were treated according to our ranks, like treating diplomats here. For the officials above the fourth rank, they arranged a service person for each of us for bringing our cups up and taking down the fruits and the cookies that were given to us at the ceremony to our own servants. After that, we also attended the parties given by the Labrang and by Dzasa Che Jigme. They all acted tactfully except for the Talama. We got along very well with the other Labrang officials. After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Rampa arrived, a party was given and we attended the party. At that time, we didn't have any kind of unfriendly atmosphere [feelings] between the Tibetan government officials and the Labrang officials.   

**Q:**  The main problem was the seating arrangement in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably. The Chinese also gave a lot of parties for all the Tibetan government officials and the Labrang officials. The Chinese cadres were also acting tactfully.   

**Q:**  I just heard that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> said that they were not going to pay the taxes to the Tibetan government anymore?   

**A:**  That was called the Babshi, the taxes levied on newly opened fields. In the past, they used to pay a very small amount of taxes for that. This tax was levied like the land tax and the owner of a large area of land had to pay a large amount of taxes. At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Labrang had a large area of land, but they had been paying a small amount of taxes. Therefore, there was talk in the government saying that it wouldn't be okay if they didn't pay that. So when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was powerful, he was sent there and he made a revenue book [Tib. འབབ་དེབ] for collecting the taxes according to the size of the land. The taxes were also levied according to the quality of the soil, like the best, the middle and the worse. They didn't levy taxes on barren lands. So Labrang was levied a large amount of barley taxes and this became the cause.   

**Q:**  I mean in regards to sending the horse corvée and animal corvée in the territory which belonged to the Labrang after the Panchen Lama arrived.   

**A:**  I didn't know about that.   

**Q:**  After this, did you go to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, and I worked in the ritual performing office [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**Q:**  When you were staying in Phari, how was the situation of the traders?   

**A:**  In Phari, the traders were well organized because it was located at a high altitude and crops were not grown in that place. Only the stalks could grow. The people were just selling the stalks to the travelers who had many horses and mules and donkeys. The people in Phari were making their living in that way. In addition to that, they used to manage lodging inns and got their income from the travelers. Some of them also did some wool trade. At that time, I was the wool tax collector. Usually, we would count the number of loads that arrived in Phari through the lodging inns, and we also knew where the traders sold the wool. When they sent the wool down, one Indian rupee [Tib. གོརྨོ] was collected for each load of wool, and we collected 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོར་མོ] The basic currency unit (dollar, rupee, pound).">gormo</a> for each musk. We collected 15 for each load of pig hair, which was used for making brushes. And there were also tiger and leopard skins for which we collected 10 gormo. We just collected 2-3 gormo for marmot skins. Usually, our office opened at 8 a.m. and we had to stay there until 12 a.m. During that time, the travelers would arrive and they would report where they were living, and we would collect the taxes and give them receipts. After that, we had to place a seal on the tax money. The travelers would keep two copies of the receipts and go down through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>.. In Yadong there is a bridge which is the only way out. This place was called Norbu Tshokyil [Tib. ནོར་བུ་མཚོ་དཀྱིལ]. We had an agent there to check the tax receipts. He would check the loads and collect one copy of the receipt. The other receipt would be collected by the representative of the General Governor of Yadong [Tib. གྲོ་སྤྱི] at the custom gate. After one month, all of the receipts would be sent to Lhasa. At that time, there was no way of embezzling even a single gormo. The rules for the wool collectors were very good.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrival what differences were there regarding the offices and the trading?   

**A:**  Even after the Chinese arrival, when I was there, it was the same as before. There weren't any changes and we were doing the same [things as before]. And the Chinese didn't say anything and they also didn't come to that place.   

**Q:**  In general, from 1951 to 1955, there weren't any troubles, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that, the situation became worse and worse and the Dalai Lama could no longer stay there. How did the situation become worse and worse?   

**A:**  At that time, the Chinese were saying that the organization of the Tibetan government was not right. In the constitution and the 17-Point Agreement, religious freedom was written about. but the Chinese publicized in Kham that religion was something that deceived people. If you thought everything would be okay because you believed in religion, you could remain without eating food. The Chinese gradually said that and it became kind of powerful. Furthermore, the Chinese became more and more powerful in Lhasa and set up the offices of the Tibet Autonomous Region. At that time, I was in an office of the Tibet Autonomous Region as the representative of the Tibetan government, and your late grandfather was also in the Industry and Trade Department [Tib. བཟོ་ཚོང་ལས་ཁུངས]. There were 14 representatives of the Tibetan government who had the title of the department chairman [Ch. qu zhang]. There were also representatives of Labrang and the Chamdo Liberation Committee. The majority of the representatives were from the Tibetan government. Our title was given from the State Council [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང], and the Chinese said that they accepted the 14 representatives of the Tibetan government. I was working in the Transportation Department [Ch. jiao tong chu]. Your grandfather was the department chairman of the Industry and Trade Department.   

**Q:**  I remember, my grandfather was in the Construction Department [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**A:**  Anyway, there were representatives from the Tibetan government, the Labrang and Chamdo in all of the 14 departments. There were also some people who were given the name of committee member [Ch. wei yuan]. They had greater authority. When the meetings were held in the Tibet Autonomous Region, there was an interesting story about this. For example, I was working in the Transportation Department and it was a big department. My colleague was a Chinese cadre and there was another person from Po Tamog [Tib. སྤོ་བཀྲ་རྨོག] who was younger than us. He didn't know Chinese and he knew a little bit of Tibetan, but he couldn't read. We had an interpreter and a secretary. There were about 10 cadres from the Tibetan government and Labrang. There were about 20 Chinese cadres who were like the accountants. Each of the department chairmen were given a brand new car. I was given a red car with a driver. The main duty of the department was to improve the highways up to the borders. Building the airport and bridges were also included in that. At that time, the Chinese were giving their opinion and they were asking us what to do. But, actually, we were not familiar with that work. So we just had to listen to whatever the Chinese said. It was just the beginning, and the Chinese were also good and they listened to whatever we told them. The documents were all submitted in Chinese. The documents were submitted to the Tibet Autonomous Region and at that time, the General Secretary [Ch. mi shuzhang] was Nagöo, and there was also Lobsang Samden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་བསྟན] from the Tibetan government. There was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye from Chamdo. There was a Chinese General Secretary who was a great man. Above those people, there were several committee members [Ch. wei yuan] who had great authority. Among them, I remember there was the Junior Tutor to the Dalai Lama, Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche. The Senior Tutor to the Dalai Lama didn't take the name of a committee member. The Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama and Zhang Guohua were the main leaders [Tib. གཙོ་འཛིན] of the Tibet Autonomous Region. There were also Chinese committee members from Tashilhunpo. Whenever a meeting was held in the Tibet Autonomous Region, we, the department chairmen, would submit the plan to the office of the General Secretary. They would make some amendments and after that, they would make an agenda for the discussion, and all of the departments would be divided into eight teams [Ch. zu]. We were in the teams under <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> [Tib. བཀའ་བློན་བསམ་ཕོ]. Then, the discussion would be held in the teams and we would tell our own opinions. The main point of the opinions was whether the construction would be beneficial or [whether] it would cause any harm to Tibet. The opinions of 14 departments were collected and the office of the General Secretary made a joint document of the opinions. It was read by Sambo and each of the department heads would be given a copy of the document. At that time, whenever we put forward some suggestions or remarks regarding errors, Sambo would write down those opinions and he would go to the office of the Dalai Lama and Zhang Guohua and make a report to them. After that, the general meeting would be held, and Ngabö would read the document and explain the opinions of the departments, and he would say, "Please raise up your hands if you agree." But we were not allowed to raise our hands because we didn't have the right to raise our hands. Only the committee members would raise their hands. We understood that. But there were some mediocre [Tib. ཐབས་ཆག] department chairmen from Tashilhunpo. They actually didn't know what was going on and raised their hands. At that point, the Dalai Lama knew about that and he burst into laughter. Nobody was telling them to put down their hands. At the next meeting, somebody might have told them about that because they didn't raise their hands. At that time, we were given copies of the documents when we went home. About a year after the first meeting was held, when they held the meeting again, if there were some amendments that should be made, when they read the document they would read it according to whatever amendments were made and it was approved at the meeting. But, actually, when the resolution came down to the department, the amendments in the document were not like what we had agreed on and approved at the meeting. The Chinese were telling lies like this. So we were surprised and we couldn't say anything to the Chinese. We used to tell our friends and reliable people about this. In the beginning, they gave us the copies of the document when we left the meeting. Later, whenever the meeting was over, Janglojen Sey [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་སྲས] and Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ] stood near the gate and told us that we shouldn't take these documents. I used to kid Janglojen and tell him, "I am definitely going to take this home." At that time, we had already lost power like this. Later, all people attending the meetings were thoughtful and nobody said their opinions. They just said, "It is good." At that time, we, the cadres of the Tibet Autonomous Region, had a good condition.   

**A:**  They gave us a car and the salary was also high. When we went to the office, there was a private room for resting and meals were served. Whenever there were shows, like movies, we would be invited and they would give us 3-4 tickets. At that time, they had a newspaper called Pianshi, with an editing office [Ch. bian shi]. We were told that we should write articles regarding the opinions that we had in the office. We wrote articles in Tibetan. Although, we couldn't write very bad things. We just wrote about the advantages of the work and what would be beneficial for one's own country. The drafts of the articles were sent to the office of the Tibet Autonomous Region. The office would make corrections and tell us that we should write like this, and [so] we didn't have any chance to say anything. We were paid a high price for the articles. When we told them that we didn't need to be paid because we had a salary, they said that this was a rule of the newspaper office. At that time, one of my jobs was to attend the opening of a new highway and give a lecture to the workers. We also newly established a Motor Repair Factory [Ch. qi che xiu li chang]. It was a large one. When it was opened, the kalön of the Tibetan government were also invited. Being the leader of the department, I had to go through the motions of giving a lecture. We also had to give parties during the Tibetan New Year. It looked very happy , but, actually, they were not doing work fairly, and they were not differentiating whether the work would be beneficial or not. Furthermore, the Chinese didn't have concerns about collectivity. One time, when the Dalai Lama went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[hind. Buddha Jayanti] The 1956 celebration in India of the 2,500 anniversary of the death (nirvana) of the Buddha.">Buddha Jayanti</a>, it was said that the reforms were postponed and that they were not going to do any inappropriate things against the will of the Tibetan people. So it was said that the departments should lay off cadres from one's own department. There were many Chinese who came to build the roads in the border areas who were laid off. When they went back, they threw away the implements for surveying the lands, and the materials, shovels and the hoes. Actually, those materials were very important. At that time, there was a good Tibetan cadre who reported that the Chinese were doing this. There was a steward who used to say, "The Chinese don't have any loyalty. After the office was closed, the members of their secret organization would come hold meetings. So I don't know ." When it was said that we should increase production and economize the expenses [Tib. ཐོན་སྤེལ་གྲོན་ཆུང], they cooked a fixed amount of rice measured in cups for the fixed number of people. They were not allowed to have any leftovers. When the Chinese received the orders, they had to hold meetings and we were not admitted into the meetings. The main chairman of the department and the General Secretary were very good people. We also had a good interpreter, and later my Chinese became better than the interpreter's. He was from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and he had a very tough accent. At that time, I didn't need an interpreter because I knew some Chinese. Before that, though, I didn't know the Chinese characters. I worked like this for four years. After that, I resigned from the office of the Tibet Autonomous Region and I worked in the Tibetan government. At that time, I knew one of the directors in the Tibet Autonomous Region. He came to me and said, "Do not resign from your job. You are still young and we have hope for you." But I insisted on resigning saying that I had to work for the Tibetan government. After that I didn't go there because I was really bored with working there and I left the red car. I never used the car for my own purposes except for going to the office. Some of the officials were using the car when they come to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to attend some ceremonies. But I used to ride my horse and go there. Some people asked me, "Why don't you use your car?" I used to tell them, "That is not my car." In the beginning, the office was good, but it became more and more strict whenever some kind of orders came down. It became incompatible with the thinking of the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  What kind of thinking do you mean?   

**A:**  According to the thoughts of the Tibetan government, Tibet should be developed gradually and many Chinese soldiers should not come up. But the Chinese brought many soldiers and arms, and they were preparing for war. Therefore, everybody felt suspicious.   

**Q:**  At that time, it was said that Phala Drönyerchemmo was doing something secretly. Did anybody know about that?   

**A:**  I don't know anything about that. Some people were saying that he was doing something, but he is a very nice and stable person. We are related to each other a little bit. So I used to go to his house as a relative and a friend. When there were some ceremonies in the early morning, I used to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and stay overnight at his residence, and attend the ceremony in the morning. He didn't say a word to us about those things. Just before the Dalai Lama left Lhasa, the situation in Lhasa became kind of chaotic. At that time, Phala called me to his house. Before that, when I was attending the meeting held in the Kangyur Parkhang [Tib. བཀའ་འགུར་པར་ཁང], the Lord Chamberlain [Drönyerchemmo] told me, "It might be better for you to stay here in Norbulinga because you have to attend the meeting and it will be late for you to go back after the meeting." So I accepted that and they sent my bedding to Norbulinga. During the meeting, I was elected as a representative by the people. At that time, I was working in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Legung [Tib. གྲྭ་བཞི་ལས་ཁུངས], which was the armory and mint of the Tibetan government. Chapa Sey [Tib. ཆ་པ་སྲས] and Göshampa [Tib. རྒོད་གཤམ་པ] were also in that office. Both of them went to the Chinese side. So I was the only person staying in the office from the Tibetan government side. So I went to get the money and the other things that we had in the office.   

**Q:**  Did Chapa work in that office?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did he ask for leave?   

**A:**  He didn't. He just went to the Chinese side. At that time, the government officials were divided into two groups; one group going to the Chinese side and the other staying on the Tibetan government side.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  This was just before the revolt. The officials who were staying on the government side were holding meetings and some of them were elected as representatives, and the others were doing their regular work. At that time, the monk officials held meetings and elected three representatives from among the Khenjung. Kungö Tara [Tib. རྟ་ར] was also among the representatives. Similarly, representatives were elected from each rank. At that time, I was a representative and I was working in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Legung, so I took the jeep of the Trapchi Legung and went to get money. There were many one hundred <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> [Tib. སྲང] bills left in the office. We had a large amount of money and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> coins, but they had deposited them in the Chinese bank. Chapa and those people had deposited them earlier. I came to the office just before the revolt. So I took all of the one hundred sang bills to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and I stored them in a house of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Treasury [Tib. rste phyag] where I could lock them up. I reported to the Kashag about this and they said it was good to do that. Since the situation had become like war time, I paid the money to the soldiers and others things according to the letter from the Kashag. At that time, I used to come from the Trapchi Legung and go attend the meeting in Kangyur Parkhang at 2 p.m.. Then I went to Norbulinga and stayed overnight and held the office. The lay officials Segshingwa [Tib. བསྲེགས་ཤིང་བ] and Jijag were my staff members. Since I was the only person in charge of the Trapchi Office, I asked for an acting person to be in charge , and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Rampa was appointed as my colleague. We took out the money and paid it wherever it was needed to be paid. We had only about 10,000-20,000 Indian hundred rupee bills in the office in Trapchi, but I didn't take them back. I also left the little amount of gold that was there because I was the only person in charge and there were several staff members. At that time, the Kashag told me, "You should get the soldiers prepared, as we might have to use them all of a sudden." So I thought that the Dalai Lama might be going to leave because the situation had already become chaotic and tense. Finally, I thought that the Dalai Lama was going to leave. After that, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> [Phala] called me and I went there. I knew Sir Major Chikpar, the head of the Indian Consulate in Lhasa, from when I was staying in Phari. We used to eat together in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and we also gambled together. I also used to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</a> to see him. Major Chikpar also knew <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and the Lord Chamberlain. When Phala called me, I went to see him and he said, "If you could, please go to meet Major Chikpar tonight. If the Dalai Lama will stay in Norbulinga like this, we couldn't bear the responsibility if a disturbance were to occur in Norbulinga. So we were thinking that it would be better to take him to Lhoka. And in the case that he couldn't stay in Lhoka, to please tell Major Chikpar to ask for permission from the Indian government for the Dalai Lama to come to India." I told him, "If I go and tell him, he probably won't listen to me." Phala said, "You know him well and this is very important. Go ahead and tell him." I said, "Yes, it is important. But would he accept what I tell him?" Then I said yes. He didn't tell me this in a manner of giving an order. He said it in an informal way and it was like talking to an internal person because I was staying in his house. Then, I was very suspicious that the Dalai Lama might be leaving today or tomorrow [that day or the next]. I had a horse and a servant with me, and I had my Tibetan fur gown (chupa) and a gun in Norbulinga. I thought that if some disturbance were to occur, I might need them. Then I put on my fur gown and wore a fur cap, and took my gun and went to see Chikpar. When he saw me, he was smiling and he told me to come in and drink tea. I said, "No, thanks." I told him, "I have an important message to tell you," and I told him to call Yabala [his translator]. I also spoke a little bit of English and told him that I had an important message. Chikpar asked me, "Whose message are you going to deliver?" He used to kid around and he had a good sense of humor. He said, "Wait a minute. What? What?" He wanted to hear the message before But I couldn't say such an important message in English. Then, Yabala came. He was smart and he told him to shut the door. I told Yabala, "Drönyerchemmo Phala sent me to tell you that the situation has already become very tense. Because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> is in Lhoka, he is going to take the Dalai Lama to Lhoka. In case Lhoka is not stable, he might have to take him to India. Therefore, please ask for permission from the Indian government for the Dalai Lama to come to India." He said, "Yes, I will ask for permission right away through the wireless as you said." Then I went to the house of Kundeling and I was going to eat my meal, but I didn't want to eat food. I thought of going to my estate at Changkhyim so that if the Dalai Lama would go to Lhoka, I could leave from Lhoka. Changkhyim was a very good estate and the house was also very good. At that time, Kelsang Thubden [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཐུབ་བསྟན], who was one of my family members [from the Tregang family], was with the soldiers of the Trapchi Regiment at the Chamgo [Tib. ཆབ་སྒོ] Bridge. He was a young guy and he was carrying a rifle. I sent a person to call him. I told him, "I am going to flee. I can no longer stay under the Chinese. The Chinese won't treat us well." I think you are also not getting along well with the Chinese. Do you want to come with me? You have your mother and your wife," who had just given birth to a daughter. But he was very glad and said that he was also going. I told him to think about it carefully. The two of us made the decision to flee. At that time it was dark. After we left that place and went to the ferry site right away. There was some kind of disturbances at that place. When I got to the other side of the river, I heard from a person of Kundeling that the Dalai Lama was going to leave. He wanted me to change my horse so that it would be ridden by the Dalai Lama, and he gave me a white horse as its replacement. My horse was a very good one. Then I saddled the mule that my chief of stable (chigbön [Tib. ཆིག་དཔོན]) was riding because it was better than the white horse, and I made my chief of stable ride the white horse. Then we departed right away towards the Changkhyim Estate. It was at night and we hadn't eaten food, so I felt giddy. We asked for lodging and slept there for a while. Kelsang Thubden didn't sleep and he was hanging around outside, and said that the Dalai Lama had left. Then he wanted me to leave, but I stayed there for a while. On the next day, when we crossed the Sand Mountain Pass [Tib. བྱེ་ལ], we saw that the retinue of the Dalai Lama was there. Anyway, I didn't see the Drönyerchemmo after that [going to see Major Chipar]. So he didn't know whether I had delivered the message or not. At that time, I got high altitude sickness [Tib. ལ་དུག] and didn't feel well. After that, we crossed the river after the sunset. I heard that the Dalai Lama was staying in the Kyishong Rame [Tib. སྐྱིད་གཤོངས་ར་སྨད] Monastery, which belonged to us, and we had an apartment there. When we went there, the Drönyerchemmo was staying in that apartment, but he was not there. So I asked them for bedding and boiled water because I was sick. After a while, the Drönyerchemmo came. He said, "What happened to you?" I said, "I am sick. So I probably can't go tomorrow." I had become very weak at that time. I didn't get a chance to talk with him on that night. At midnight, they served me some rice soup and I slept well. The next morning, I felt better, and thought of making the report and went to see the Drönyerchemmo. I told him about asking for permission and that the Major Chikpar said that he would make the report right away. Then the Drönyerchemmo said, "Well done." I didn't tell anybody about this, except I told my late older brother and he said that it was well done.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama left <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, did he plan to stay in Lhüntse Dzong [Tib. lhun rste rdzong] and talk ?   

**A:**  In the beginning, he was coming in a relaxed manner because, at that time, Lhasa was not lost. And they hadn't hear about the loss of Lhasa. On the fourth night, the Dalai Lama planned to arrive at Chongye Riu Dechen [Tib. འཕོངས་རྒྱས་རི་བོ་བདེ་ཆེན]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས] were supposed to seek an audience and make their reports, and the Dalai Lama was scheduled to stay for a day. As soon as we arrived at Kyishong Rame, the Kashag might have inquired about which of the Tibetan government officials had arrived there. In the early morning, the Kashag sent a person to call me saying that the Kashag told him to call whichever government officials had arrived in that place. I was supposed to go back to my estate in Changkhyim because I was not among the retinue and I was just running away, but I didn't have the freedom to do that. The Kashag told me, "You can't leave like this, acting for one's own gain. You have to be in charge of preparing for the Dalai Lama's arrival [Tib. ཕེབས་སྒྲིག]." I told them, "It's okay because I have my own estate over there. So may I please go there?" But the Kashag still insisted on saying that it was not right to go like this. The paymaster [Tib. phogpön] Phala [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན་ཕ་ལྷ] and I were appointed as the chief officials responsible for preparing the horse and pack animal corvée [Tib. རྟ་ཁེ་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]. Kelsang Thubden and Phala Rimshi [Tib. རིམ་བཞི] were appointed as the chief officials for preparing for the Dalai Lama's arrival [Tib. ཕེབས་སྒྲིག་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]. At that time, there were personal attendants of the Dalai Lama and there were many bodyguard soldiers, and there were some people said to be the representatives and atru (a kind of bodyguard [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག]). We had to prepare the corvée horses for those people to be exchanged from one county to the next. It was very complicated work. The misers were very good and they said that this was the most important time so they would offer their best horses and mules. But some of the soldiers were greedy and brought some good horses and mules for themselves. So we had to lock up the good horses and mules and get ready for the next to be used. We had a lot of work at night because we had to prepare the horse corvée for the next day. At that time, Namseling and Samjola had arrived at Jedeshöl [Tib. ལྕེ་བདེ་ཞོལ] and they sought an audience with the Dalai Lama. They were planning to go back to Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང] or Nedong [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང], and then meet up at Chongye Riu Dechen. At that time, the Kashag and the three personal attendants of the Dalai Lama, that is, the monk official in charge of serving food, the monk official in charge of the clothes and the monk official in charge of the religious offerings [Tib. གསོལ་གཟིམ་ཆོས་གསུམ], none of them had bedding. I got bedding from the monk's apartment in Kyishong because that monastery belonged to us, and I also got good food to take. At that time, I told two of the nuns who were related to me and were staying in Changkhyim to send the bedding and other things to Chongye Riu Dechen. They sent the things ahead and because of their demerit [poor karma], although they planned to come on the next day to seek an audience with the Dalai Lama because the Dalai Lama was scheduled to leave the next day. Phala Phogpön came to me to tell me that. At However, a messenger arrived that night and he delivered the message to Drönyerchemmo Phala that Lhasa was lost. At that time, the Drönyerchemmo didn't come back to the house. I was waiting for him to learn what I should do on the next day. Then the Drönyerchemmo said that the Dalai Lama had to leave tomorrow, so I should get the horses and pack animals ready, and the other officials in charge of preparing for the Dalai Lama's arrival also had to depart right away to go ahead. On the day before, they had brought about 50 pieces of woolen bedding from Changkhyim as well as quilts and woolen gowns. We divided these to all the people, including the soldiers, and they also brought <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, butter and a brand new rugs. The nuns didn't get the audience. Later, Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] had those woolen gowns even in Dharamsala, and they used to tell me that they were from Changkhyim.   

**Q:**  Did the messenger come when the Dalai Lama was in Chongye Riu Dechen?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was the messenger?   

**A:**  I don't know that. It was four days and nights from Chongye to Lhüntse. After the Dalai Lama arrived at Lhüntse, there was nothing to talk about. The "temporary traveling" government [Tib. འཕྲལ་སེལ་བྱེས་གཞུང] was set up in Lhüntse. At that time, there were the two tutors to the Dalai Lama, and the kalön and some other government officials. We celebrated the establishment of the temporary government and performed the rituals, and it was announced that the capital was set up in Lhüntse. The people in that area also performed operas. The Dalai Lama stayed for a night in the place called Dedrug in Lhüntse and left the next day. At that time, a Chinese plane flew overhead.   

**Q:**  Was that the day when the Dalai Lama departed from Lhüntse?   

**A:**  After he left Lhüntse, he stayed overnight in Chayü [Tib. བྱ་ཡུལ] at the estate that belonged to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> family. The plane came the next day when the Dalai Lama left Chayü, and when he was going towards <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>, we saw a big plane flying over.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama left <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, did he ever have any thought of holding talks when he arrived at the border?   

**A:**  Probably not. I didn't know about that. After that, Lhasa was lost and it was said that the Chinese were coming to chase after us firing machine guns. So the soldiers remained behind to stop the Chinese from chasing us. So I think holding talks was out of the question.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Drönyerchemmo had relations with the wireless operators and the Americans knew wherever the Dalai Lama was going. Did you hear about this?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. After the Dalai Lama arrived at Lhüntse, a petition was sent to the Indian border saying that the Dalai Lama was coming. Kelsang Thubden went to deliver the petition. He was told to depart that night to the place on the border called the Chudangmo [Tib. ཆུ་དྭངས་མོ]. Up to that area, the Dalai Lama stayed overnight in Chayü, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> and in a place where the Lopa people were living. Actually, that was Tibetan territory. He stayed there for one day and on the dawn of the next day, Kelsang Thubden came back and brought the message that the Indian government welcomes the Dalai Lama. He said that the Indians were already well prepared with bodyguards and they had made the roads very nice. At that time, residents in that area said that the Indians improved the roads very well. At that time, all of us were relaxed and glad. I heard that the Dalai Lama got sick that night. Because he might have had to stay in the cowsheds of the Lopa people, we put the cushions in a tent that we had brought with us, and the Dalai Lama had to sleep in the tent, and it rained the whole night. So he had a stomachache. In the days that followed, the monk official in charge of serving food called me and asked if I could find a house. It might be better to move to a house. After that, we arranged to move to the house where the Dalai Lama's mother stayed for the night. We cleaned the house and the monks of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Monastery did the religious cleansing.   

