# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0036.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Changkhyim (Tregang), Thubden Tsempel [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བཀྲས་ཁང), ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་འཕེལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Unknown  
**Date of Interview:** 17 May 1997  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Changkhyim (Tregang), Thubden Tsempel [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བཀྲས་ཁང), ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཚེ་འཕེལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 75  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1922  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Changkhyim [Tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ (བྲས་ཁང)] was a monk official in the Tibetan government who was the brother of Tsipön Shakabpa (of JKTS) in Kalimpong. In this short phone interview, he discusses the mission that Phala sent him on March 17th to secretly ask the Indian Consulate General about asking the Indian government, and especially, Prime Minister Nehru, for help should the Dalai Lama have to flee to India after leaving Lhasa for Lhoka.   

---  
### Tape 3  

---

**A:**  On the morning of March 17th, I went to the Assembly meeting at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Parkhang, which had been going on for a few days. There a messenger arrived saying that I should go immediately to Phala's house in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> after 12 p.m. So I went there and Phala said, "I have a very important job for you. You were posted at Phari before and you know the Indian political officers well. I need you to go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</a> and see the Consulate General." When I asked him why, he said that I should tell the Consulate General that "The situation is such that the Tibetans have demonstrated to protest against the Chinese invitation to the Dalai Lama to see a show. The Tibetans claim that they have always been independent, and so there is a lot of commotion. At the same time, the Chinese have increased their military strength, and even these nights, reinforcements are continuously arriving. In Nortölinga, there is a Chinese military camp, so it is a potentially dangerous situation which you yourself are well aware of. So if something should happen, then for us Tibetans, the Dalai Lama's life is of the highest importance. If all of a sudden there is war, then it is most dangerous. In the southern area of Tibet, we have our guerrillas there and we are thinking of taking the Dalai Lama there. If it should happen that he cannot remain there, then he will have to go to India. So please inform the Indian government [of this], and especially Prime Minister Nehru himself." [In his second telephone conversation, Changkhyim says: "That we have guerrillas in the south and the Dalai Lama plans to stay there. If the Chinese give chase, then he has only India to turn to." I asked him if permission and asylum were specifically sought? He said no- it was only stated that the Dalai Lama could only look toward India (Tib. ཞལ་གཟིགས་ས་རྒྱ་གར་མ་གཏོགས་ཡོད་པ་མ་རེད).] So I went there to Dekyilinga and said, "This is what Drönyerchemmo Phala asked me to tell you." I went there along with the Sikkimese Yaba Gyakpala's elder brother (can't remember his name) and we met Consulate General Major Chikpar and asked him to send this message immediately, that same night. All of this was top secret, as the situation was very dangerous.   

