# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0070.01  
##  : with Yuthok Tsering Drokar (Dogönpa Jam) [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་དཀར (རྡོ་དགོན་པ་ལྕམ)]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 25 May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Yuthok Tsering Drolkar (Dogönpa Jam) [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་དཀར (རྡོ་དགོན་པ་ལྕམ)]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** ca. 70  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Yuthok Dogönpa [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་དགོན་པ] is the second wife of Yuthok Sawangchemmo. In this interview, she discusses how her husband came to remain in Kalimpong representing the government, and the history of Ngabö's decision in 1950 to wait to be captured by the People's Liberation Army in Kham.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0070_01/H_0070_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You said that you came [to India] in 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I came in 56.   

**Q:**  When you came there in 56, was there a political group in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a political group, but I don't remember all the names. In this group was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Khenjung, what's his name? He was a tall person with a thin moustache.   

**Q:**  Some called him Jayangshar [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཤར] Khenjung.   

**A:**  Jayangshar Khenjung. Yes it is. Those seemed to be there quite a lot. So when Kungö [Yuthok] was staying there [in Kalimpong] as sort of the representative of the Kashag, there was a period when they did not get along. But I cannot tell you the reasons why they did not get along. However, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> [Yuthok] tried to mediate a lot. Then I don't know whether they got along after that or did not. In the meantime, in Lhasa, without Yuthok knowing about it, leaflets were distributed. When they did that. it seems like there were disturbances [Tib. འཁྲུག] everywhere.   

**Q:**  I see. This created some disturbance.   

**A:**  Yes, it seems to have created political disturbances. Kungö did not know. Later, it was said that the leaflets were sent from Darjeeling. The leaflets were thrown [to distribute them] and then the Chinese questioned the Kashag and they did not allow even the rituals to be performed. There was a servant, the aide or dronyer [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར] of Shasur. Just after we had finished our supper, he came with a letter from the Kashag. Then he told about the leaflet distribution, and that the Kashag said that they were not allowing the performance of government rituals. He was crying as he was relating the situation that they [Chinese] are making the Kashag to have a very hard time. So in the Kashag's letter it seems that there were so many rituals to be performed. All the rituals were done by Jayang Khyentse [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་མཁྱེ་རྩེ] Rimpoche in Gangtok. The government's name was not used and it was said that it was Yuthok's ritual. Dadang Pola [Tib. མདའ་ཐང་པོའོ་ལགས] and others went to Gangtok to assist.   

**Q:**  Were they not permitted to do rituals in Lhasa?   

**A:**  It was not that it was not permitted, but it was said that they were trying to stop doing rituals and making it very difficult. This servant said that they were making it very difficult to perform rituals. This was done by the late Jayang Khyentse. With Dadang Kungö. There was also a monk official as his assistant, but now I don't remember [him]. He was an ordinary rank monk official.   

**Q:**  In 1954,   

**A:**  Now regarding the question of why they did not get along, this I really don't know very well. There was the People's Association on one side and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and them were another. Yuthok <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> negotiated between them.   

**Q:**  Between whom?   

**A:**  You know there was the People's Association the opposition and Shakabpa.   

**Q:**  Now I didn't quite understand about the People's Association.   

**A:**  There was the People's Association too. It was not just Kudrak. So they didn't get along. You know there is the group Panjain Kyidu [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག], ask them. They know it clearly. Anyway, there were two sides. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and the monk officials came together [the People's Association was the other group]. So one day Yuthok spoke to them together. Usually when they got together, I went outside but this time Shakabpa and the others were already coming in so I sort of couldn't go and I stayed inside. Yuthok said, "The Dalai Lama, the three great monasteries (Tib. དེནས་སེནདྲེགསུམ [Tib. གདན་ས་སེ་འབྲས་དགའ་གསུམ]), and the government are all in Tibet so this time even if it is like the person who has killed your father, don't mix them together in this."   

**Q:**  So on the side of the People's Association, was Alo Chöndze there?   

**A:**  No, he was not there, he was later.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that Alo Chöndze, Phünkang, Yuthok were one group.   

**A:**  No, Yuthok was right at the top and he was just put in with the group. He is not at all the type to do that. His thinking was absolutely ["pure"].   

**Q:**  In 1956, the Dalai Lama came to India for a pilgrimage. Then when he was returning, was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> coming to this side [India].   

**A:**  No, it's not like that. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> who were with the Dalai Lama were Ngabö, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, Surkhang, Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and then... The ones who were [not] there were Yuthok, Shasur, and Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང][Gadrang was not a Shape but the Jigyab Khembo]. It was customary that the most junior Shape goes to receive the Dalai Lama [when he returns from a trip], so Yuthok came along with Drunyichemmo Angula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] who perhaps was also the youngest [of the drunyichemmo]. So they were the first reception committee [Tib. ཕེབས་བསུ]. Now all this I learned much, much later, after Tibet was lost and everything. Later he would relate this like a story. When he went to receive the Dalai Lama - when he first came [from Lhasa] - he said he wondered whether he would be able to stay a day or two in Kalimpong. He said that he might have to return since he might not be on time. Then he was able to stay a day or two. Then they went to Gangtok and all the Shape got together and the Dalai Lama did a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> [divine lottery]. The names of Yuthok and Drunyichemmo Angula were drawn, so the two went down to Kalimpong. What was told to the outside was that they took sick leave. That's what I heard. Now I don't know whether I should say all these things or not. I don't know. I hesitate. They might say this lady can't keep her mouth shut.   

**Q:**  Now these are some things that happened a long time ago and I'm asking everybody.   

**A:**  Even if it has been many years, the tail still exists. At this moment our Tibetan cause is still yet to climb up. So I still think about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> a bit. Other than that, being like a dog and a pig running wherever the wealth is .   

**Q:**  Okay. .   

**A:**  So that is what happened and Kungö [Yuthok] was very angry saying these guys have sacrificed Tibet, the Dalai Lama is still in Tibet, and this is too much. And since then something got into him [implying he was disturbed]. And beside this, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> received a letter from Drönyerchemmo [Phala] saying that they did not do it out of disrespect [Tib. ལྟོས་མེད]. It just was due to carelessness [Tib. ཧོལ་རྒྱུགས] And for this I take it upon myself to apologize and so please don't let this matter disturb you.   

**Q:**  This is in reference to the leaflets that were thrown during the Mönlam.   

**A:**  Yes the one that was thrown during Mönlam. So in this way things got further and further apart.   

**Q:**  How long was the stay at Kalimpong?   

**A:**  For a long time. He arrived in 1956 and stayed about 2 years. Then it was said that from Tibet 10 persons had come. These guys were not good at all and [so the police thought they might have come to harm Yuthok so they said] "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> please don't stay at Kalimpong." This was said by a high ranking police officer at Darjeeling. You remember Namchu Babula?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Yes, they and about three other constables arrived. Then we moved to Darjeeling.   

**Q:**  Was it about 10 people who came from Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, 10 newcomers.   

**Q:**  They were Tibetans.   

**A:**  I don't know whether they were Tibetans or not. The police also told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> not to go out for walks, but to take the car. He said this is what they said and he doesn't know why. At that time, Seykusho Rinzinla [Tib. སྲས་སྐུ་ཞབས་རིག་འཛིན་ལགས] [Yuthok's son] was there, right? He told him [Yuthok] you better not go for walks, you know. Then we moved to Darjeeling and when they said the same thing, we moved to Calcutta. We stayed the longest at Calcutta, right? It was just over a year's stay when Tibet was lost.   

**Q:**  When coming to Kalimpong what was he supposed to do? Where did he stay?   

**A:**  You mean us?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  At Durpin. Just near Durpin there was a large Indian house.   

**Q:**  Was it a red one? The place where we stayed around 1956-57? Madrabnikunj?   

**A:**  No. It was called Ordlene House (Kuti). We didn't stay at the main house since the owners, who were Marwari, used to keep their family there for the summer. So on this side, there were 4 rooms and 4 rooms upstairs too. A sitting room and a kitchen below. Next to the sitting room was a small room.   

**Q:**  What was the work at Kalimpong?   

**A:**  I really don't know anything about the work in Kalimpong. Really, I'm telling you the truth. Now this instance regarding the disagreement and the distribution of the leaflets, it's as I have related. We had just finished eating dinner and were just sitting around when the servant came. So as soon as it was said that Shasur's servant had come from Tibet, he was called in and right there he related the story. So I heard this. Let alone this, I had brought a short sleeve dress and a fur dress. Other than that I brought nothing. No jewelry, nothing. I was to return after two months.   

**Q:**  So how did you come from Lhasa?   

**A:**  I told you last time. A telegram had reached Tsarong. I was told to come to Tsarong.   

**Q:**  So after the discussions in Kalimpong, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was to stay and so he sent a telegram to you. What was stated in the telegram.   

**A:**  It said that he had 2 months leave for a pilgrimage, so unless you come soon, the period of my leave will be over. So without anything I came. Since it was winter, I took a fur dress and in India it was decided not to take any dresses since one could make them there. Since it was almost New Year, I brought a sleeveless dress and one apron. I was so stupid. The main servant was the one who asked if the New Year's dress should be packed. So I should have thought of packing the jewelry too, shouldn't I ?[for New Years]. So the jewelry was kept at Tsarong House [in Lhasa].   

**Q:**  You know there was something about some money from the US Government that was printed in some Indian newspaper. About what year was that?   

**A:**  I don't remember.   

**Q:**  Now let me ask you about 1950. Lhalu was Doji and Ngabö was not interested in fighting and it seemed that he was thinking of having discussions. At the same time, at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, many representatives were sent to foreign countries.   

**A:**  You mean the trade representatives?   

**Q:**  No. While at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, in 1950, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and others [were sent].   

**A:**  It was regarding the Trade representative.   

**Q:**  Anyway, whatever it was, there was no help from the outside, so the 17-Point Agreement was implemented, right?   

**A:**  No, No, its not like that. There was no opportunity for discussions.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  There was no opportunity to even discuss and go. When it was said that the Chinese were coming, of course, I was not there. Regarding this, my sister <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> Achala [Tib. ས་འདུ་ཚང་ཨ་ལྕག་ལགས] can tell you very clearly. She was among those who were chased (pursued) by the Chinese. She came barefoot and had no time to put a sash around her dress. She just got up from bed and fled.   

**Q:**  What I am trying to ask you is this. From one perspective, after the 17-Point Agreement, take for example the two sitsab. They were being very hard-headed from the beginning. Then there were others. Since the Chinese were saying very nice things, what were they thinking? Were they [Tibetans] thinking that maybe it might be all right, or what were they thinking? Were some thinking that since the old ways were traditional, they wanted to do something new.   

**A:**  It was not like that. No, it was not.   

**Q:**  It seems to me that there were two strains of thought. Nobody was helping from the outside and they can't fight a war. The 17-Point Agreement was signed already saying that if you don't sign then they will forcefully liberate [Tibet].   

**A:**  It was not that way. From the Kham area there was a lot of talk that the communists were coming from the Kham side. When this happened, it was Rasa Gyagen [Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན] who was broadcasting [about this] on the [Chinese] wireless. Anyway, we Tibetans said a lot of things with bravado [Tib. ཁ་རྒྱགས་པ] like we are going to fight until even the women are fighting and until we have even lost our hands up to the shoulders [Tib. ཕོ་ཟད་མོ་ལ་ཐུག་ཐུག, ལག་ཟད་དཔུང་པར་ཐུག་ཐུག]. So when they were saying things this, the Chinese were swarming in like a herd of beggars. It was time for Lhalu to come back [to Lhasa] and when a representative was asked to be sent [to Beijing], one wasn't arriving [in a timely fashion], so Ngabö was sent. I don't think he even had time to properly hand over things as Lhalu was just ready to leave. So when Ngabö was there it was the 7th month and it was the occasion of the Kashag picnic. No matter that telegrams were sent [reporting that the Chinese had attacked], the Gadrung (Kashag's aides) did not report that the messages had arrived. They did not bother the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> and the picnic was continued for probably a day or two. So during this time, the Chinese just flowed in and chased everyone back [toward Lhasa]. So Ngabö and a few soldiers probably did not have the wish to fight. Now all this is what I heard, not what I witnessed.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Then it's said that he crossed a pass. All the workers and everyone was there. This was told to me clearly by the personal physician, the Lamenpa [Tib. བླ་སྨན་པ], who was previously a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of Shölkang and he used to check my pulse. One Lamenpa has to go with the Doji. When he just arrived back from Kham, he came to see me and it was at that time that he related these things to me. So while they stopped for a meal and a rest, Ngabö said, "If we go like this, it is not good at all. If we start moving, the Chinese are going to come. So today we should just stay here and think about going back [to Chamdo]. So if there are any among you who want to return [to Lhasa] then do so. Those who want to stay, stay". So whether they left from here or they left after arriving at Chamdo, I can't be sure - but the doctor said, "These servants really let us down". All the Kudrak said that wherever <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> goes, they will go - his staff said that. So the staff and all returned and then the Chinese came and sort of arrested them. Sawangchemmo was led away on a horse that did not even have a saddle. The rest, it seems, were on foot. When they got to Chamdo, Sawangchemmo was kept upstairs. All the Kudrak who were his staff were all kept in a large place. Then each one got a mug full of rice. There was not one among them who knew how to cook rice! What woe, My! [Tib. ལྟས་ངན] However there was one monk official who had [originally] come from one of the three great monasteries who knew how to cook rice and he [the doctor] said that he felt so sad. After a few days, Sawangchemmo gave advise from the top of the roof. He said, "Now you all please don't feel disheartened, its all right. I am going to discuss [with the Chinese] and so you all don't feel sad". So that day so many were crying. So since they had decided to discuss things, Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ] and the others arrived [from <a href "#" data-tooltip "[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>/India], right? They came down and then went to China, right? During this time, Ngabö told the doctor that he can return if he wanted to. He said that he got some amount of silver <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> or something as salary from the Chinese]. When he got to Lhasa, he said that only 1 silver dayan was left after expenses. He said that they [Chinese] were so shrewd and the doctor was so flabbergasted. There was only 1 dayan left, how calculating he thought. Then Ngabö went down and they said that they want to implement the 17-Point Agreement. The Agreement itself must have been written by the Chinese. We won't write one, isn't it? And when they said that they had no seals and that they need to consult Yadong, they were told that if you guys can put a seal right now then that's it. If not, then you all will have to stay here and our People's Liberation Army soldiers will go to Lhasa. So after that, those at Lhasa were waiting for a reply since they had sent the representatives. They were not thinking that war was going to come. So its said that if this happens then it will be too much [that soldiers will go up to Lhasa] and so they immediately made a seal and applied these seals. This was done through bullying tactics, right? So if they had not made the seals and affixed them, then it seems that they were going to advance [towards Lhasa]. If they did that, then the people down there (Chamdo) would be arrested and kept, right? Among them [in Beijing], there were many Kudrak. Künsangtse, who else?   

**Q:**  You mean those who were discussing it?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Sey [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་སྲས], some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> - was it Thubden Chömpel [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཆོས་འཕེལ]?   

**A:**  Wasn't <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</a> Rinchenla [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་ལགས] there?   

**Q:**  Yes, and Depön [Commander Phüntso Tashi].   

**A:**  Yes, people like Depön know everything.   

**Q:**  Yes, but he's in England, I'm waiting for him. He, however, is writing a book.   

**A:**  Even if he is, it would be one chapter and it could be one chapter in this one. If it comes out in many books, then you can get it. Kungö Yuthok has written many books, but until now he has not written about it.   

**Q:**  Yes, a lot has not been published. So what I was trying to ask you was that among the Kudrak there were many it seems who did not like the old system and went down to China to study. What were they thinking? Did they want to do something new?   

**A:**  Well I don't have anything to say about others, right? I wouldn't know about the others. My brother, [Shölkang] Jedrungla [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང་ལགས] and Surkhang Jedrungla were sent together. When they were sent, they went to prostrate themselves before my father and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> and others so that they wouldn't have to go. But they went to China and whatever education they got would give them something, right?   

**Q:**  So they were saying that they didn't want to go.   

**A:**  My father went everywhere to request this, but they were not given leave.   

**Q:**  But why did the two absolutely have to go?   

**A:**  They sent them. The Youth League. I think he was a Youth League leader. Then they returned by sea. My brother stayed in Sikkim and never returned. Never did. So he sent requests for leaves, one after another. Later, it was said that we are not going to give you any leave. If you return then it's well and good. If not, then we are going to demote you and strip you of the official's garment [Tib. གོས་སྟོད་ཕུད]. My poor father went to all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> and prostrated. At that time, I even spoke to Drunyichemmo Angula. He was at that time a letter writer at the Yigtsang. Now I forget the title. So they phoned and telegrammed and then my brother returned. As soon as he did, the government itself put him in there; once again they told him to go to China. Then he got involved with the Youth League. Surkhang Khenjung was able to quickly come here and return again and so he stayed in India. Now, my poor brother got messed up with the Chinese. And when he got messed up with the Chinese, his hope was based on the fact that the communists said that they were peaceful and that they had come to help the poor and help Tibet. So he worked with that in mind and my brother had no other thoughts. He was a very kind hearted person who always wanted to help others. So when they saw his faults when he was in India, they did not leave him alone saying that he must return. Later, when he was completely mixed up with the Youth League, they said that he was such a great communist that he was a party member. But in the eyes of the Tibetan people he was like an irritant in their eyes [Tib. མིག་ནང་གི་དྲ་མ]. But not one member of our family was asked to come and work with the Chinese. There were so many who were saying that someone has to attend the offices or else you are going to be left behind. They were saying that one has to go forward by taking the first steps right now. At first, they [Youth League] were saying that our Tibet after 10 years was going to be an excellent place without anybody bullying.   

**Q:**  Who was saying this.   

**A:**  It's the same as what the Chinese were saying. The Chinese said [speaking English] "at least 10 years". That they were going to make the roads.   

**Q:**  So they said for the next 10 years.   

**A:**  They said "for at least 10 years" they were going to help and then after that, they supposedly were to have finished helping us. So they were then supposed to leave Tibet.   

**Q:**  After 10 years?   

**A:**  Isn't that what "least" means.   

**Q:**  You mean "at least" that means the smallest number.   

**A:**  No, Ola [younger relative], the biggest number [Tib. མང་ཤོས་དེ].   

**Q:**  At the most, yes.   

**A:**  Yes, that is what the Chinese said and this they definitely said. So before the 10 years were over, they got more and more arrogant [Tib. སྐྱག་ཁྲལ་ཚ་རུ་བཏང]. My brother Jedrungla just got mixed up with the communists, otherwise [he wasn't with the Chinese].   

**Q:**  Yes, when I asked around here they were all saying that Shölkang Jedrungla and Surkhang Jedrungla really went with the Chinese and played it up.   

**A:**  And that they were sort of completely communists.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Then when the People's Association was organized, from among them there were volunteers who came forward. The one who was to kill Shölkang Jedrung was a monk official nicknamed "Nepalese," (Tib. ཕེཔོལ [Tib. བལ་པོ་ལགས]). He volunteered. Also Taring and other Kudrak were chosen for elimination with someone guaranteeing to be the assassin.   

**Q:**  Are you talking about the 1952 People's Association?   

**A:**  The People's Association had a meeting, right? It was the first People's Association. So when it was said that [sentence unfinished]. At that time, the women like Taring Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ], Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང] and others were among those who were teaching Tibetan to the Chinese. My brother was with the Youth. So suppose the meeting was to take place today, then it was said that so and so agreed to be the assassins. At the meeting, there were two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> from Sera who also used to hang around as "servants" of my brother. The two of them came straight to Shölkang from the meeting and they knew exactly what kind of a person my brother was. They were his servants since the time my brother was a student at the Tselabdra school. I didn't quite understand very well, but I think they went straight to my father. My father sent the servants and horses and told [Jedrungla] to come down immediately. Now, you know Ola, these two monks came straight from the meeting to the Shölkang House. I don't know where the meeting took place, but maybe on either side of the Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག]. When the horses were taken went there, all the houses were closed. It is said that not one person was there. The Chinese heard about it and took them all away. I don't think the servants from Shölkang house got as far as Wobaling [Ch. he ba liang] when my brother got home. So its like that. From the meeting the discussions were leaked out to the Chinese and they closed the whole thing down.   

**Q:**  You are talking about where they were meeting right?   

**A:**  From where the People's Association met they guaranteed they would eliminate a number of people who were at the Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] school [where Taring and others were teaching Tibetan to the Chinese soldiers/cadres]. So this discussion was immediately told to Shölkang. Immediately when the horses were saddled and servants sent to tell my brother to return. The distance was not more than 10 minutes. My brother had already arrived home when the servants got there. The Chinese had already closed the [school] house down and barred the doors to the school. Not one teacher was there. [seems the servants were going to Trungji Linga school where Shölkang was]. They got to know about it. So it's like that.   

**Q:**  During this time there were a lot who were going to school in China and there must have been many from the Youth League. What I heard was that there were many who were thinking about modernity.   

**A:**  That was all taught by the Chinese. The Chinese were saying that it will be very good if you do that. The Chinese said they were going to do such great things.   

**Q:**  Yes, but there were some people who were going along and others who were not.   

**A:**  A section believed in the Chinese thinking and that it would be good if the country became nice and clean. So a section from the eastern side were sending all the messages of the Chinese. Another section just hated the communists. When the communists first came, all the people clapped their hands. The Chinese were so happy (laughter), but we considered it bad to clap hands. They thought that we were greeting them - when Ngabö and all came. So that's how they said that Ngabö brought the Chinese and came. He had to bring the Chinese because without the Chinese he was not going to be allowed to leave. If one were really truthful, then Ngabö [not completed but implies a situation of no choice]   

**Q:**  Yes, if one were to think from one perspective, then I don't think that his [Ngabö] thinking was that bad because he sort of had no other alternative. On the one hand, there was no way to fight and nobody was helping from the outside. And so he probably thought, well, I guess that's about it and went about his work.   

**A:**  From the beginning, if we had not let things slide, the roads in Tibet were very bad. When the Chinese first came people said that they were nothing. That they were like ants coming in a line and when they sat they fell at the same time. If we had from the beginning stopped them, it would have been good.   

**Q:**  If they had fought in the first place, you mean.   

**A:**  Mainly what transpired was that people have violated the karmic law [Tib. རྒྱུ་འབྲས་རྙོག] or something.   

**Q:**  In 1951-52 Somola (Aunty), were you in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa. When the Dalai Lama was to leave, they [Chinese] dug the grounds at the back side of our house and when we asked what it was for they said that it was for a gunnery unit. If the people and the Khambas were to start a commotion, then all the guns were pointed to the [Potala] palace. When they dug, one side was dug deep and the other side was a slope. When I went for a walk at first I thought, "What were they doing?"   

**Q:**  Did the first People's Association, demonstrate quite forcefully and go to Zhang Jingwu's residence.   

**A:**  When the People's Association was organized they said that they were going to demonstrate and that the Khambas were there. Then the Chinese brought the culprits out and they squeezed the Kashag saying can you look after them or not, and that they have to be executed. [Interruption] It was said that if you do that the firewood would also run out. That the Khambas are coming. So around 1955-56, they said that you had better make sure the doors are barricaded [Tib. མནན]. But nothing happened. But its absolutely true that they caught Khambas and took them away. Our servants saw all that. Around the market place, Wongtö Shinga [Tib. འོང་སྟོད་ཞིང་ག], it is said that Khambas disappeared. They said that the Khambas were caught and they took them in front of our house and by the back entrance of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Langdün [Tib. གླང་མདུན].   

**Q:**  So they were being arrested.   

**A:**  They were arrested without warning and were taken by the point of the gun.   

**Q:**  So this was before <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> went to Lhoka, right?   

**A:**  Some must have gone before that. They did go before that. They must have arrested from this group. They would go back and forth, right?   

**Q:**  In the old days there used to be a lot of political songs. Do you remember any from around the 1950's. It seems that from 1950-59 there weren't any songs.   

**A:**  [laughing] The communists had come and who's got time to sing then.   

**Q:**  I mean in Lhasa.   

**A:**  No, they didn't have time to sing songs. Then you can't sing recklessly. I don't think there were any new songs. Everybody was busy adulating the Chinese and were preoccupied with stage acting. There were no songs. The earlier songs were very nice.   

**Q:**  Regarding the leaflets, what was in it?   

**A:**  I saw just a bit of a copy that was sent. I don't recall very much now. In that it said, "Those who are inside as well as outside Tibet should take the responsibility together and kick out the Chinese." [Tib. གཞིས་བྱེས་ཁུར་མཉམ་ལེན་གྱི་ཐོག་ནས་རྒྱ་མི་མཐར་སྐྲོས་གཏོང་དགོས] So the Chinese really made them have a very hard time [Tib. སྐྱག་པ་ཤོར་ཤོར་བཟོས]. There was talk that they really squeezed the Kashag. Now this is what I heard.   

**Q:**  So it is said that both inside and outside together, right?   

**A:**  Yes. So when they said together they really handed over the people who were inside Tibet. Isn't it? That's sort of how I saw it. I thought " Oh My".   

**Q:**  But this was said by those who were outside Tibet, right? So the Chinese don't have to believe leaflets distributed from the outside as the truth, isn't it?   

