# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0070.02  
##  : with Yuthok Tsering Drokar (Dogönpa Jam) [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་དཀར (རྡོ་དགོན་པ་ལྕམ)]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 12 March 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Yuthok Tsering Drokar (Dogönpa Jam) [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་དཀར (རྡོ་དགོན་པ་ལྕམ)]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** ca. 71  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Yuthok Dogönpa [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་དགོན་པ] is the second wife of Yuthok Sawangchemmo. In this interview, she talks about some of the events in Kalimpong in the period from 1956-1959 and how Yuthok and Drunyichemmo Angula were chosen to remain in India when the Dalai Lama returned in 1957. She also discusses what she heard from Yuthok about the disagreement between people in Kalimpong.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0070_02/H_0070_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Aunty, the Dalai Lama told me that when he went to India in 1956, Yuthok <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> and probably Drunyichemmo Angula [Tib. ཨམ་གུག་ལགས] came to receive him. They told the Dalai Lama not to go back to Tibet and to remain in India. How did this happen at that time? Did the Tibetan Government talk about the Dalai Lama staying in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  When [Yuthok] Kungö went to receive the Dalai Lama, probably it was because the most junior among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> were told to go to receive him [as a welcoming reception when he returned]. So the two of them went together. At that time, Kungö and the drunyichemmo and some others were kind of one group who told the Dalai Lama to stay in India. Another group of people told the Dalai Lama to go back to Tibet, and they became more powerful. Before the Dalai Lama's departure, I heard that all the Shape and drunyichemmo rolled the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> lottery in front of (the image of) Shri Devi [Tib. ལྷ་མོ]. At that time, if the Dalai Lama would go back to Tibet, there needed to be some people working here [in India]. So [Yuthok] Kungö and Drunyichemmo Angula and the representative of Ganden Monastery and some people stayed in Kalimpong. At that time, I didn't have any idea about those things. When I was in Lhasa with my daughter Tsepel la [Tib. ཚེ་དཔལ་ལགས], who was then being breast fed, Kungö told me to take my daughter and come to India. I was told that Kungö had asked for a three month leave for a pilgrimage and for having eye treatment and he wanted me to come to India because his leave was going to finish soon. So I left Tibet just like a pilgrim with my daughter and without taking anything [possessions]. I got this message from the Tsarong family who said that they received a telegraph message from Kungö. When I came to Kalimpong, Kungö was staying in Kalimpong, but I didn't know what work he was doing. Just after that, I heard [from Kungö] that the people in the association called Panchayat Kyidu didn't get along well and he was mediating between those people. At that time, we were living in the house of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] A name of a Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government lay officials.">Pandatsang</a> [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང]. At that time, there was my uncle <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and the Khenjung and some other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> [monk officials] [in the exile group called Jenkhentsisum].   

**Q:**  Were the [three] monk officials Gyantse Pejö Thubden Nyinji [Tib. དཔལ་ཆོས་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད], Champa Wangdü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་དབང་འདུས], and Champa Tsündrü [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས] there?   

**A:**  Probably they were the ordinary <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> who were there. Among them, there was a tall tsidrung with a mustache. He used to come to the place where they were mediating. They talked to each other many times, but I didn't know whether the mediation worked out or not. One day, I heard them saying, "We have to face a situation where there are disturbances inside Tibet so therefore even if a person was an enemy who killed one's father, please do not bring this [hatred] to the work [we have to do]."   

**Q:**  What did they mean the enemy who killed one's father?   

**A:**  They meant that even if someone had killed one's own father, they should get along well with him in this work. The work they meant was probably government affairs [Tib. གཞུང་དོན] and they were saying do not mix personal affairs with government affairs. After that, uncle <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and those people were on one side. I heard that they drove out 1-2 people from the Panchayat Association and they set up the "Trust Association" Yitön Kyidu [Tib. ཡིད་རྟོན་སྐྱིད་སྡུག]) The main leaders were people like the mother of Lhawang La [Tib. ལྷ་དབང་ལགས]. Probably it became kind of powerful. It was said that Yuthok <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> joined the Yitön Kyidu. Actually, he didn't join it. He didn't do anything like that. After that, [Yuthok] was called to see <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ]. When he went there and came back, he told me, "It was really strange. Why did he do this?" Normally, he would not tell me about such matters. Long after that, I heard from people but I am not sure whether it is true or not, that they said that they wanted to withdraw a little bit of gold and the silver from the Tibetan government's gold and silver in Gangtok. This would be used for the Tibetan Government's political expenditures.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> say that?   

**A:**  When he went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a>, Lukhangwa probably told him this. When the two of them talked together, they were alone. He was called at about sunset and when he came back he told me, "They are doing this even at this time." Probably, [Yuthok] told him [Lukhangwa], "We can't withdraw it right away. We must hold a meeting and do it." When the meeting was held, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང], Nornang [Tib. ནོར་ནང] and some monk officials. Probably, just a few Kudrak held the meeting and there weren't any ordinary people there. Later they didn't withdraw the money. Probably, they didn't say that they are going to withdraw all the gold and silver at once. They said that they want to withdraw a little amount to be used for expenses. After that, probably between the end of the 1957 and 1958, during the Mönlam [Tib. སྨོན་ལམ] Festival in 1958, they threw the posters. I heard that what was written in the poster was, "The Tibetan people inside and outside should take the responsibility together [Tib. གཞིས་བྱེས་ཁུར་མཉམ་ལེན] and expel the Communists." At that time, I didn't have any ideas about that. One night when it was almost dark, the clerk of the Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར] came to deliver a letter. The clerk was crying and said, "We were told to perform many rituals [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན] and when they performed the rituals, the Chinese were keeping a lookout over them very tightly [Tib. དོ་དམ་པོ] and the Chinese were treating the Kashag in a very bossy manner."   

**Q:**  Did he mean the general rituals that the government performed?   

**A:**  Yes. He said that the Chinese are very powerful and are making the government unable to perform these rituals. Probably, it was written in the letter that they [people in India] should perform the rituals. At the beginning, I didn't have a clear idea whether the rituals were for Yuthok or not. At that time, two young monk officials were helping Dathang Kungö [Tib. མདའ་ཐང] to perform the rituals. They collected the materials to be used for the rituals which were performed by Jamyang Khyentse [Tib. འཇམ་དབངས་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ] in Gangtok. It took some time for them to get the materials for the rituals and the person in charge was Dathang Kungö. In Gangtok, probably they told the people that the rituals were for Yuthok. At that time, Kungö knew that the posters had been were thrown in Lhasa. Before that, he didn't know that. I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> printed the posters in Darjeeling and sent them to Tibet from there. Later [Yuthok] said, "Now it is very difficult" and he was kind of depressed. After he got a little bit better, one night when it was almost dark, Namchu Babu and a policeman came and we were told that we must move to Calcutta because it is dangerous for you here. Who knows what kind of danger there was? After that, we moved to Darjeeling and then to Calcutta. In 1959, when the Dalai Lama was coming to India, I saw the news in the newspaper. At that time, Kungö was staying in another small house saying that because there were many children at home and it was annoying. At that time he told me, "Now it is bad. The Dalai Lama has left." After that, all people were in a kind of hurried manner and all the people held meetings. He [Yuthok] spent a lot of money for other people who didn't have money like Alo Chöndze, Shelkar Chandzö and the representative of the Ganden Monastery. After that, when they [Tibetan "people's" association in Kalimpong-Darjeeling] reserved a train and traveled down there [unclear if it means Delhi or Calcutta]. However, the train almost got derailed. When the police came, they said that this was done intentionally [Tib. བསམ་གནག] by someone who untied a link of the railroad and replaced it just with a piece of grass rope. The police said that it was not because the train had a problem and if the train had really turned over, all the people would have been killed.   

**Q:**  From where did they reserve the train?   

**A:**  It was from Kalimpong. At first they came up from Calcutta and held meetings, and after that they went down again to ask the Indians to lend houses for the Dalai Lama. All of the members of the People's Association also went down. I heard that uncle <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and sister Phünkang were also with them. Gyalo La [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་ལགས] was also there.   

**Q:**  Do you mean on the train?   

**A:**  No. Three or four of them went together by air, and probably sister Phünkang Lhajam [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ] helped them. I heard that Gyalo la, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> were not on the train. When they told Nehru about that [told that the Dalai Lama was coming], I heard that Nehru didn't take notice of them at first. Then all of the people in the Panchayat and Yitön Associations gathered together and they submitted a petition [to Nehru]. At last Nehru helped them.   

**Q:**  Do you mean he helped the Dalai Lama to come to India?   

**A:**  Yes. Then I heard he guaranteed all the arrangements for the coming of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  I heard that in the beginning they were working together, but later Alo Chöndze and Phünkang Lhajam became a kind of separate party that was apart from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Gyalo La, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this happened at t<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> time, but I don't have anything to tell you about the reason. At that time, it was said that Yuthok was also in the party. Actually, he didn't join any party. He was trying his best to make people get along well. He didn't do anything partially. Later, Alo Chöndze and those people went separate [from the other group]. Alo Chöndze, Bisu <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a> [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ཇོ་ལགས], Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག], and those people were arrested [in 1956] when they started the People's Association. At that time I heard from Kungö that when the Tibetan Government officials went to the joint office [for doing the investigation], the Chinese implied that they [the representatives of the People's Association] should be killed [this is incorrect]. At that time, I heard that those people had turned their back towards the Chinese and had made them very angry, but had taken off their hat and saluted to the Tibetan Government officials. Later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Jola [Tib. གཙང་པ་ཇོ་ལགས] died in the Tibetan Police Station. When they were in the jail [actually under light detention], many people in Lhasa brought them tea and snacks and cookies. This was because they were [representatives] of the People's Association. Probably it was decided that they were not allowed to do that again. I didn't know about the real decisions that were made. Later, Bumtang Trunyi probably died and Alo Chöndze and Bisu Jola went to India.   

**Q:**  What kind of trouble was there between the Panchayat and Yitön Kyidu [associations in Kalimpong]?   

**A:**  They expelled 2-3 people from the Panchayat Kyidu. It was said that uncle <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and those people were behind their expulsion. I don't have anything to tell you about the reason why they were expelled. Soon after they were expelled, the Yitön Kyidu was set up. I just heard about this. When the Dalai Lama came to India [in 1956], the people in Kalimpong like those in the Panchayat and the Yitön Kyidu were very helpful. Panchayat might be an Indian word. What does that mean?   

**Q:**  In India, there were some people called Panchayat who were like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> in Tibet who represented the people [under a dzong].   

**A:**  I heard that they used that kind of name thinking that it was similar.   

**Q:**  At that time, there were some people working under <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> like Baba Lekshey [Tib. འབའ་པ་ལེགས་བཤད] and Gyetong la [Tib. རྒྱས་སྟོང་ལགས], and Alo Chöndze, and Shelkar Chandzö. Were they paid any kind of salary? Or were they saying it was just kind of private [on their own] [Tib. སྒེར]?   

**A:**  They were all volunteers. They didn't have any salary from the government.   

**Q:**  I heard that they received some salary.   

**A:**  If they were paid salary, probably they were getting a little money from the government. Otherwise, they had a hard time in Darjeeling. At that time, the representative of Ganden monastery used to come to us and say, "Please lend me a little bit money." [Yuthok] Kungö made clothing for the representative of Ganden and gave him some money because he was the poorest among the ["People's] representatives and he also gave some money to Shelkar Chandzö who always seemed to run out of money and had to go hither and thither [to get some money].   

**Q:**  At that time, where did they gather together? Did they gather together in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s house?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. Normally, they would come to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and hold talks. Sometimes, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Khenjung, and the tall guy [Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen] and those people used to come to Pandarama House to talk to each other and then leave. At that time, they were keeping secrets very tight, so I am not sure where they held the meetings. At that time, Kungö never told me about those things.   

**Q:**  Previously, you told me that when you were in Taiwan you knew somebody who was a fake Chushigandru. Were there 1-2 of those people?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. They said that at first they were soldiers in the Bodyguard Regiment of the Panchen Lama, then 11-12 of them left that. But I don't have anything to tell you about how they got out. I am not sure why they had to leave it all of a sudden. Anyway, they left the regiment and ran away. I am not sure whether they ran away on their own choice or the Panchen Lama was taken to another place and they were just left there. They said that they didn't know what to do after they ran away, and they had no choice but to say that they were Chushigandru. So they ran away saying that they are Chushigandru. Otherwise they couldn't manage. I said to them, "I heard that you people robbed a lot, did you do that?" They said, "We didn't rob very much. People didn't open the door and give us food and beverages, so we just took some food and beverages." Some people said that they robbed a lot. Now they went back to their homeland. It was true that there were fake Chushigandru. They themselves told me about this in person. They said that a very sad thing happened in Lhoka. There was a father and mother in a household and they didn't have anything to eat and drink except a little bit of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and the household was a very big one. They took half of the little amount of tsamba they had and left them only a little bit of tsamba. So at that time, they felt kind of sad.   

