# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0053.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Li Zuomin  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China   
**Date of Interview:** July 13, 2009  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Li Zuomin  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 81  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Li Zuomin was the director [Ch. qu zhang] of the United Front Bureau [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར་བུ] in the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན; Ch. wei yuan Tib. ལྷན་ཁང]. He speaks fluent Lhasa dialect Tibetan and was the major Tibetan translator for the heads of the TWC. In this interview, Li Zuoming discusses the revolt launched by Chime Gompo after asking the Dalai Lama for instructions. He then discusses in detail his experiences working on the Tibetan Work Committee, and also the varying opinions of its members. He also describes the circumstances surrounding the Dalai Lama's journey to Kalimpong and how the decision was weighed. He briefly discusses the "94th Instruction" before going into detail on his work as an interpreter for the Dalai Lama. Additionally, he describes some of the many influences on the Dalai Lama and how they contributed to his opinions and decisions on various matters.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0053_03/H_0053_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I will tell you whatever I know.   

**Q:**  One thing that I don't know in detail is that before you went to India with the Dalai Lama, in Chamdo's Jomda, [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ] a small revolt took place launched by Chime Gompo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ] and you also went there. Please tell me in detail about this.   

**A:**  From the end of April to the beginning of the May in 1956, the PCTAR was formally set up. At that time, there were the representatives of all the counties. Under Chamdo, there were several counties and there were ten some representatives of Jomda County led by Chime Gompo. When they came to Lhasa, before the meeting they had brought some gifts to be given to the Dalai Lama. At that time, Lobsang Samten [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན] was the acting Jigyab Khempo, the Khentsab, [Tib. mkhan thshab] and when they went to offer the gifts, the representatives told the Khentsab that they have to offer the gifts and they also have to ask important questions to the Dalai Lama. Khentsab told the representatives, "I will report the Dalai Lama whatever you tell me. I can't say whether the Dalai Lama will give you an audience because he is busy with the works of the TAR. I will ask the Dalai Lama about giving an audience, hand blessing and blessing ribbons, [Tib. སྲུང་མདུད]. I heard that the representatives mainly have to ask the Dalai Lama to give instructions [Tib. བཀའ་སློབ] after the PCTAR was set up about what they should do after going back to Chamdo. After two days, Lobsang Samten called the representatives and told them, "The Dalai Lama said that he doesn't have time to give you the audience. However, after you go back to your homeland, you can do the Khamba's way of doing things [Tib. ཁམས་པའི་བྱེད་སྟང་རང་བྱས་ན་འགྲིག་གི་རེད]." Then the representatives went back. The so called Khamba's way of doing things means to carry gun and make war. By that time, the revolt in the Ganzi Autonomous Prefecture, [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས་རང་སྐྱོང་ཞོཨུ] had already taken place and this is a Khamba's place. At that time, Chamdo was regarded as Kham because it is located on the east side of the Yangtse River, [Tib. འབྲི་ཆུ] [ed. that is incorrect]. So the representatives said that they were to do the Khamba's way of doing things and they were extremely glad and went back home. At that time, the speeches given on the inauguration of the PCTAR by Chen Yi, the Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama and the the Central Committee's representatives were all passed on to the counties who were told to study them. At that time, in Chamdo there was the Chamdo Local People's Liberation Committee [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་ས་ཁུལ་མི་དམངས་བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ་ཨུཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. And in the 12 counties under Chamdo, they have the County People's Liberation Committee, [Tib. རྫོང་མི་དམངས་བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ་ཨུཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. Chime Gompo was the director, [ch zhu ren] of the Jomda County People's Liberation Committee. At that time, all the members of the County People's Liberation Committee were all heads [Tib. འགོ་པ] and there was no masses present. So one night all of them went to the mountains carrying guns and the launched the revolt saying that we are doing this according to the Dalai Lama's order to do the Khamba's way of doing things.   

**Q:** How many people were there when they first went up to the mountains?   

**A:** There were a little less than 30 people and they also took some masses with them by force [Tib. བཙན་ཁྲིད]. There were 27-28 ring leaders [Tib. གཏེ་པོ]. Among them, there was Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས], the son of the King of Derge King and his mother Jayang Palmo [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཔལ་མོ]. He was also taken by force to be used like a flag because in the past, before the liberation, Chime Gompo belonged to Jomda which was under the Derge King. So Derge Sey who was about 16-17 years old, was taken as a "flag" to show that it was an order from the Derge King. So this was their kind of plot.   

**Q:**  After they went to the mountains, did they make war right away or what?   

**A:** At that time, all the provisions for the PLA were transported through the Kham-Tibet Highway [Tib. ཁམས་བོད་གཞུང་ལམ] which was also called Chuan-Tibet Highway, [Ch. chuan; Tib. བོད་གཞུང་ལམ] and there were over 100 Liberation Brand [Tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་རྟགས་ཅན] PLA trucks driving in line with one gyashog (squad of 100) of PLA troops. After the Khambas went to the mountains, they ambushed the PLA trucks and cut off the highway. And they also burned many highway maintenance centers. Therefore, in August, there was the Tibet Work Committee of the Communist Party [Ch. zhong gong; Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན་ཨུཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] and the Tibet Military Command Area [Tib. བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང] which was also under the Tibet Work Committee. And regarding politics [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད] the PCTAR was also set up, but it did not have real political power. The main work was taken care of by the Tibet Work Committee of the Communist Party. At that time, the person in charge of the Tibet Work Committee staying in Lhasa was Fan Ming. So he set up a work team [Ch. gong zuo zu] whose Team Leaders [Ch. zu zhang] were Ya Hanzhang who was the general secretary of the Tibet Work Committee and Zhang Ziwen who was the director of the main office [Ch. ban gong ting]. The director of the Public Security Office [Tib. སྤྱི་བདེ་ཁང] was Song Ziwen and I was the director [Ch. qu zhang] of the United Front Department of the Tibet Work Committee. The four of us were told to go to Chamdo and they gave us two duties: one was to win over [Tib. བརྩོན་ལེན] Chime Gompo, etc., those who went to the mountains, by educating and persuading them [Tib. གོ་སྐོན་སློབ་གསོ]. The main duty was to educate and persuade the Chamdo Local Work Committee of the Communist Party which was under the Tibet Work Committee to lead and implement the first people's democratic reforms. Probably, they had sent a letter before that said, "you have been liberated in 1950 and the offices were set up in the counties. Therefore, you have good conditions (to start reforms), so you should lead the people and implement the first democratic reform in Tibet. But they didn't agree to do this. When we went there, when we reached the Tagma la [Tib. སྟག་མ་ལ] mountain pass, we could hear the sound of guns from the revolt launched by Chime Gompo everywhere. So we couldn't sleep, [and thought] that there was no hope of winning them over by peaceful methods and by telling them to put down their guns. Then we made work assignments to see whether the conditions for democratic reform have ripened, [Tib. ཆ་རྐྱེན་སྨིན] or not. We held many meetings of the religious persons such as Phagpala [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] who was the main lama of the Champaling [Tib. byans pa gling] Monastery and then Shiwala [Tib. ཞི་བ་ལྷ] and there were many monks like the abbots and the gegö also. They were all the high ranking people [Tib. མཐོ་རིམ་མི་སྣ]. We held round table discussions [Tib. བཞུགས་མོལ་ཚོགས་འདུ] with about 10 people and discussed whether the conditions for the democratic reforms have ripened or not. They were saying, "Leave alone the condition ripening, how could we implement democratic reform when we can hear gun sounds on the Tagma La Pass." Then Zhang Ziwen, who was the director of the main office of the Tibet Work Committee, but didn't know Tibetan, he held meetings consisted of the cadres in the offices in Chamdo and discussed whether the conditions for democratic reform have ripened or not. Song Ziwen, who is in charge of Public Security, also held meetings consisting of the police and such people and discussed whether the conditions for democratic reform have ripened or not. The opinion of the three of us was that the conditions to implement democratic reform had not ripened. But Ya Hanzhang, who was the team leader, was saying that we can say that the conditions have ripened and we can implement the reform in Chamdo first. At that time, the team leader and three other members had contradictory [Tib. རྒྱབ་འགལ] opinions. The Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji] of the Chamdo Local Work Committee was Wang Qimei. He was sick, poor thing! [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ] He had a leg problem and was lying in his bed so the three of us went there and we held a meeting at which Ya Hanzhang and Wang Qimei verbally fought [Tib. རྒྱག་འདྲེ་ཤོར]. Ya Hanzhang was saying, "You must [Tib. ཡིན་གཅིག་མིན་གཅིག] lead the people and do the first democratic reforms." However, Wang Qimei was saying, "Even if you behead me, I cannot lead and do democratic reforms since the conditions have not yet ripened." Since Ya Hanzhang and the three of us had different opinions, we didn't say anything when they were verbally fighting. As you know, Ya Hanzhang was knowledgeable in general and was especially knowledgeable about Tibet studies. He had written many things, and he was also very tough person [Tib. མཁྲེགས་པོ]. He said in Chinese, "Do not hide your illness and not go to see the doctor" [Ch. bu yao hui ji ji]. [Tib. ན་ཚ་གསང་ནས་ཨེམ་ཆི་མི་བསྟེན་པ]. He meant one should not hide one's errors and should not let the person die. So Wang Qimei being a soldier, was very agitated and said, "My sickness is at the point of death and you, the skillful doctor, come to treat me." Like this, they fought verbally and all of us had a red face [Tib. གདོང་དམར་པོ་ཆགས] and didn't say anything and then returned to our residences. Wang Qimei was angry and on the next day he called the meeting of all the cadres such as the directors in the Local Work Committee and he attended the meeting using a cane. Wang Qimei told the cadres to tell their opinions about whether the conditions for democratic reforms have ripened or not. The cadres told their opinions and finally there was nobody agreeing to do the reforms. So Ya Hanzhang was angry and didn't have anything he couldf do so he just wrote a report. Since he was a scholar, he drafted the report and read it at the big meeting, but they didn't agree to it. Then Ya Hanzhang told the three members of our work team that he is going to submit the report to the Tibet Work Committee of the TAR in the name of the work team members. The point of the report was that the conditions for doing democratic reforms first in Chamdo have ripened. But then the three of us said that if this is the point of the report, then we are not going put our names on it and we don't agree to it. You can submit the report in your name only. Finally, he sent a telegram in his own name. So we didn't have work to do because we couldn't win over the people launching the revolt. All the cadres including the three of us didn't agree and then we were called back to Lhasa. The main point is that I could witness or prove [Tib. དཔང་པོ] what the Dalai Lama told Chime Gompo. Two days before our departure from Chamdo, a work team led by Ngabö Ngawang Jigme [Tib. ང་ཕོད་ངག་དབང་འཇིགས་མེད] who represented the TAR arrived in Chamdo. At that time, Ngabö was the Uyön (Committee member) of the Standing Committee and the General Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡོག་ཆེན་མོ] of the PCTAR. Ngabö got the order from Fan Ming and in the name of the PCTAR he led the team. His work team's duty was as same as us, that is, to win over the people launching revolt and to do the democratic reforms. Since I speak fluent Tibetan and I also had good relation with Ngabö, so the three of us work team members told Ya Hanzhang that we are going to see Ngabö. Ya Hanzhang agreed so we went to see Ngabö. At that time, Ya Hanzhang just shook hands with Ngabö and did the normal kind of greetings and then he went back but the three of us stayed there. Then Ngabö asked me, "How is the situation here?" So I told Ngabö, "There is no hope of winning over those people and regarding doing democratic reforms, leave alone the masses, even among the cadres there is nobody agreeing to it." Ngabö and I being old friends, we talk straightforwardly and never hide anything when we talk. So Ngabö told me, "This work is difficult, so you should do it well." And I said yes. After about 10 days, Ngabö returned to Lhasa. Later, one day when I went to see Ngabö in Lhasa, regarding the Dalai Lama, he was told a very important thing. Ngabö being a Tibetan and having been the Doji [Tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] Kalön (Governor General) in 1950 and when Chamdo was liberated he was arrested, he had many relations with the heads of the monasteries in Kham. So he told me that he called about 100 people who were the heads of the counties and held a meeting and explained them ( the issues). After that when he was taking a rest, one person came to him surreptitiously and said, "What you said is just empty words. You cannot make the people revolting put down their guns and surrender because the root is deep and I have a secret to tell you." After the meeting, Ngabö called that person who was the vice county leader of Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད]. Probably, he had close relations with Ngabö and was a reliable and trustworthy person. He told Ngabö, "Chime Gompo went to the mountains and launched the revolt in accordance with the order from the Dalai Lama. So it is impossible for you to educate them to put down their guns and surrender. So this matched with what Lobsang Samten said at that time. Later Ngabö himself wrote this in his memoir [Ch. hui yi lu] which is not yet distributed [Tib. བཀྲམ].   

**Q:** This is strange, regardless of whether it was said by the Dalai Lama himself or by Lobsang Samten.   

**A:** Ngabö told me that before he left for Chamdo, he went to the Dalai Lama and told him that he is going to Chamdo in the name of the work team of the TAR to win over Chime Gompo, etc. and that he also told the Dalai Lama, "maybe it will be good if you could write a handwritten letter to Chime Gompo telling him to put down the guns". The Dalai Lama agreed to write the letter, but then he said, "I will write the letter, but I am afraid this letter will not be helpful" [Tib. ཕན་ཐོགས་ཨ་ཡོང]. Then Ngabö also told me, "I told the Dalai Lama what I heard from a person about what Lobsang Samten had said as if it was true [Tib. དངོས་གནས་ཡིན་པ་ནང་བཞིན] and I asked the Dalai Lama how did that happen? And the Dalai Lama told me, "It's too bad. That person is reckless! I am going to enquire about this [Tib. ཨ་ཁ་མི་འདི་གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང། ངས་ཉིན་མ་གཅིག་རྩད་གཅོད་ཀྱི་ཡིན].   

**Q:** Did he mean Lobsang Samten is reckless?   

**A:** Yes. Ngabö told me, "Later, whether this matter was enquired about or not, not a word was heard about it. [Tib. འཇམ་ཐིང་ངེར་བཞགས་སོང]   

**Q:** Later, how could Chime Gompo get through this?   

**A:** He was killed when they quelled the revolt.   

**Q:** Was this in 1956?   

**A:** No. It was later when the widespread revolt took place. Chime Gompo and another person called something Gompo were both killed on the battlefield. Probably, this was at the end of 1958.   

**Q:** Did they remain in mountains for about 2 years?   

**A:** After the widespread revolt took place in Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས] and Dzogang [Tib. མཛོ་སྒང] and the PLA quelled the revolt, Chime Gompo was killed when they scattered. Later Derge Sey Okar, who was taken by force to the mountains by Chime Gompo, was released by means taken by his mother Jayang Palmo and he returned back.   

**Q:** Did Chime Gompo have relations with the Khambas who launched the revolt on the other side of the Yangtse like those in Lithang and the Bathang?   

**A:** Yes, they had relations. Later, the Derge King and another head leader [Tib. འགོ་པ] of Derge united with Chime Gompo and the revolt on the east and west side became united.   

**Q:** When you and the Dalai Lama were in India, at one point it was not decided whether the Dalai Lama would stay in India or return to Tibet. At that time, what was the thinking among the cadres of the government on this matter and what were you talking about in case the Dalai Lama stayed there; what were you going to do?   

**A:**  At that time, Zhou Enlai talked with the Dalai Lama three times. And there was a leading team among the entourage [Tib. ཆིབས་ཞབས་ཙོགས་ཆུང] that consisted of 6-7 people like the Kalön Ngabö, Ragashag [Tib. རགས་ཁ་ཤག], Jigyab Khembo Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] and Phala Thubten Wönden [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་འོད་ལྡན]. The team leader was Ngabö. As for our thinking, before the Dalai Lama left for India, the main principle of the policy work line, [Tib. བྱེད་ཕྱོགས་སྲིད་ཇུས་ཀྱི་རྩ་དོན] was confirmed. At that time, Nehru sent the invitation to the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama inviting them to the Buddha Jayanti.   

**Q:** Did they send the invitation to the Central Committee?   

**A:** Yes and the principle of the work line [Ch. fang zhen yuan ze] of the Central Committee for making this decision was a very important one. I delivered the message to them which said that the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama should make the decision whether or not to go and that the Central Committee does not have any opinion about this. If you decided to go, Zhongyang will not send any cadres because both of them are state leaders. At that time, the Dalai Lama was the Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན་རྒྱུན་ལས་ཨུཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང་གི་ཨུཡོན་ཞང་གཞོན་པ] and the Panchen Lama was the Vice Chairman of the National Political Consultative Congress, [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཀྲུ་ཞི་གཞོན་པ]. And Zhongyang also said that we trust both of them so the two of them can decide correctly whatever kind of political matters arise. In case, the two of you have any kind of problem, we will give orders to our embassy and you can request whatever you want/need them to do. This was the principle. Then both of them said that they are going, so the TAR and the Tibet Work Committee made the preparations for them. When we arrived India, the cadres of the Chinese Embassy in Delhi, in accordance with Zhongyang's instructions, they did not meddle in this matter. However, internally there were some discussion about what to do if they say that they want independence or if they say that they are not going back. Regarding this, it was decided to act according to Zhou Enlai's talks. Zhou Enlai educated and persuaded the Dalai Lama. His main point to the Dalai Lama was, "even you are a state leader; you still have the nature of being a deity [Tib. ལྷ]. So if the deity remains in the temple, it has the grandeur of being a deity and you will have the strength of a deity, but if the deity departs the temple, then you will lose the strength of a deity. If you stay in India, your temple is in Tibet and you cannot move it to India. If you stay in India, you will be in political exile, [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་གྱར]. (He said that) Nehru told me clearly, that you (the Dalai Lama) are not allowed to do any activities to oppose the PRC. So if you stay in India, you cannot do any political work". This is what Zhou Enlai told the Dalai Lama. At that time, the Dalai Lama insisted that he wants to go to Kalimpong. Just before that, Zhou Enlai had spoken to the Dalai Lama about this (Kalimpong). When Nehru was talking with Zhou Enlai, Nehru had told Zhou Enlai, "Kalimpong is the place where all the spies of the world gather. On this, we, the Indian Government don't have anything we can do. Therefore, Zhou Enlai told the Dalai Lama, "It is very dangerous if you go to Kalimpong because Nehru told me that Kalimpong is the place where all the spies of the world gather. On this, we, the Indian Government don't have anything we can do. So you should think about it carefully. [laughter]   

**Q:** When he was going to Kalimpong, it had been decided that he (the Dalai Lama) will go back to Tibet. Before that, it was not confirmed whether he will go back or not because there were the people like Jenkhentsisum. So after an awhile, did the Dalai Lama tell you cadres that he is going back? Did he say that he wants to go via Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, he told me this. Before that, the Dalai Lama went for for a pilgrimage and tour for about 2 months during which time the separatists like Gyalo Thondub [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ], Taktser Norbu [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར་ནོར་བུ], Shakabpa [Tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ], Lobsang Gyentsen and Alo Chöndze were with the Dalai Lama all the time, so they told the Dalai Lama very clearly that this is a good opportunity, so he should stay in India and lead the movement for Tibetan independence and do something to accomplish this goal. So at that time, the all the members of the entourage of the Dalai Lama including the servants were mentally very disturbed. Among these people, Ngabö was the most stable [Tib. བརྟན་ཤོས], but since he was just one person, it was hard to do anything. Then Zhou Enlai, in accordance with the opinion of the Dalai Lama, talked with the Shape. At that time, the Dalai Lama had asked Zhou Enlai to tell the Shapes about the disadvantages or harm [Tib. སྐྱོན་དང་གནོད་པ] that would accrue if he stayed in India and about the advantages [Tib. དགེ་མཚན] if he returned to Tibet. Then Zhou Enlai, in accordance with the request of the Dalai Lama, called a meeting in the Chinese Embassy in Delhi and called the six (leading) people and told them that the Dalai Lama requested him to tell them the advantages and the disadvantages and what kind of situation will occur if he stayed in India and also about the advantages if he return. Ngabö was the team leader of the entourage that included Surkhang. Ragashag [Tib. རགས་ཁ་ཤག] and the Talama Jogtang [Tib. ཏ་ལ་མ་ལྕོགས་སྟེང]. He talked with them one by one in detail and told them, "What are you going to do? Among us internally, the situation is chaos [Tib. ཟང་ངི་ཟིང་ངི]. If you are still doing chaotic things, I am going back. In short, what are you thinking? Are you going to stay in India or go back?   

**Q:**  When Ngabö talked with the Shapes, was Zhou Enlai there?   

**A:** No.   

**Q:** Zhou Enlai talked about the advantages and the disadvantages and then he went back, right?   

**A:** Yes. Then Ngabö called all the members of the entourage and all of them propitiated the deities [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ་བཏང] and swore that we will have solidarity [Tib. རྡོག་རྩ་གཅིག་སྒྲིལ] and we will not do reckless things and we will not listen to whatever the separatists tell us and we are going back. At that time, the Dalai Lama had said that he is going back, but he was not thinking like that in his mind, [Tib. བསམ་བློའི་སྦུག་ལ་དེ་འདྲ་མ་རེད]. And then he went to Kalimpong. In Kalimpong he had some strange underground [Tib. ས་འོག] friends. It was said that Ngabö, in any case, [Tib. ཡིན་གཅིག་མིན་གཅིག] had to go to Kalimpong. Kalimpong and Sikkim are located in the mountain areas and the road was zigzag and narrow. At that time, they had an internal plan to assassinate Ngabö by making a car collision. But they had to see where and when they will do it. When Ngabö arrived Kalimpong, he learned about this plot and tried to go back to Tibet first [before the others]. At that time, Ngabö's wife Tseten Drölkar [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟན་སྒྲོལ་དཀར] was pregnant with her last child called Chime [Tib. འཆི་མེད ], so she sent a telegram through the post office saying that her life is in danger because she has a hard time giving birth so Ngabö should return immediately. So Ngabö took the telegram and went to ask for leave from the Dalai Lama. By that time, the air route from Siliguri to the Dam [Tib. འདམ] Airport [north of Lhasa] was open, so Ngabö went to Siliguri Airport from Kalimpong. The plan for sending our government plane to receive Ngabö was set up and for security purposes, I spread talk in Kalimpong saying that Ngabö is going to leave Kalimpong at 3 am on the next morning. Internally, it was decided to leave at 1 a.m. and he did leave at that time. We did this because there was a plot of assassination. I also told Ngabö that he should tell the entourages that he is leaving Kalimpong at 3 a.m.   

**Q:** Did Ngabö go back with the Panchen Lama?   

**A:** No. They left separately. The Panchen Lama had already left. After they arrived India the Dalai Lama did something unprecedented and went to visit the Panchen Lama and told him, "This time, if the two of us could go to Kalimpong together and give dharma teachings and hand blessings to the 30,000 Tibetans living there it would be good. However, the Panchen Lama disagreed and said, "What ever you say, I am not going to Kalimpong. According to my thinking, it is the best to send telegram to the zhongyang and tell them to send a plane to Kolcutta and then we go back to Beijing and report to the Central Committee what we did in India." But the Dalai Lama wouldn't agree, right? So the Panchen Lama said, "If so you go there. I am not coming and I have only one opinion to tell you. Please take care of yourself. It is dangerous there." Then after two days, the Panchen Lama told me this and he left from Siliguri airport. I was not sent as a cadre by the Central Committee to accompany the Dalai Lama. On the 19th of November in 1956, the Central Committee representative [Zhang Jingwu] gave an elaborated farewell party in the hall of the Yabshi family. There were about 3-4 tables where there were the entourage officials above the 5th rank and there were also the Chinese cadres; and I was there as the interpreter seatting at the first table there the Dalai Lama, Zhang Jingwu, Ngabö Surkhang, the Dalai Lama's mother and Lobsang Samten were sitting. Then Zhang Jingwu all of a sudden told the Dalai Lama, "I received a telegram from the Central Committee just before I attended the meeting saying that while you will be in India for the pilgrimage and tour, Premier Zhou Enlai is going to visit Pakistan and Nepal and he will come to Delhi either from Pakistan or Nepal and probably he will meet you people. So the Central Committee suggests that you take an interpreter mainly to interpret Chinese into Tibetan. The Central Committee has no objection whoever you are want to take with you. So the Dalai Lama pointed to me with his chopstick and said, "How could there be a better interpreter than him. So I will take him." So it was decided right away; the Dalai Lama was going to leave the next day. Zhang Jingwu then told Yang Papa, the person in charge of the Foreign Office, to make a passport for Comrade Li Zuoming to go to the India. At that time, I didn't have a photo for the passport, so the photographer from the Xinhua News Agency who was at the party was told to take a one hour photo. At that time, it was snowing on the Nathö La mountain pass (to Tibet) and in India the weather is hot, so I had to prepare clothing both for winter and summer. Yang Papa gave me the passport at 2.a.m and I left like this. After the Dalai Lama had finished his formal scheduled events, he stayed 15 days in the Sikkim Palace. This also had a plot. They were saying as a pretext that the Nathö la is covered by snow. This is what they told me and said externally. Internally, they sent a person secretly [to Lhasa] and told people there to launch a disturbance [Tib. ཟིང] in Lhasa since if there would be a disturbance no matter if it is big or small, they would be able to use this as a pretext for the Dalai Lama to not to go back. So he waited for this for 15 days. But they couldn't launch the disturbance.   

**Q:** Did this person arrive at Lhasa?   

**A:** Yes, we also arrested 2-3 people. When the Dalai Lama was staying in the Sikkim Palace, he gave me the order to come to him every morning. So I went to see him for 2-3 days and then every morning, he said, "hayoo! It is difficult. [Tib. ཧ་ཡུ་ཁག་པོ་འདུག་ག]. So on the third day I told him, "If you have the same one word to tell me everyday, from tomorrow, I am not coming." But he told me, "please come. I had to say that on these days." [Tib. སྐབས་མཚམས་ལ་དེ་འདྲ་ཞུ་དགོས་བྱུང་སོང].   

**Q:** When you held the meeting with Phala and Gyalo, etc., did Shakabpa come there?   

**A:** They came to Mumbai and the situation became strange. At that time, all the members of the entourage led by Ngabö had solidarity, so there was the danger that their plot to stay in India and work for Tibetan independence will be destroyed [Tib. འཐོར].   

**Q:** When they came to Mumbai, was it before or after, Zhou Enlai's visit?   

**A:** It was after that. At first, Zhou Enlai delivered a message to the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama and requested them to go with him to Nepal. This is because Lumbini in Nepal is the birthplace of the Buddha. I was not there when he said that. That was probably told through the embassy and the Panchen Lama agreed right away. The Dalai Lama first agreed, but later Gyalo Thondub and Shakabpa learned about that and they opposed it so the Dalai Lama changed his mind. But he didn't dare to tell Zhou Enlai and probably he told Ngabö to report about that. I am not sure about this. At that time, wherever the Dalai Lama went, Tagtser Norbu, Gyalo Thondub and Shakabpa would stay in a place near by. When they were in Mumbai, they told Ngabö to come to their residernce saying that they have an important thing to tell him. Ngabö, being a member of the entourage, was staying in the residence that was arranged by the Indian Government. Ngabö being a thoughtful person, after he made the members of the entourage agree to solidarity, he was alert that they might do something bad to him so he would always stay with Ragashag in the same room. So when they called Ngabö to the meeting, Ngabö told Ragashag, "I am going there. If I don't come back tonight, you enquire to the three of them. Maybe, I would have been killed and or maybe I would have been kidnapped." Ngabö told me that he went there and they had prepared elaborate fruits, sweets and tea etc and then Ngabö told them. "I am neither going to eat or drink your fruits, nor I am going serve these things when you come to me. In case the fruits and the tea are poisoned or if there would be some problem after eating them, then it will be not good for all of us. So you tell me what you are going to tell me. Then they told Ngabö, "We apologize to you Sawangchemmo. We are in a very difficult situation because the Dalai Lama was told to go to Nepal and he might have agreed. So you are the only person who can stop him from going and please also help us to stay in India and work on the Tibetan Independence."   

**Q:** Did they openly say that to him?   

**A:** Yes. Then Ngabö said, "The Dalai Lama himself have made the decision to go to Nepal, so how can I, a member of the entourage, tell him not to go? According to the Tibetan traditional system, do we have this kind of system? You think about this because we are Tibetans. Regarding staying in India and working for Tibetan independence, this will also be decided by the Dalai Lama himself. If we tell him to do this and that, won't he become a puppet [Tib. གསང་ཐག་འཐེན་ཡུལ]. This is nonsense! [Tib. སྣང་བ་མི་འགྲོ་བའི་ཤད་ཆ]. I am not going to do this".   

**Q:** Did Ngabö ask Shakabpa whether they had the support from India and the US?   

**A:** Yes, he told them, "If you stay in India, what kind of benefits are there [Tib. ཕན་ཐོགས] and who has agreed to help you." To this, Shakabpa said that they have confidence [it will come], so Ngabö told him, "if you have confidence, bring it to me and I will take it and tell the other members of the entourage." They told Ngabö that it is hard to show it right away. Then Ngabö said, "If you just verbally talk like blowing wind. I am not going to trust you. This is true."   

**Q:** Another thing that I don't understand is that you told me that in India, Zhou Enlai delivered a letter from Mao Zedong to the Dalai Lama which said that the reforms will be postponed for 6 years, but later I found in some Chinese documents that after Fan Ming did the experimental reforms in places like Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང], in September 1956, the Central Committee sent a telegram or letter to Fan Ming telling him to postpone the reforms, but he didn't inform the Dalai Lama about this. I think that if he had informed the Dalai Lama, the Dalai Lama's mind/attitude would have become better. So why didn't they inform the Dalai Lama then?   

**A:** This document was called the "94th Instruction", [Tib. དགུ་བཞི་མཛུབ་སྟོན]. After they set up the PCTAR, in June 1956, Zhang Jingwu and the zhongyang representatives returned to Beijing. At that time, Zhang Guohua was not healthy and had gone to take a rest and Tan Guansan was also not there. Anyway, among the 4 party secretaries and vice party secretaries, three were absent and Fan Ming was alone. Since the end of the May, they started to do the so called the preparatory work for the democratic reforms and they caused the disturbances. [Tib. ཟིང་ལངས]. It was said that we need many Tibetan cadres and from May to June-July, the offices themselves collected people from the society in a casual manner saying that they are for the purpose of becoming cadres. They decided to pay 3 dayang per month and the office would take care of their residence, food, etc. Later they hustled to get people and the pay was increased to pay 5 dayang per month. At that time, I was not high ranking, but was just a director [Ch. qu zhang] of the United Front Office; I was able to get 7 people; 4 boys and the 3 girls who were like 13-14 years old. I pitched a tent for them in the park and gave them good food and 3 dayang per month. After 2-3 days, three of them were lost. When I told them why didn't you tell me if you are going home? It is not good to sneak away, they told me, "This is not the case. Another office is paying 2 dayang more." When I enquired about this I came to know that they were taken by the Communist Youth League [Tib. གུང་གཞོན་སྡེ་ཚོགས] of the PCTAR which had a Lhasa Muslim cadre called Ma Bojian. Ma Bojian spoke Tibetan fluently and had good relations with the kudrak and he also had taken boys and girls from some other offices. [laughter] Secondly, the revolt in Chamdo had taken place and the situation was in chaos. So the Central Committee issued the "94 Instructions", and instructed that the preparatory work for the democratic reforms be stopped. However, the 6 years postponement was not confirmed and it was not spread externally; and it was just an internal matter. So I think that was the reason for not telling the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama. And another reason is that Fan Ming did it on his own without the the Central Committee's instructions. Regarding the letter from Mao Zedong to Zhou Enlai, it was confirmed in November 1956 when there was a Tibetan Government tour group led by Sambo Tsewang Rinzin [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་ཚེ་དབང་རིག་འཛིན] that came to Beijing. Chairman Mao met them and later they came to Shanghai. At that time, Mao Zedong held a Supreme State Conference [Ch. zui gao guo wu hui yi] [Tib. ཆེས་མཐོའི་རྒྱལ་དོན་ཚོགས་ཆེན]. They could only hold this meeting several times. At this meeting, Mao Zedong gave a speech and later it was published in a book titled, "Regarding correctly settling the contradictions within the people" [Tib. མི་དམངས་ནང་ཁུལ་གྱི་འགལ་བ་ཡང་དག་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་ཐག་གཅོད་བྱ་རྒྱུའི་སྐོར]. At that time, he didn't say to postpone the reform for 6 years. He said, "From now on during the 3rd five year plan, we will not do the reforms in Tibet." This was exactly 6 years.   

**Q:** What is the difference between the "94" instruction and this speech of Mao Zedong?   

**A:** In the "94" instruction, it was written that the condition is not ripe, therefore, stop the preparatory work for the reforms.   

**Q:**  So Fan Ming still did that continuously, right?   

**A:** No. He didn't.   

**Q:**  I talked with Serdrong Wangyal [Tib. གསེར་གྲོང་དབང་རྒྱལ] and he told me that they did the experimental reforms on his estate in Tölung in November.   

**A:** The Central Committee document was passed down in September, but the conclusion was delayed till end of the year. Among about 3,000 people who were recruited to be cadres, there were also prostitutes, thieves, and Khambas who were wandering in Kham. When they differentiated these people, they couldn't be expelled, so they were sent to study in China. So because of this conclusion, it was delayed till the end of the year. Then from 1957, the Central Committee started the great curtailing, [Tib. ཁུ་བསྡུ་ཆེན་པོ].   

**Q:** What I heard was that Fan Ming also brought several thousands of Han people from Ganzi, Gansu and Qinghai, etc. Was that true?   

**A:** Yes this is true.   

**Q:** How could he get such a power?   

**A:** Oh! He was a very audacious, [Tib. ཧམ་པ་ཆེན་པོ] person, so it didn't matter whether he had the power or not.   

**Q:** If the Central Committee's policy is good and if the people implement it, then it will be good. Before the Dalai Lama went to India, he had the idea of staying in India and one reason for this was the events in Sichuan and another reason was that when they did the trial democratic reform it caused him to feel frightened. So I think this was a big mistake, right?   

**Q:** The situation was like this because in 1955 when the Dalai Lama was in China, he made a great accomplishment when the State Council adopted the resolution to set up the PCTAR. After that, in the beginning of May, when he was going back to Tibet and went to Sichuan there was the earthquake and he had to stay about a half month in Chengdu. Then when he reached Dartsedo, I am not sure what the Dalai Lama was thinking then because I was in Beijing working as a clerk for Zhang Jingwu. But the events from then happened. [Tib. དེ་དུས་ཀྱི་གནས་ཚུལ་ད་ལྟ་ཆགས་ཡོད་རེད] For example, at that time, the masses, especially those in the southern part (of Kham) requested the Dalai Lama to come to Kham and give dharma teaching and hand blessings. They did that very strongly by sending people to Beijing. So when the Dalai Lama reached Dartsedo, he sent two persons, Trijang Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང་བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་ཤེས] who was the junior tutor and himelf had been born in Chantreng. So it was decided that Trijang will take some people and go to the south, while the 16th Karmapa Rölpey Dorje [Tib. རོལ་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ] will take some people and go through the north route in Kham and Surkhang Wangchen Gelek [Tib. དབང་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས] was as sent his partner. They were sent as the representatives of the Dalai Lama to satisfy the people wish by giving dharma teachings. This became a strange situation. And when they implemented the democratic reforms in Kham, the revolt took place in the southern area and also in the northern area. After the revolt was quelled, they found a letter from the battlefields that had been sent by Trijang giving instructions to the heads of the southern Kham area telling them to carry guns and oppose the democratic reforms. We have that letter.   

**Q:** Who wrote the letter?   

**A:** It was written by Trijang. Although I didn't see the letter, they said it was written in Tibetan. So there is proof to say that the Trijang was the person who moved the puppets to launch the revolt in Kham.   

**Q:** In this letter, was it written that if they do the democratic reforms, then you should carry guns and oppose it?   

**A:** Yes. It was written that you should carry guns and oppose it. Therefore, Zhou Enlai or someone from the Central Committee gave a hint to the Dalai Lama saying that root of the revolt in Kham is something strange. At that time, when the revolt in Ganzi took place, Zhou Enlai told the Dalai Lama, "If you send a delegation [to investigate the uprising in Kham) [Tib. སྐུ་ཚབ་ཚོགས་པ], we will support you." This is the reason for saying that. In Ganzi, after the revolt was quelled, according to the custom of the PRC we would do an exhibition to show the proof. I heard that the above mentioned letter was displayed there.   

**Q:** After you people returned to Lhasa what was the situation then in 1957? Then Zhang Guohua came from Beijing, right? Anyway the situation became worse since 1957, right?   

**A:** Yes.   

**Q:** Why?   

**A:** On the 24th November 1956, we arrived at Gangtok in Sikkim and (on the return trip), the Dalai Lama arrived at Tromo on the 7th of February. From Tromo to Lhasa, the situation was very strange. As I was the interpreter taken by the Dalai Lama so I had to write a report about my trip. So I got good time to write this on the way from Tromo to Shigatse because from Tromo to Lhasa, I didn't have any work because the Dalai Lama was giving dharma teachings and hand blessings.   

**Q:** You were like an ula, right?   

**A:** Yes. When I arrived in Shigatse, I found that probably there was a little less than 20, 000 characters (in my report). I wrote things that happened and I also wrote my analysis. Then in Shigatse, I told the Branch Work Committee, [Ch. fen gung wei; Tib. yan lag las don uyon lhang kgang] to print about 10 copies of this and I took these to Lhasa. On the way, the Dalai Lama gave many dharma teachings and especially, he gave the Kala Chakra Initiation in Lhasa. You think about the purpose of him giving these teachings because you are expert on religion and those things. After he arrived Lhasa, I found that his mind was no more natural and have changed [Tib. གཡོ་འགུལ་ཐེབས] and he had become uncertain [Tib. ལྡང་ངི་ལྡིང་ངེ]. He was suspicious about the Central Committee thinking that maybe it is the not the right way to be close to the Cenral Committee and to have Tibet united with the motherland. Since his mind had changed, he should have a plan, right? I think the Dalai Lama didn't trust that Tibet will be independent, although the people in India had told him that. But I found he had been veery influenced by the Indian democracy and especially by Gandhi's non-violence idea. The Dalai Lama wouldn't tell me about Tibetan Independence, but he told me very strongly about these two things. For example, I will tell you a story. One day, we went for a tour to the upper and the lower Indian Parliaments which was officially arranged by the office. In the offices, the glass ink pots on the tables were stuck to the table. So the Dalai Lama asked Nehru, "What is the reason for keeping the ink pots stuck to the table? Nehru said, "If we don't make the ink pots stuck to the table, sometimes the members of the parliament would fight when they discuss issues and when they get angry they might hit each other with the ink pots. If they did so, the office will be filled with blue ink." The Dalai Lama was glad and said, "This is the real system of the democracy." On another day, we also went for a tour, this time to the house/museum of Gandhi which was a very important site where there was the image of Gandhi when he striving for the independence of India using non-violence, and it showed him spinning thread with a wooden weaving machine. At that time, the Dalai Lama said, "This is great and is harmonious [Tib. མཐུན་པ] with Buddhism. He had great influence from these two visits. That's why he got the peace prize by carrying the flag of non-violence. We Chinese have a proverb, "it is better to be the head of the bird rather than being a yak tail [Tib. གཡག་གི་གཞུ་གུ་བྱེད་པ་ལས། བྱའི་མགོ་བྱེད་པ་དགའ]. This means that this person [the Dalai Lama] is ambitious [Tib. ཧམ་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ] for power, so he likes to be the head of the bird, although the head of a bird is small. Though the yak tail is big, it is just a tail. The Dalai Lama had a very strong thoughts regarding political power. Do you know about this?   

**Q:** No, I don't.   

**A:** In reality, if he is the king of an independent Tibet, even though Tibet is small, but he is the head. The Dalai Lama very much liked and admired the Sikkim King. The Dalai Lama was not satisfied, even though he was the Vice Chairman of the National People's Congress of the PRC, which is such a big country. The Dalai Lama was thinking that if he becomes the head of the small independent Tibet, he would become the king. I can prove this from his conduct and his speech. I will tell you a story. In 1955, when he [Dalai Lama] came back from Beijing, he sent Trijang and some people and they did the work for inciting the revolt. When he reached Derge, although I was not there, I heard about this from Ngabö and Surkhang when they told me about their travels. Surkhang was like a small Tibetan two-sided hand drum [Tib. དྲ་རུ]. So he told me about this. When the Dalai Lama reached Derge, he gave the order to the Kashag who were part of his entourage, "I am going to give some dharma teaching for about 10 days in the monastery in Chamdo. In the meantime, you Shapes should discuss an important political matter regarding whether we can become a Federated Republic [Ch. jia meng gung he guo] [Tib. མདའ་འབྲེལ་སྤྱི་མཐུན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ] in the PRC. In the past, the Soviet Union had 16 such Republics like the White Russians, etc. The Dalai Lama was very engaged in thinking [Tib. དབྱང་ཞེད་པོ་ཅིག་ཡོད་རེད] about this. In 1955, The Dalai Lama told the Kashag in Chamdo to discuss and collect your opinions on whether we should report to the Central Committee that we should become a Federated Republic.   

**Q:** This might be the Phünwang's [Tib. ཕུན་དབང] idea.   

**A:** Wow! Do you know about this? Did you know about the Dalai Lama's story that I told you?   

**Q:** No, but the idea about the Soviet Union might be Phünwang's thoughts.   

**A:** You are even more knowledgeable than a god! [Tib. ལྷ་ལས་མཁས་པ]. This was exactly Phünwang's thinking. When he went up (to Beijing) Phünwang was with him and he told the Dalai Lama about this. So the Dalai Lama was extremely glad (to learn this) and he told the Shapes, but the Shapes got agitated when they discussed this and they wouldn't hold a meeting and saying, "This talk is nonsense and rubbish [Tib. ག་ཡིན་འདི་ཡིན་མེད་པ་རྣ་བར་མ་འགྲོ་སྐད་ཆ]. Isn't it good to [keep] do [ing] what we are doing now [have autonomous regions not republics]? [Tib. ད་ལྟའི་ད་ག་བྱས་ན་ཡག་པོ་མི་འདུག་གས]. What the hell is he talking about saying [we should be] a Federated Republic. We don't want this trouble and we are not going to discuss this. In 1957, at the time of the Lhasa Shotön [Tib. ཞོ་སྟོན] Opera Festival, when he had many relations with people, the Dalai Lama gave an elaborate party in Norbulinga for the leaders of the military and I was there, but not as an interpreter. They had arranged things like mahjong and cards in the old and the new palaces. At that time, the Dalai Lama said to me, let's go for a walk and he asked me, "Why aren't we allowed to set up a Republic in our country? I told him in detail saying, "If you compare Russia and the PRC they are not comparable [Tib. སྡུར་སྟངས] regarding the size of their nationalities and how their nationalities were formed [Tib. མི་རིགས་ཆེ་ཆུང་དང་ཆགས་སྟང]. For example, before the October Revolution, those like the White Russians, etc. were countries, but we didn't have that. Xinjiang's Sheng Shutse was a warlord [Tib. དམག་ཤེད་ཅན] not a country. And not only Tibet, but most of the minority nationalities still histories [Tib. གནས་བསྡད་ཡོད་རེད]. So in the bigger regions, Autonomous Regions [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས] and in the smaller areas, Autonomous Prefectures [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ཁུལ] have been set up. And under that, there are Autonomous Counties and also Xiang. This fits with the actual situation[in the PRC] [Tib. དངོས་ཡོད་གནས་ཚུལ་དང་མཚམ་པོ] and it is also helpful for the nationalities development. The Dalai Lama probably didn't agree with this, but he just said, "Oh! Oh." So I was astonished [Tib. ཧ་ལས]. Later, I told Tsögo, Thöndrub Tsering [Tib. mtsho sgo don gryb tshe ring] with whom I had a good relationship, "It seems to me the Dalai Lama likes the idea of a Republic. How did that happen?" He said, "You idiot! [Tib. ལྐུགས་པ] What is there to be astonished about? This was taught to him by Phüntso Wangyal [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ]. But you should not talk about this recklessly. [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང] Do you have anything to prove it?" I said, "of course I have the proof because he said it in Derge." Then he told me, "If you don't believe me, go ahead and ask Sawang Ngabö. So later I asked Ngabö whether it is like that, and he said, "Of course it is like that." When Chamdo was liberated, he was the Doji (Governor-General)and Phünwang was there. So Ngabö told me, "Since 1950, there was the danger that I would have been deceived [Tib. མགོ་སྐོར] by this. When Ngabö said that, since he was the first Tibetan Communist Party member and a scholar on theory [Tib. རིགས་པའི་གཞུང་ལུགས་ལ་མཁས་པ], I believed him. So the Dalai Lama was engrossed [Tib. དབྱིངས་ཡོད] with this idea [of a Republic like the USSR.]   

**Q:** In 1955, who told you about how the Dalai Lama gave the order to the Shapes to discuss that?   

**A:**  Ngabö told me.   

**Q:** I talked with Ngabö many years ago and he told me, "Actually, there was no need to launch the revolt. In 1958, if the Tibetan Government had taken methods and talked with the Khambas or had sent the army and expeled the Khambas, there was no reason for the revolt to take place. But the Tibetan Government didn't do that. Ngabö was blaming the Tibetan Government and the Dalai Lama. What do you think about this? I think he was right.   

**A:**  This was right. In the beginning, after the revolt had failed in Gansu, Tshongön [Tib. མཚོ་སྔོན] (Qinghai) and Kham, those people escaped and came up to Tibet. So if the Kashag could taken action to arrest them or had given them instructions to go back [to Sichuan], but they couldn't do that. I am not sure about what the Dalai Lama was thinking at that time, but at that time, there was the Kashag and some Dalai Lama's attendants who were talking with him everyday. There was a group of people who were holding very strong thoughts about not reforming the joint political and religious system of the Feudal Serfdom (of Tibet).   

**Q:** Probably Phala, [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ] was one of them?   

**A:** No. Not Phala. There was Lukhangwa [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ], Lobsang Tashi, [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] Talama Jogtang and those people.   

**Q:** How about Trijang Rinpoche?   

**A:** Of course, he was one. Some people had very strong thoughts of Tibetan independence. These people were Phala, Surkhang Wangchen Gelek, Liushar Thubten Tharpa [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐར་པ] and Trijang who played a dual role [Tib. ཉིས་རྩེག]. These two groups had the basis to become united [Tib. གཅོག་ཆགས] because independence is the method to not have the old system be reformed. If they remained under PRC, sooner and later the democratic reform will be implemented. The groups who wanted to become independent were the puppets of the foreign countries and they had relations with them. [Lowell] Thomas was an American and the British touched hands [Tib. ལག་པ་འཆང] in the 18th century [???] and from that time the Americans touched Tibet. In 1958, the Dalai Lama met the two people airdropped by the CIA who were carrying wireless equipment.   

**Q:** I met one person called Lithang Athar [Tib. lit hang a dar].   

**A:** This had a great influence on the Dalai Lama. Later, maybe Gyalo Thondub woke up from his dream. Anyway, much later he wanted to meet me though he didn't call me. One day, he came to me and said, "I worked for the CIA and I also worked for the Indian General Office [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ལས་ཁུངས]. Now I have come to know that both the Americans and the Indians were saying that we will do this and that for the Tibetans, but actually, they were thinking about their own benefit [Tib. ཁེ་ཕན] and were not thinking about Tibet's benefit. So now I have woken up from my dream."   

**Q:** In my book, "the demise of the lamaist state" I also named the Americans and the Indians as bad friends because I have the hand written dairy of Shakabpa in which it was written that the Jenkhentsisum had a very close relation with the Indian Government and the Indian Government was paying them ae monthly salary. And there was lot of trouble in Kalimpong.   

**A:** The British Ambassador Patterson was also saying that [Ed. Patterson was actually a British missionary].   

**Q:** But the Khambas were causing trouble and the Tibetan Government was not doing anything and Ngabö could not push the government to make war [against the Khamba] right? At that time, some people in Lhasa were saying if the government sent troops, they will join the Khambas, but I asked some military officers about this and they said that if they were sent to make war with the Khambas, they will make the war because usually, they didn't like the Khambas. So I think the government could have taken action.   

**A:** This is a fact.   

**Q:** What was your government doing at that time?   

**A:** At that time, we were saying that the revolt is just a matter of the local security and not a matter of the national defense [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲུང]. So there is a big difference between these. You, the Local Tibetan Government have your soldiers and police and it is your duty to protect the security of the local places. As for the PLA, it has the duty to safeguard the national borders. If there are some offenses [Tib. གནོད་ཡས] against the border, we will send the PLA right away. But if we send the defensive [PLA] troops for the local security, this will be against the rules [Tib. ལུགས་དང་མ་ཐུན་པ]. I will tell you another story. There was a person called Jiang Huating who was a company leader in the Independent Artillery Company.   

**Q:** I met him in India. His Tibetan name is Lobsang Tashi.   

**A:** Jiang Huating deceived and engaged in misconduct by having [sexual] relations with a [Tibetan] girl of the household guarding a park in Lhasa. Later [after he escaped the PLA camp], he was kept in the Trapchi Regiment whose Depön was Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ]. He was kept there for about 7 days, and we knew about this. One day, Political Commissar Tan [Guansan] called me and told me to call all the members of the Kashag for a meeting in the office Jiaoji qu. So I made phone calls to Surkhang, Shasur [Tib. བསྒད་ཟུར], Ngabö, Liushar, Talama and Lobsang Samten. I told them, "Our PLA soldier Jiang Huating had rebelled against us and you have kept him in the Tibetan soldier's regiment." At that time, Surkhang was the senior Shape [Tib. ཁྲི་པ]. So I told Surkhang to hand over that person. We have the proof, so don't say that you don't know about that. Then Surkhang said, "Yes, yes, we will do as you say." Then I asked Surkhang, "How are going to do that?" Surkhang said, "I will enquire about this and if he is really there, I myself will tie him up with a rope and bring him to the presence of the Political Commissar. The Political Commissar said, "That sound good and your attitude is good" and then the meeting was over. After 2-3 days, Surkhang came all of a sudden. At that time, we had given Hapo brand [???] British cars to each Shape and Surkhang came in his car just near my hostel door at around midday. He was acting and told me, "Please help me today. Otherwise, I will die. Please help me to meet the Political Commissar Tan." I thought this was about the matter of Jiang Huating so I called the Political Commissar and told him that Surkhang wants to see you. He said, "Bring him here."   

**Q:** Surkhang didn't tell you the reason for wanting to meet the Political Commissar?   

**A:** He didn't. When we entered the Political Commissar's office he was sitting near the table and Surkhang kneeled down at once without saying anything and he offered a khata of the best quality called Nangdzö. I was surprised and the Political Commissar was also kind of surprised and yelled, "Surkhang! What happened to you? Surkhang was indicating [Tan] should to receive the khata so I told the Political Commissar to take the khata. Then Surkhang slapped himself 7-8 times till he was in tears and said, "I am not a man! I am a ghost! I am so sorry! Then the Political Commissar told him not to do that and tell him what happened. Then Surkhang said, "Last time, I told you that I will enquire about Jiang Huating and if I found him, I will tie him up and bring him to you, but I am sorry to tell you now that I couldn't accomplish my duty. When I went to enquire about him, he had fled the night before. So it has become as if I didn't keep my words and I deceived the Political Commissar. So I feel ashamed and I feel pain in my mind.' Then he cried. He was acting like this. You didn't know this, right?   

**Q:** Yes. I didn't.   

**A:** Once before that, he told me when he was enjoying a picnic, "Do you know what we kudrak think about the politics? I said, "How can I know what the kudrak are thinking about politics? Then he told me, "Whoever is good in acting two-faced, we regard him as a politician, [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་མཁས་པ]. Surkhang was that kind of person.   

**Q:** The old society was like that. Thank you so much for your time, it is very useful.   

