# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0053.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Li Zuomin  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Li Zuomin  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Li Zuomin was the director [Ch. qu zhang] of the United Front Bureau [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར་བུ] in the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན; Ch. wei yuan Tib. ལྷན་ཁང]. He speaks fluent Lhasa dialect Tibetan and was the major Tibetan translator for the heads of the TWC. In this interview, Li Zuomin talks about the PRC policy of allowing the Dalai Lama to go to India and how the Dalai Lama wrote the letters he sent to Tan Guansan in 1959. He provides detail on how the Dalai Lama was caught between the progressive and the reactionary forces; and on how the Dedön Tshogpa in India sent letters to many lamas and kudrak to win them over; and on how the Chinese helped the Tibetans.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0053_02/H_0053_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  If this is the case, then Phala was doing things on his own. Would he ask Surkhang and those people? These are all secret, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in 1957 and 58 the Welfare Association made a lot of efforts with the lamas, the monks and the abbots of the three great monasteries and among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>s in Tibet. They sent many propaganda letters to try to win over members including <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a>, Tsewang Rinzen. In the letters, they said "We have set up an association and if you agree, we will regard you as our member, and these are our principals." It was said that on the corner of the letter, there was a unique sign and the letter said: "Be careful. The communists are very cunning, and if they knew, they might make a false letter and trick you. We received this and the secret telegram code." One day a man showed me this letter; he had taken it from a monk. He didn't come in person, but sent it through a young messenger, telling me to send it back. I sent it back after reading it. Later, he sent letters to the kudrak like Sambo, Tsewang Rinzin [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་ཚེ་དབང་རིགས་འཛིན] and he reported about the letter and I was the interpreter and gave this propaganda letter to the leader.   

**Q:**  This was around 1957-58, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was keeping it very secret.   

**Q:**  In 1951, the PRC and the Tibetan Government worked together and after awhile the revolt took place. Was there any other method that could have taken to avoid the revolt during the years 1951-1959? What were the mistakes made during that period?   

**A:**  I think it is difficult. I will give you some examples; we made a great effort to avoid a military confrontation. When I reached Tibet in 1951, actually I started working from 1942. The so called community would have to do the class struggle, but at that time, we didn't mention a single word regarding this [in Tibet]. We had to mobilize the masses and whatever we did regarding making relations we did tirelessly wanting to bring peace, but finally we had to result to force. All our public relations works had been done only through Kashag and upper stratum class. What we did in public was: we sent doctors and nurses in teams to give medical treatment to people who needed it. When we did this, we went through local (Tibetan) government officials. We also gave loans both in money and grains. This too, we did through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> (district head). The dzongpön did all the loan planning work. During the autumn, we again went through the dzongpön to collected our loans, with the money and grain being kept there [in the district] to use for next year loans. Our prime objective was to lead the upper class people to know how to transform the society in peaceful ways. At that time we cadres had extremely strict discipline. When we came up to Tibet, we were all soldiers but after we arrived in Tibet, we became civil cadres. We were not allowed to go to market recklessly. Sometimes when we had to go out we often ran into humiliations; some people spit on us and came to hit us with their fists. We said nothing, and just wiped our faces. The reason for tolerating this was the hope of leading them on to a good path (winning them over). All this tolerance on our part was meant to lead the people on the correct path. Around the time of 1958, in the vicinity of Lhasa, there were so many disturbances, some of which were very serious. We told the Kashag, "It is not that we do not have power and especially the military power, but these areas are under your jurisdiction. You have the right and have responsibility to quell those disturbances by whatever means, including the use of force. For example, Jiang Huaqin, who was the military officer of the cannon regiment, became a turncoat and went to join Andrutsang. After he fled, he was hiding for 7 days in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment, being kept by the Depön Tashi Pera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Tenzin Thondrup [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]. Regarding this, Tan Guansan called in the Kashag members and held a meeting. Surkhang was the senior officer and he was told: "Our man left from us but we know he is in Lhasa and you have kept him. So you must hand over him to us. If he runs away the responsibility lies with you." Surkhang said," Probably, there might not be such a person. I don't know at all. But, since the Political Commissioner Tan Zhengwei said this, I will do my best to find him out. It would be a big crime if anyone kept him." After few days, he left Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Yes, he is in India and he is called Lobsang Tashi.   

**A:**  He also went to Taiwan and got a title from the GMD.   

**Q:**  I met him in south Indian in the Tibetan settlement; he was like a countryside (farmer) man.   

**A:**  He got the title of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> with one star called Shaojiang.   

**Q:**  Then he might be a different person.   

**A:**  [Tenzin Lhundrub] I heard that he was the cross-eyed person who was from the 308 cannon regiment.   

**Q:**  Then it is the same person. Later he joined <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and he was there when they went to Shang Ganden Chönkhor [Tib. ཤངས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. He was a tough person.   

**A:**  Later, he became the Chief of Staff of Andrutsang. After they took him over there, one day Surkhang sat in his car and came to me in great haste instead of calling me and he said,"Please help me." I said," What happened? <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a>, of course I will help you." He said," Now, I swear by the three jewels, it is too bad. It happened that probably that man was there, but then he ran away. What to do now? Tan Zhengwei told me that we have to take the responsibility. I'm going to tell Tan Guansan now and apologize to him. Please help me and be the interpreter" I said, "Okay." As soon as we arrived in the military headquarters, he showed a big drama. He offered a long <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> called Nangdzö [Tib. ནང་མཛོད] to Tan Guansan and dropped himself on his knees and slapped himself twice saying,"Tan Zhengwei! I am not a man. Sorry. The man has fled away." He was doing like that.   

**Q:**  Tashi Pera had connections with Chushigandru.   

**A:**  Yes, he and Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང].   

**Q:**  These all were connected with Phala, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was related to Phala.   

**A:**  They were all on one side.   

**Q:**  It is hard to know the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>'s conduct.   

**A:**  That's why Surkhang said that the politics of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> are deceptive. He himself was doing that. [laughter].   

**A:**  It is hard for us foreigners to understand that.   

**A:**  Let alone you for foreigners, it is hard for me to understand that, despite staying so long time in Tibetan society; for 28 years, I am sort of confused. This is just a talk between two of us. [laughter] I am just kidding.   

**Q:**  I have a very bad memory. One thing that is hard for me to understand is that the PRC told the Dalai Lama that he can go to India, right? Actually, there was a danger that he might stay in India permanently and if he did stay there would be a trouble, right? So what was the policy of the PRC? Why was he allowed to go? I think that some might have said that it is not good to do and it would be better for him not to go. What kind of PRC's policy decided that the Dalai Lama could go?   

**A:**  Regarding this policy, it is what I told you above. There was nothing else. Mainly, it was decided by the Central Committee (zhongyang) and the invitation came through the Foreign Ministry to the China's People's Government. This was because he was a Vice Chairman [Ch. fu wei yuan zhang]. So the Central Committee trusted him and let him make his own decision. Regarding the view that there would be trouble and danger for him stay in India, I don't know what the thinking and policy of the Central Committee was. What I knew was that Zhang Jingwu sent a telegram to the Central Committee saying that the Indians have invited him. Zhongang said, "We don't have any objection whether he would go or not. The two of them [the Dalai and the Panchen] can make the decision and it will be done whatever they decided, and the Central Committee will help them with whatever they need.   

**Q:**  Was the Dalai Lama's note book as big as this?   

**A:**  It was a red note book smaller than this and he kept a very thin pencil in it so he could make note of whatever important thing was told to him. The Dalai Lama wrote several letters to Tan Guansan by tearing the pages from his note book and he would write in a very beautiful hand writing which was kind of unique and I would know his writing right away. There were 2-3 pages in his 3rd letter.   

**Q:**  Did he sign the letters?   

**A:**  Yes, he did. We wouldn't get the original because it might kept in the office. Later, his hand written letter was printed in the People's Daily. These were his genuine hand writing.   

**Q:**  Do you think this was a policy of the Dalai Lama or was it true?   

**A:**  Do you mean the letters?   

**Q:**  Some say that it was decided for him to flee and this was a strategy.   

**A:**  Do you mean for deceiving us?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Yes, people were saying that, but at that time, I didn't think it was like that. Therefore, as soon as he left, the Central Committee announced that he was abducted. This was based on his letters. In 1954-1955, when the Dalai Lama came to China and went for the inspection tour, I thought his thoughts were quite advanced. After he went there in 1956, he was kind of disturbed [Tib. དཀྲུགས], but even then, I thought he was not deceiving us continuously. I think that is true. For example, in the third letter, he said that he is trying and after awhile he will arrange some people and stay at a safer place and he will make a sign and asked Tan Guansan to help bring him out of Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  When we look back, I think his conduct was strange. For example, he is kind of progressive in 1954 and he met the Chairman Mao. After that, he didn't take the method of stopping the Khambas and Alo Chöndze before they did the work, though later on a proclamation was issued.   

**A:**  Regarding this matter, according to me, the Dalai Lama is very intelligent and quick-minded, but he was caught in the middle between the two forces among Tibetans. One force is representing progressives, and one force is representing backward or reactionary or stubborn ones who want to preserve the old system. They know that Tibetan independence is impossible according to history, but what they really wanted was to protect their interests, the old system. I don't mean this about the Dalai Lama. It was the stubborn group. Since we arrived in Tibet, the Dalai Lama was in between these two. When the progressive forces were stronger, he swayed to the left, and when the reactionary forces were stronger, he swayed to the right and vice versa.   

**Q:**  There wasn't any discipline in the Tibetan government like the PRC had.   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't have any.   

**Q:**  They were doing their own things. For example, Phala Drönyerchemmo did a lot of work, but I doubt that he had relations with the Kashag. All <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s connections were with Phala.   

**A:**  This is also not certain. Surkhang, this person is not easy to cope with. He used to act a lot   

**Q:**  Gyalo Thondup and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> didn't get along well.   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  But, I don't know about their relations with Phala. I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> had connections with Phala.   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  Later, Surkhang did some work. If Phala and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> had connections, would the Dalai Lama know this? What do you think?   

**A:**  I think it is difficult. I don't think the Dalai Lama would definitely listen to Phala.   

**Q:**  I heard from a person coming from outside, that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> sent the leaflets thrown at the Mönlam to Phala. I doubt that Phala would ask the Dalai Lama before they threw the leaflets.   

**A:**  This is difficult to say for everybody.   

