# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0053.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Li Zuomin   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China   
**Date of Interview:** June 25, 2011  
**Language of Interview:**   
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Li Zuomin  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 81  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Li Zuomin was a senior cadre in Lhasa in intelligence in the United Front Work Department in Lhasa. He speaks fluent Lhasa dialect Tibetan and was the major Tibetan translator for the heads of the TWC. In this interview, Li Zuoming describes the preparations for the Dalai Lama's visit to the Military Area Headquarters, his security during his visit and the concern surrounding his trip. He then briefly discusses the issues regarding the Dalai Lama's safety and the letter from Phala confessing his wrong doing. Additionally, he talks about the mimang tsogpa, the 17-Point Agreement, and various political decisions and acts of the Dalai Lama. Finally, he discusses the decision to let the Dalai Lama go [from Lhasa] in 1959, the revolt that occurred after, and the casualties that were a consequence of the fighting.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0053_05/H_0053_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  [ continued from interview H.0053.04] I sent one of the best interpreters under me who was good in both Chinese and Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Then it was decided that the Dalai Lama would to go to the Military Area Command, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Deng Shaodong told the Dalai Lama that he can send us a message whenever he wants to come.   

**Q:**  Was Deng Shaodong a military leader?   

**A:**  As I told you, he was the newly arrived vice commander and major general [Ch. shao jiang] of the Military Area Command who had one star on his shoulder.   

**Q:**  What kind of a person was he?   

**A:**  He was a very kind-hearted person (Tib. སང་པོ [བཟང་པོ]) and it had been only 3-4 months since he had come to Tibet, so he didn't know the real situation in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Then what happened?   

**A:**  After Deng Shaodong reported to Tan Guansan what he told the Dalai Lama, Tan Guansan told Deng Shaodong that he did well and then I was sent to tell [the Dalai Lama] that there will be no problem whenever the Dalai Lama comes to the Military Area Command and he can decide when he is going to come. Then Wu Tingxiu, the chief of staff [Ch. can mou zhang Tib. ཇུས་འདོན་པ] and senior colonel [Ch. da xiao] of the PLA, and a director [Tib. བུ་ཞང] of the United Front Bureau [Ch. tong zhan bu] and I were sent to Norbulinga to discuss the way and the security when the Dalai Lama comes to the Military Area Command. It was said that there are many details to be decided on, and the Dalai Lama must fix the time of his coming.   

**Q:**  Where did you go to?   

**A:**  I was sent to the Dalai Lama himself twice and I discussed the detailed security arrangements with Phüntso Tashi who was the Gusung Depön (Bodyguard Regiment Commander). It was after the Mönlam and the Gutor in 1958 [he means 1959] and it was in the middle of February in 1958 [1959] and I am not sure about the animal year. Through discussions back and forth, the time was fixed. Since the Dalai Lama himself paid attention to the good days and bad days [in astrology] [Tib. ཚེས་བཟང་ངན] this was very important so he checked the lunar calendar and said the best day would be on March 10th, which was the 1st day of the 2nd lunar month, so on that day he will come to the Military Area Command to watch the show. It was clearly confirmed. Then I went to the Gusung Depön again and there was a director of the United Front Work Bureau [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར་བུ] and the chief of staff with me. The three of us discussed this with the Gusung Depön. We divided the area for security: from the main gate Norbulinga to the stone bridge called Dzongyab Dosam [Tib. རྫོང་རྒྱབ་རྡོ་ཟམ] which was located behind the Jagpori [Tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] Hill where there was a very big canal which flowed to Norbulinga. The Gusung Depön would be responsible for the security of the area from the main gate of the Norbulinga to the Dzongyab Dosam. Then the PLA would be responsible for the security of the area from the Dzongyab Dosam to the west main gate of the Military Headquarters Area Command. And they also did a lot of preparations like cleaning the hall, etc.   

**Q:**  When you told this to Phüntso Tashi, what did he say?   

**A:**  He agreed to whatever we said. The Military Headquarters Area Command had two main gates: the east and the west gate. The west gate of the Military Area Command was in front of the Potala and it was near to it. The two sides of the road from Norbilunga to the stone bridge were all filled with parks [Tib. གླིང་ག] and there were not many households living there.   

**Q:**  In Phüntso Tashi's book, he wrote that you people said that the Dalai Lama's bodyguard soldiers are not allowed to carry guns with the Dalai Lama into the Military Headquarters Area Command and they [Tibetans] said this will not agree to this.   

**A:**  It was not like that. We didn't say that Tibetans are not allowed to carry guns. From the main gate of Norbulinga to the stone bridge, their [Tibetan] soldiers can carry guns and from the stone bridge to the west gate, our PLA will do the guarding. So from the stone bridge, the Tibetan] soldiers do not need to take the responsibility and the PLA will take the full responsibility. We didn't say that the Gusung soldiers are not allowed to carry guns. He [Phüntso Tashi] told a lie. Near the Dalai Lama, there are the three attendants in charge of food, clothes and offerings, the Söpön Khembo [Tib. གསོལ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], Simpön Khembo [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], the Chöpön Khembo [Tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ] and the Jigyab Khembo. They didn't need to serve tea and those things. When they come to the PLA's area, they [the PLA] will take the full responsibility.   

**Q:**  Phüntso Tashi said that when the Dalai Lama went to the TAR, he could take 25 Gusung soldiers.   

**A:**  He is right [that he [Dalai Lama] can take Tibetan soldiers to the TAR]. But regarding the 25 soldiers, he [Phüntso Tashi] also told a lie. In the PCTAR, between the Dalai Lama's office and his residence, he can take as many soldiers as he wanted to take. However, inside the Norbulinga, there was no custom where the soldiers go to the Dalai Lama's residence.   

**Q:**  Then where do they station the Gusung soldiers in Norbulinga?   

**A:**  They were stationed at the gates and the main gates. When the Dalai Lama invites the leaders of the TAR to the picnics in Norbulinga in summer and autumn and when they eat food and play cards, all the Gusung soldiers were at the gates and the main gates. This was also instigated and lied by Phüntso Tashi. They didn't need to send Tibetan soldiers from the stone bridge to the Military Area Command because this was the PLA's area. From 12 am on the night of May 9th until the morning, about 30 PLA soldiers were carrying a wheel-like device [Tib. འཁོར་ལོ] to check whether there are underground bombs set up in the area 30 meters on both sides of the road and they stationed guards on the each side at 5 meters distance. There were also PLA soldiers hiding in the parks. On March 10th, at the erntrance of the Military Area Command, they wrote a big letter poster in Chinese and Tibetan to welcome the Dalai Lama saying "Warmly welcome the Dalai Lama to visit the Military Area Command to watch the show" [Tib. སྤྲོ་སེམས་འཁོལ་བའི་ངང་ནས་ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ་བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང་ལ་གཟིགས་མོར་ཕེབས་པར་དགའ་བསུ་ཞུ]. And the Tibetan letters were written above the Chinese. In the midday of the 9th, I learned that in that year, the Dalai Lama had passed the geshe lharampa exam, so I told Tan Guansan and he told me to change the big letters for welcoming into saying "The meeting for warmly celebrating the Dalai Lama getting the geshe lharampa title" [Tib. སྤྲོ་སེམས་འཁོལ་བའི་ངང་ནས་ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ་དགེ་བཤེས་ལྷ་རམས་པའི་མཚན་ཐོབ་བྱུང་བར་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་ཚོགས་ཆེན]. And the size of big letters were also so big [interviewer: the size of my tape recorder]   

**Q:**  On the 9th, didn't you go to the Potala?   

**A:**  On that day, there was no reason to go to the Potala. I went to the Tsuglagang at the Mönlam. When I told you that I went to the Potala it was before that. Another thing happened there at around 8-9 p.m. At that time, I heard that something had happened in the society.   

**Q:**  Who told you?   

**A:**  Probably, Ngabö or someone else made a phone call to me saying that in the society, people are saying, "Tomorrow, when the Dalai Lama comes to the Military Area Command, a helicopter is ready to fly and they will put the Dalai Lama in it and take him away." Another person said this "was a plot and that the Dalai Lama's life is in danger." [Tib. ཏ་ལའི་སྲོག་ལ་ཉེན་ཁ་ཡོད་པའི་གཡོ་སྒྱུ]. So there was a discussion [among the Chinese] saying how about changing the time of the Dalai Lama's visit? Consequently, I called Political Commissar Tan and asked him what shall we do. Political Commissar Tan said, "It is difficult to tell the Dalai Lama not to come. However, we must look at the situation and be on alert and have methods to challenge [Tib. ཁ་གཏད་བཅག] whatever happens." This was his opinion. At around 11 p.m, another thing happened. In the Lhasa market, the abtru (helper) of the mipön [Tib. མི་དཔོན] (mayor) were shouting everywhere saying, "Tomorrow, the Dalai Lama will go to the Military Area Command. So all the family members must go to Norbulinga and stop him from going. It is very dangerous if he goes." Before that, they had already made the rumor that he will be taken in the helicopter. So we were saying that we cannot tell the Dalai Lama not to come, but we have to uphold the principle of self-defense [Tib. རང་སྲུང] and be very attentive and we will see what to do at the time. Then at around 8 a.m. on March 10th, in my house, I had a direct telephone connection from my office with Gadrang's residence in Norbulinga and I received a call and it was Gadrang and he said "Oh! Something strange has happened. I wonder how things will happen today [Tib. ཁྱད་མཚར་ཅིག་འདུག་ག། དེ་རིང་ག་འདྲ་བྱས་ཡོང]." Gadrang was a humble person. He then said, "All the masses including the males, females, old and young are coming to Norbuling while crying, and around the main gate it is almost packed full with people. I don't know what this is. I sent the Gusung Depön to ask those people [what is going on] and if I learn clearly, I will call you." At around 10 a.m, I tried to call him, but it didn't go through. Probably, the wires were cut.   

**Q:**  Did he call you and said that Dalai Lama can't come?   

**A:**  He said, "Most probably, he can't come because the main gate is blocked," and then after 10 a.m., Phagpalha's [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] incident happened.   

**Q:**  Before that Phala and those people were saying that they were suspicious because you [Chinese] insisted that they (Tibetans) are not allowed to take their soldiers inside the [PLA] regiment because there was no such custom. It was why they were suspicious, so there should be a reason to be suspicious because this is a big matter, so how did that happen?   

**A:**  They just told lies.   

**Q:**  If they lied, they need a reason to cause the trouble.   

**A:**  The reason for causing trouble was the resolution they made in 1958 saying that they are taking the Dalai Lama to a safe place at an appropriate time. In May [sic March] 18th and 19th when the revolt was quelled, on that morning, I took a gun and went around the Barkor Street. There were dead bodies of PLA but most of the dead bodies were Khambas carrying rifles with braces and long swords and all of them had the talisman Jigje Mahe given by the Dalai. After the 17-Point Agreement was signed, Ngabö set up a team for implementing the 17-Point Agreement that consisted of the two katsab; Shasur and Tashi Lingpa [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་གླིང་པ]. This team was set up in the Surjong [Tib. ཟུར་ལྗོངས] Kashag. This room was burned when quelling the revolt. At that time, I met Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ], the secretary of Ngabö. Tsögo was a representative of that team. So I told him that it is strange that the house where the Surjong Kashag met was burned, why did they do that? At that time, they didn't fire a single cannon at that place. Later, Tsögo was appointed as tsipön and I asked him, "Was there a resolution they made in 1958 when they took the oath saying that they are taking the Dalai Lama to a safe place and they are going to fight with the PLA in Lhasa? Then Tsögo said, "This resolution was in that house [Surjong Kashag], so they [rebels] purposely burned it because the Kashag documents were in there."   

**Q:**  I have never heard about this meeting. Actually, it was hard to oppose the government because all people know and there were no secrets because in the tsondu gyendzom, there were the monks and the ex-abbots and all kinds of people and they won't keep quiet.   

**A:**  As you said, it is hard to put into action.   

**Q:**  They had the enthusiasm and it was a very important matter but it was not easy to oppose the government.   

**A:**  Have you heard of Tsipön Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང]?   

**Q:**  I know about him. Phala, Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] and Namseling had a secret group and they were doing secret work with Jenkhentsisum from the early times; from 1956. And they sent secret wireless messages to Dekyilinga and the Indian Government was with them and there were lot of troubles. Probably the Dalai Lama didn't know that. I also have Shakabpa's hand written diary. So there wasn't any meeting like you said. Phala, Tashi Bera and Namseling were the ones who caused most of the trouble. For example, the three tsidrung who went to India were sent by Phala. Phala was working for many years to gain independence.   

**Q:**  Where is that resolution?   

**A:**  As I told you now, it was burned when the revolt was quelled. Ngabö and Tsögo were related closely and Tsögo, Thöndrub Tsering [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་ཚེ་རིང] doesn't know how to act [Tib. འཁྲབ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མ་རེད] and he is the most straight-forward and honest among the kudrak who I have had relations with. He had a firm standpoint in having loyalty to the state and opposing Tibetan independence. Later he told me, "You Chinese have a proverb called 'white crow,' so I am the white crow. And when he [Tsögo] became the tsipön and the (Assembly) meeting was presided by the Trunyichemmo and Tsipön, every day Tsögo would inform me whatever they discussed at the meeting through another person, for example, how they made the oath, etc. Later [in India], Phala was kicked out and he got sick and went to Switzerland for treatment. At that time, Phala wrote a long letter. Do you know about this?   

**Q:**  No.   

**A:**  He [Phala] sent this letter to Tsögo because they were related, though not so close. In Tibet, when the kudrak make relations they were like one family because there were about 200-300 kudrak and they get married to each other and kudrak and the serfs (Tib. ཏྲེཉོག [བྲན་གཡོག]) are not allowed to get married. And there were several of them who shared their wives.   

**Q:**  What did he write in the letter?   

**A:**  In his letter he confessed his wrong doings saying that since the peaceful liberation in Tibet, I was holding the thought of Tibetan independence and I opposed the CCP whatever they did. In the end, leave alone having any accomplishments for Tibetan independence, even some people scolded me and considered me as a very bad person. So I am very disappointed and ashamed and I have heart disease. I am thinking of dying in Tibet. You [Tsögo] have good relations with some Chinese cadres, so please through them tell the Central Committee to give me a permit and allow me to return to Tibet. I am preparing from now on, and from the day I return and get a place to stay and make a living, I will submit a written confession in which I will write all of my good things and the bad things without concealing anything. Tsögo showed me that letter. At that time, Tsögo was a Standing Committee Member of the National Consultative Conference [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུན་ལས] and whenever he came to Beijing to the meetings he would come to me. At that time he was little bit sick and was hospitalized after the meeting. Tsögo said, "This time, I didn't bring Phala's letter and later I will send it to you, so please report it to the Central Committee." I said "I will report it to the Central Committee and if the Central Committee agrees, I will send you a message." Unfortunately, after about 20 days, Tsögo died. Since we two are old friends, I will tell you about some of the things in Tibet that were very strange. For example, the one called mimang tsogpa (People's Association) which started in November in 1951 and February. Do you know how they started? Who were the ones who were standing behind them?   

**Q:**  This is not clear. Who do you think were the ones staying behind them?   

**A:**  I am very clear about this. They took the name of the Dalai Lama and the ones who really made it were Surkhang, Wangchen Gelek, Liushar, Thubden Tharpa [Tib. sne'u shar thub btasn thar pa], and Phala, Thubden Wönden [Tib. ཕ་ལྷ་ཐུབ་བསྟན་འོད་ལྡན]. These were the main ones. I am not sure whether Trunyichemmo Rong Namse agreed or not, anyway probably, he was not among the ones who agreed to it totally. Trunyichemmo Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན] was the one who oppose it consistently (Tib. ཐ་ཇིགཏུ [མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ]). When the Dalai Lama fled from Lhasa and when he was in Tromo, the 17-Point Agreement was already signed. Thern on the 29th of May or in the beginning of June, they held a meeting and did a very bad thing in the name of the Dalai Lama. This was mainly made by Surkhang, Wangchen Gelek and next was Liushar, Thubden Tharpa. At that time, he [Liushar Thubden Tharpa] was kalön or katsab (acting kalön), right?   

**Q:**  Liushar was a katsab.   

**A:**  He got the promotion and at that time there were Surkhang Wangchen Gelek, Liushar Thubden Tharpa and Rong Namsey and Shakabpa had also come back from Kalimpong then. Basically, when the Dalai Lama was in Tromo,Shakabpa was there all the time. After Ngabö signed the 17-Point Agreement, he didn't send the original but sent a clear copy of it to Tromo. When Ngabö signed the 17-Point Agreement, he sent all the contents of the 17-Point Agreement to Tromo through many secret telegrams [Tib. གསང་ཏར] in Tibetan. This was not asking for instructions, but it said that 17-Point Agreement is signed and the Central Committee gave a very strict order saying that the original copy of the 17-Point Agreement is not allowed to be taken outside (of China) because there will be bad result if you take it out. So [Ngabö said] "I will bring the original through Chamdo. And the Central Committee leaders will come through the sea route and they will bring a copy of the Agreement". After they received this telegram, Surkhang, Wangchen Gelek, Liushar, Thubden Tharpa and Shakabpa held discussion and said, "Now, the 17-Point Agreement is already signed and it was signed by the representative of the Tibetan Government who had the full power. Therefore,it is hard to say that we don't agree and we also can't say that. However, we should not agree to it. So what we should do is that the so called Communist Party would listen to the people a lot and they say things like the People's Liberation Army and the People's Republic of China etc, and that they serve the people. So if we put forward a comment (Tib. སམཆར [བསམ་འཆར]) in the name of the people (Tib. མིམང [Tib. མི་དམངས]), probably we can change it [Tib. བཟོ་བཅོས་རྒྱག་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་ཡོད་པ་འདྲ]. At that time there was the Che or travelling Kashag (Tib. ཆེ་ཀཤག [བྱེས་བཀའ་ཤག]) which was with the Dalai Lama and there were also a few kalön who were left in the Kashag in Lhasa and they were called the Shi or Home Kashag (Tib. ཤི་ཀཤག [གཞིས་བཀའ་ཤག]). So they sent a telegram [Hind. tar] in Tibetan in the name of the Che Kashag to the Shi Kashag and especially to the two sitsab, Lukhangwa [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] and Lobsang Tashi [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. In the shi kashag there was Shasur, etc. In the telegram, it was written, "the 17-Point Agreement is already signed and this is very harmful for us, but we can't oppose it because our representatives have signed it. You must select monks and lay people from among the three monastic seats and among the people who have loyalty to the Tibetan Government headed by the Dalai Lama and who have faith in the religion and can sacrifice their lives for the old system and set up a tsogpa. And this tsogpa must be called mimang tsogpa. If we send a letter to the Central Committee coming from the mimang tsogpa probably we can change it".   

**Q:**  At that time, was there a telegram sent?   

**A:**  Of course, there was.   

**Q:**  Are you sure?   

**A:**  Yes, I am sure. I even saw the original telegram. Later, this came out from the historical archives [Tib. ལོ་རྒྱུས་ཡིག་ཚགས] of the People's Government [Tib. མི་དམངས་སྲིད་གཞུང] of the TAR. This was a telegram in Tibetan with numbers [coded] and the content was short. At that time, they used the name of the Dalai Lama. Regularly, the Tibetan government (dewashung) had a custom whereby they make a draft and at the end they write "Please think about whether this is appropriate or not." [Tib. འོས་མིན་དགོངས་བཞེད་ཐུགས་རྗེ་གནང] and they submit it to the Dalai Lama and he would look whether this is appropriate or not and if he agreed, he would put a mark with red ink on the word "appropriate."   

**Q:**  This is new, I didn't know that. Did they write their names in the telegram?   

**A:**  No, they just wrote "from the Che Kashag". Lukhangwa, Lobsang Tashi, Shasur and Tashi Lingpa were in Lhasa then.   

**Q:**  What about Ramba?   

**A:**  Ramba wasn't there.   

**A:**  He might be in Tromo.   

**A:**  Ramba was very old and by then had died. They sent it in the name of the Che Kashag, but they couldn't send it without getting the approval sign from the Dalai Lama. I can't say for sure whether the Dalai Lama was striving for Tibetan independence, but anyway he was a person doing things carelessly [Tib. བ་རེ་བོ་རེ]. Furthermore, he had two older brothers, Gyalo Thondub and Taktse Jigme Norbu [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར་འཇིགས་མེད་ནོརྦུ] who went to America. According to international customs, old secret documents would have their secrecy expired or become invalid (Tib. trö [གྲོལ]) after 30 years and then it is allowed to make them widely known. However, in our country, they are not doing like that at all.   

**Q:**  We Americans also don't do that. We just verbally say it, but we can't get the documents from the CIA even though 30 years have past.   

**A:**  They say 30 years, but among the documents, there are differences whether it is appropriate to do it or not.   

**Q:**  In that telegram, they didn't mention anything about gaining the independence and just said the mimang must oppose it, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Tell me again what did they say as the main point in the telegram.   

**A:**  In the telegram, they wrote that one point is that all the PLA must withdraw from Tibet and secondly the Tibetan territories that have been occupied by China [Ch. zhong guo] must leave them as before and nobody is allowed to remove the good and old customs [Tib. གནའ་སྲོལ་བཟང་པོ] of Tibet. The mimang tsogpa was making this appeal (Tib. bökü [འབོད་སྐུལ]) and it also said that the Tibetan soldiers are not allowed to get converted (Tib. གྱུར [སྒྱུར]) into the PLA and that the Tibetan currency is not allowed to be changed. In short, even a single good and old custom of Tibet is not allowed to change. That telegram was short and precise and if it would be translated into Chinese, there will be less than 2,000 characters. So in March-April in 1952, the represenetative of the Central Committee, Zhang Jingwu, sent letters to the Dalai Lama and they stuck a public announcement (Tib. ཇིདྲག [སྤྱི་བསྒྲགས]) in the name of the Dalai Lama saying that the so called mimang tsogpa is an illegal organization and it must be disbanded. But they just went through the motions of doing that.   

**Q:**  They were behind them [behind the mimang tsogpa], right?   

**A:**  Yes. Furthermore, the Central Committee's representative talked with the Dalai Lama and said that they should demote (Tib. ནེཡུང [གནས་དབྱུངས]) the two sitsab and the Dalai Lama agreed. However, when they stuck that proclamation (Tib. ཙཙིག [རྩ་ཚིག]), they wrote that the two sitsab must stop working [Tib. ལས་ཀ་བཞག]. The word demote and stop working is different in nature, right?   

**Q:**  This is clear.   

**A:**  Later, Ngabö told me, "Though the two sitsab were demoted, but when they held the drungja (morning tea ceremony), their seating arrangement (Tib. དེནཐོབ [གདན་ཐོབ]) remained as same as before. So they acted two-faced (not really demoted). Just before they quelled the revolt, on the 17th of March, Tan Guansan send three letters to the Dalai Lama back and forth, you know that, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  In the third letter he sent to Tan Guansan, he (the Dalai Lama) wrote "In Norbulinga, I am gathering a group of people who listen to my orders and when it becomes reliable [Tib. བློས་འཁེལ་བ་བྱུང་མཚམས་ཤིག་ལ] and he also mentioned the names of the Gusung Depön and some rupön and I am taking these people and going to a place which is safe and near Norbulinga. At that time, I will give a signal to the PLA and at the appropriate time please send people to protect me outside." This letter duped [us]. When he fled, it was at 12 midnight [Beijing time] on the 17th of March. He departed from Norbulinga and went to the Ramagang [Tib. ར་མ་གང] ferry site and then went in coracles and crossed the river. This is what we saw. When he [Dalai Lama] told us to send people to receive him, we were like hesitating whether to believe it or not. Actually, at around 9 p.m of 17th of March, I knew that the Dalai Lama is going to flee that night at 12.   

**Q:**  How did you know that?   

**A:**  I had friends among the kudrak.   

**Q:**  Among the kudrak there were not many who knew this.   

**A:**  Yes. Anyway, at 10 p.m, I knew that. At that time, from the place where I have my office to the place where Tan Guansan's residence is in the Military Area Command, there was an underground tunnel built to go there. When I go out from my office, I will reach the west gate of the Military Area Command and between that there is stream and bridge. I went through the tunnel and after about 7-8 minutes I reached just near the door of Tan Guansan's office. I didn't need to call him because I could go there and tell him that I heard about that [the Dalai Lama is leaving].   

**Q:**  What did Tan Guansan say when you said that?   

**A:**  At that time, Tan Guansan was not in his residence where he had his phone, but he was in a hall holding a military meeting because at that time the disturbance had already started. At that time, in Lhasa, there were only 3 regiments [Ch. tuan, Tib. མདའ་ཤོག] of PLA and he had called the regimental commanders and the political commissars and they were planning to hold a meeting. When I reported that, all the military officers were there.   

**Q:**  How many people were there in the meeting?   

**A:**  A little less than 20 people were there. There were the regimental commanders and the vice-regimental commanders [Ch. tuan zhang] and the political commissars and vice-political commissars, battalion leaders, rupön and gyagpön. Then Tan Guansan told me, "You must report whatever you know to the Zhongyang (national) Military Commission [Ch. jun wei]. If you report it, it will be clear and certain." At that time, the telephone from Tan Guansan's office was direct to the Zhongyang Military Commission and I heard them right away when I picked up the phone. Then I made the report about what happened.   

**Q:**  Did you personally make the report?   

**A:**  Yes. I did. They [zhongyang] said, "Is this reliable and certain [Ch. ke kao pa] [Tib. བློས་འཁེལ་པོ་རེད་པས།གཏན་གཏན་རེད་པས]. I said "It is certain." Then they told me to wait 10 minutes and stay on the phone, and we will give you the answer. Then just after 7 or 8 minutes, they said, "Let him go" [Ch. rang ta zou] [Tib. ཁོ་འགྲོ་ཆུགས། ཁོ་གཏོང་ཞོག]. At that time, in Lhasa, even the civil cadres were also organized as militias. They [zhongyang] said, "Make all the people who can make war like the soldiers and the militias build bunkers." So all the offices built bunkers and dug tunnels and got ready to make war. And they said "Be ready to make war. Be ready to make self-defense war but do not attack them" [Tib. དམག་འཐབ་རྒྱག་ཡག་གི་གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཨང་བསར་བྱེད]. [Ch. zuo hao zhan dou zhun bei] [Tib. རང་སྲུང་གི་དམག་རྒྱག་དགོས། ཕར་རྒོལ་མ་བྱེད; Ch. yao zuo zi wei zhan/ bu yao tu ji]. And they said "Send people to keep a close watch but do not move. Tomorrow we will send you the written order with 4 A" [Tib. ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མའི་འགྲོ་ཕྱོགས་གང་ཡིན་སྒྲུང་ཤོག། ལྟ་ཤོག། ལྟ་ཤོག་མ་གཏོགས་འགུལ་སྐྱོད་གཏན་ནས་མ་རྒྱག། སང་ཉིན་ཡིག་ཐོག་གི་བཀའ་ཨེ་བཞི་ཡོད་པ་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡོང] According to the Chinese custom, if they send telegram with 4 A , this means special top secret [Ch. te ji] [Tib. དམིགས་བསལ་གྱི་འབྲེལ་བ་དང་དམིགས་བསལ་གྱི་གསང་བ་ཆེ་བ].   

**Q:**  You mean from zhongyang?   

**A:**  Yes. This was said through the telephone and the Central Committee (Ch. zhongyang) was saying that on the phone.   

**Q:**  Did they get that telegram the next day?   

**A:**  Yes, they got it at around 7-8 o'clock, but I didn't see that. Later, Tan Guansan told me the contents of the order in brief. They said, "Let him go. Don't stop him" [Tib. ཁོ་གཏོང་ཤོག། མ་བཀག]"   

**Q:**  This was the Zhongyang's order, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was decided by Zhongyang. And probably there were some explanations in the secret telegram saying "The Tibetan kudrak are deceitful, if we go to catch him [the Dalai Lama], they will just kill him and they will blame us for the killing and will put the responsibility on us which will make it so that we won't know how to explain it in front of the people [Tib. བོད་ཀྱི་སྐུ་དྲག་གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ཚ་པོ་རེད།ང་ཚོས་ཟིན་གག་བྱས་ན། ཁོ་ཚོས་བསད་བཞག་གི་རེད། བསད་པའི་ཁག་དེ་ང་ཚོར་གཡོག་གི་རེད། མི་དམངས་ཀྱི་ཁྲོད་དུ་གསལ་བཤད་བྱེད་མ་ཤེས་པ་ཞིག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་རེད].   

**Q:**  This was the Zhongyang's thought, right?   

**A:**  Yes. This was the reason for letting him go. In the Military Area Command, there was the commander, vice-commander, political commissar, vice-political commissar and under them there were the chief of staff [Ch. can mou zhang] [tib jus 'don pa] who will become 4-5 places when the leaders of the regiment stand in line. At that time, the chief of staff was Fu Tingxiu who was a member of the Red Army's Long March and his title was senior colonel [Ch. da xiao]. When Tan Guansan held the military meeting, they sent the chief of staff Fu Tingxiu along with one gyashog of PLA which was called "reinforcements" [Ch. jia qiang lian [Tib. ཤུགས་སྣོན་རྒྱག་ཡག་གི་གྱཤོག] to go to the place where he [the Dalai Lama] was going and told him to watch him (the Dalai Lama).   

**Q:**  Did you send people to the other side of the river when he [Dalai Lama] was going to Lhoka and everywhere?   

**A:**  No, we didn't send people purposely there. There was an underground cannon regiment and probably they made a telephone call to the leader of the cannon regiment and told them to hide near the road where he is going and keep a close watch. I didn't know for sure. I am a strange person, so I thought of going to watch by myself. At that time, I was a gyagpön of the militia in the office and there was also a junior gyagpön in the office. And there was a lot of works in the outside society like making relations with the kudrak.   

**Q:**  Did the militia get the training for shooting guns?   

**A:**  All of us had guns and we got the little bit of training for shooting guns internally. If we don't know how to shoot, what is the use of having guns? [laughter] Then the rifle will become a stick. Then I said that I will go with the chief of staff to watch.   

**A:**  Yes. So I told him [Tan Guansan], "Shall I go to watch with the chief of the staff? As soon as he [Dalai Lama] went, I will return to the office." I was young and he [Tan Guansan] was in his sixties and he would treaty me very kindly and he was regarding me like a child and he said, "You kid! You are talking wantonly. Don't go" [Tib. ཕྲུ་གུ་ཁྱོད་རང་གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང་བཤད་ནི་མ་འགྲོ]" Then I told him, "Please let me go. Furthermore, there is an advantage because I can identify whether he is truly [the Dalai Lama]." Then he said "Go. It will take only 10 minutes and you have to come back to the office after 10 minutes because you are the gyagpön of the militia. Then he [Dalai Lama] went.   

**Q:**  And then?   

**A:**  He went via the south side of Jogpori [Tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི] and the east and south side of Norbulinga where many trees were planted. It was a sandy place [Tib. བྱེ་ཐང] and there were many trees. The Tibetans way of the planting threes was strange as they plant the trees which were so long and planted them so close to each other that the sheep and goats can't get through it. And in between the rows of the trees, there was like 2-3 meters [Ch. gong tri]. So he [the Dalai Lama] was going through that space which was sandy and also there were some pebbles.   

**Q:**  How did you know that he was the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  I will tell you. He was with the Khamba cavalry who were wearing skin chupas with the fleece on the inside, but the fleece of the [collar] was folded outside. They were carrying guns and long swords and he [Dalai Lama] was also wearing the same chupa. He went to the Ramagang ferry site where they crossed the river at the shallow part of the river and after about 20 people had passed, then he [Dalai Lama] was surrounded in the middle by the cavalry. His clothes looked the same as the Khambas and he was wearing a fox fur cap and a skin chupa with the fleece of the collar folded outside and he carried a long sword and a rifle with a stand. I didn't see whether he had a pistol or not.So his outside look was as same as the Khambas, but he was wearing sun glasses. As soon as I saw him I could identify him.   

**Q:**  How could you identify him right away? You mean from his look?   

**A:**  I am familiar with his look and the way he goes and especially the sun glasses. So I could identify him right away.   

**Q:**  Would the Dalai Lama wear sun glasses?   

**A:**  Yes, regularly when they held the picnics, he would wear sun glasses made from crystal rock [Tib. རྡོ་ཤེལ; Ch. shui jing] and I also know the shape (Tib. སོབཏ [བཟོ་ཏ]) of his body. He was surrounded by soldiers.   

**Q:**  Were they soldiers or Khambas?   

**A:**  They were Khamba cavalry.   

**Q:**  Weren't there Gusung soldiers?   

**A:**  I didn't know because all of them had dressed the same as the Khambas.   

**Q:**  Even the Gusung soldiers wouldn't wear their army uniform, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I had a pair of binoculars and on that night it seems like there was moonlight [unclear low voice] and before that as I told you, I went to him [Dalai Lama] many times for making the preparations at the Military Command Area. So I knew him [Dalai Lama]. Then I said that I am going back and I went back to the office. At that time, I was very tired because for several days, I could sleep only at 2-3 a.m. At that time, the junior gyagpön was near the door and there were about 40 militias and I told them to go there [unclear] and I stayed there [in the office] and told them as soon as you hear the gun shots, you must call me. The junior gyagpön said, "No problem" [Tib. སྣང་དག་མི་འདུག].   

**Q:**  This was on the night of the 17th, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It was right at 12 o'clock on the night of the 17th. At that time, I had a rifle called carbine made by the US which held 20 bullets. Then I slept right away and dreamt and saw in my dream that the Lhasa river was flowing like a flood which made a big noise and I was frightened and woke up. And then I heard the gun shots at the Potala and the Tsuglagang and the high buildings in Lhasa. And then I took my rifle and went out and I went to the gyagpön office [Ch. lian bu] which was underground and covered with sand and there was a one storied house with a steel roof imported from India and the roof was broken by the bullets and had became like a sieve.   

**Q:**  When the revolt took place for two days how many people were killed and wounded from the Chinese side?   

**A:**  There were not many killed and wounded.   

**Q:**  Was it like 50-100.   

**A:**  For only in Lhasa, there were more than 100. They (Tibetans) were shooting from everywhere. At that time, we didn't go out and stayed in the office to do self-defense. The biggest victory we got was at the Foreign Office.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  This is because at that time in Lhasa there was an office [Ch. ban gong shi] of the Foreign Ministry [Tib. ཕྱི་འབྲེལ; Ch. bu] which was located at the north on the outer circumambulation road around Lhasa (Tib. ལིངཀོར [གླིང་སྐོར]). This house used to belonged to a kudrak which they bought by paying a lot of dayan. The house was beautiful with a garden and they were staying there with about 30 cadres of the Foreign Office. So the rebels must have known that and they destroyed the wall which was built by pounded earth and made a gap [Tib. ཁ་ཤོ] where trucks could pass by and the people in the office thought that if they [rebels] entered in [into the office], the cannons will destroy all the cadres. Since they were militias, they had a phone connection with the Military Area Command and they even had the Militia's Headquarters [Tib. ཡུལ་དམག་གི་བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང]. So they called the Military Area Command who then sent two armored cars [Ch. zhuang jia che] which cannot be destroyed by gunshots and they drove to the gap of the wall. So they [the rebels] couldn't do anything.   

**Q:**  Did they kill all the people?   

**A:**  They didn't kill all, but probably they killed ten some rebel bandits who had come there. And not a single cadre inside the office was killed.   

**Q:**  At that time, how many Tibetans were wounded?   

**A:**  I don't know the number, but some of them might have been wounded. However, there were not many from the masses [Tib. མི་དམངས]. Most of them were those people [rebels]. On the morning of the 18th, I went to the middle circumambulation road in the Tsulagang where quite a lot of rebels were killed. And at the Teaching Grove (Tib. sunchö ra [གསུང་ཆོས་ར་བ]) which was located at the south side of the Tsuglagang, it was filled with corpses of the rebels. All of them had the rifles with stands and protective talisman.   

**Q:**  Did they move the corpses from other places and put them there?   

**A:**  No, they were killed right there and probably they threw the corpses in the river. Usually, Tibetans do the sky burial, but in the Lhoka area, they throw the corpses in the river and they would not bury them. They regard the sky burial as the best, but it is very pathetic [Tib. ཡ་ང་བ].   

**Q:**  I have seen that done in the place just above Sera.   

**A:**  I also went to see that. At that time, I was wearing the yellow (PLA) uniform and saw that the wings of the vultures had become red with blood. It was at the end of 1950 or the beginning of the 1951, when Tibet was yet to be liberated, I went to Labrang Tashikhyil [Tib. བླ་བྲང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁྱིལ] (in Qinghai proince) to investigate the Tibetan customs and gave the patron one load of dayan through a person I knew and watched all the places and then later I went to Sera as a representative during the democratic reforms.   

**Q:**  They would cut the flesh of the corpses into pieces, right?   

**A:**  I have also seen in Amdo where the vultures just smelled the corpse and didn't eat it. So finally, the sky burial person was in a desperate situation so cut the flesh and bones into pieces and threw them everywhere. It was really pathetic. What else do you have to ask?   

**Q:**  This has been wonderful and I made you to feel very tired.   

**A:**  Don't say that my friend.   

**Q:**  This is very useful. I will think about all this and come back in August when I go to Tibet and then I will meet you for a short time.   

**A:**  We two are close friends and these things are not related to the government documents. I told you what I know and what I really experienced without concealing anything.   

