# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0053.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Li Zuomin  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Li Zuomin  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 65  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Li Zuomin was the director [Ch. qu zhang] of the United Front Work Bureau [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར་བུ] in the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན, Ch. wei yuan Tib. ལྷན་ཁང]. He speaks fluent Lhasa dialect Tibetan and was the major Tibetan translator for the heads of the TWC. In this interview, he explains how he was selected to go as the interpreter to India with the Dalai Lama in 1956. He also describes the conflict between the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama over the Tibetan Military flag, about events in India, and how the people in India told the Dalai Lama to stay there. He provides detail on the revolt in Chamdo's Giamda, the abduction of the Dege Queen's son, and opposition to the PRC's reforms. He explains the handing over of the Kashag's secret code book to the Chinese, the U.S. support of Tibet, the difference between the speeches of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama, and efforts made for the Dalai Lama to return to Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0053_01/H_0053_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  To begin, please tell us about your trip to India with the Dalai Lama.   

**A:**  In 1956, I was with the Dalai Lama from the beginning to the end; from the time he left Lhasa for India until he returned to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What happened at that time? There was talk as to whether the Dalai Lama was to stay in India or to return. After a while, Zhou Enlai came and held discussions. Please tell us about this.   

**A:**  Then I will tell you about that first. In the beginning, as you know, Nehru met him and he said that there is the commemoration for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[hind. Buddha Jayanti] The 1956 celebration in India of the 2,500 anniversary of the death (nirvana) of the Buddha.">Buddha Jayanti</a> held by the world religious association and he invited the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama through our foreign ministry. Regarding whether they [Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama] should go or not, Zhongyang set their hands free [Tib. ལག་པ་གློད] and said that they were the ones who should make the decisions and we have no objections. In Lhasa, the Panchen Lama had already made the decision that he would go. As for the Dalai Lhama, there was the Local Tibetan Government's Kahag who would discuss this. According to the Tibetan system, there were the two assemblies: the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> (Full Assembly) and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu gyepa (Large Abbreviated Assembly). Probably, at that time, they held the tsondu gyendzom. It was unanimously approved in 1-2 hours that he should leave for India. As you know, the kalön were not allowed to attend this Assembly meetings. There were the 8 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a> who presided over the meeting and there were the representatives of the three great monasteries there. Altogether there were 30-40 people.It was approved very easily, saying that it would be good for him to go. This result was reported to the Central Committee saying the Dalai Lama would go. Zhongyang said it was good, and you [Dalai Lama] can leave. But preparation should be made since, at that time, the motorable roads were not as good as nowadays. It had been two years since the roads from Chengdu to Lhasa and Qinghai to Lhasa were made, but the road between Lhasa to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> was barely good enough for the vehicles to pass. At that time, Zhang Jingwu was in China, but he was sent back to Lhasa to prepare for this trip and to help with the accommodations, horses, and mules for the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Was Zhang Guohua there?   

**A:**  Zhang Guohua was in Beijing and probably he didn't come up. Fang Min was in Lhasa. The preparation was done in a short time. Just before he left, on November 19th, Zhang Jingwu gave a banquet in his honor. The participants were: the Dalai Lama, his mother, his two tutors, Ngabö, Surkhang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> [Tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] and the Talama Jawdang [Tib. ta bla ma 'cog steng]. There were several tables. The banquet was given at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> House, because it would be inconvenient for the Dalai Lama to go anywhere else. At the first table, the Dalai Lama sat in the middle. On the left was Zhang Jingwu, and on the right was Fang Ming. I was interpreting for them. They were talking while eating and Zhang Jingwu told the Dalai Lama, "This time, it is very important to go there [India]. In the other matters, you have your right to do or say anything; I have no opinion. But when you go to India, at some point you will meet Zhou Enlai who then will be touring India or Pakistan and he might have a talk with you." The Dalai Lama said, "Oh! Well, then I need a good interpreter." Zhang Jinwu said, "It is okay. Who do you want?" Dalai Lama answered, "Of course, if he [pointing at me] won't go, I do not trust anybody. He must go." [laughter] This is how we decided I would go as an interpreter. It was about 8 or 9 in the evening and I started preparations to get a photo for my passport. I called a journalist from the Xinhua News Agency and he took a photo. I had gotten an Indian visa through our [Tibet] Foreign Office called the Zhongyang Representative Bureau [Ch. dang dai ban gong shi] [Tib. སྐུ་ཚབ་ཕྱི་གཏོང་ལས་རོགས་དོན་གཅོད་ཁང]. They sent their cadres at 1 a.m. and then I got the passport from the Indian Consulate General office at Dekyi Lingka. I had to prepare the clothes because the Natöla [Tib. སྣ་སྟོད་ལ] pass was very high and cold and India was very hot. By the time I got everything prepared, it was daybreak and I had to depart. At that time, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama had to travel together. When we reached Shigatse, regardless of the historical conflicts existing between the two Lamas, the Panchen Lama had to do the traditional reception perfectly for the Dalai Lama. There wasn't any conflict. Then we reached <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and crossed the pass, and after that, the trouble started. There was a snowstorm on the top of the pass on the border between the PRC and the Kingdom of Sikkim, which was not a part of India although India was going through the motions of protecting them. Among the foreign countries, Sikkim was a kingdom. After coming through Yadong, at Tsogo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ], we were received by Mr. Pendar, the Political Officers of Sikkim with a unit of a hundred soldiers all in formation. When there was the snowstorm, the Indian soldiers were wearing short pants with socks, so they felt cold and saluted in a strange manner. [laughter] The next day we had to travel on horseback about ten kilometers on a road made of rocks before reaching Gangtok, where cars were waiting in line. As soon as we passed Natöla, at Tsogo, even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> stayed in tents with grass mattresses and canvas laid on the floor. The tent for the Dalai Lama was only slightly better. They brought Sikkim girls to serve us and they brought warm water in basins. While I was washing my face, The Bodyguard Regiment's Commander Phüntso Tashi [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས] came in and said, "Oh, there might be trouble." I said, "What happened?" He said, "Now, it is not good. A lot of trouble might start. All of them have arrived." I asked "Who?" And Phüntso Tashi mentioned the names of Gyalo Thondup, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and the Khenjung Lobsang Gyentsen.   

**Q:**  You mean <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right and Mr. Norbu, Taktse Rimpoche was there too. The others were the members of the Tibet Welfare Committee [Tib. dedön tsogpa [Tib. བོད་ཀྱི་བདེ་དོན་ཚོགས་པ] who I didn't know and who were doing a lot of work, though they were famous. I heard that about 20 members had come. On that day, these people surrounded the Dalai Lhama. Even my presence with Dalai Lhama didn't help, even though I was the interpreter brought by the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Did they stay around the Dalai Lama's tent?   

**A:**  They stayed near the Dalai Lama and made other people unable to approach the Dalai Lama. And they were telling the Dalai Lama whatever they wanted to. Some of the members of the Chinese Embassy in India had also come to receive the Dalai Lama at the top of the pass. As soon as we dismounted our horses, we took the cars to Gangtok. Strangely enough, the Dalai Lhama's car was carrying two flags. One was the Indian flag and one was the Tibetan military flag which is now said to be the flag of independent Tibet. Our embassy didn't accept this and lodged a protest against the hoisting of the Tibetan flag. After talking back and forth, finally we reached Gangtok. At this point, when the Panchen Lama saw this, he acted agreessively [Tib. ངར་པོ] saying, "I am not sitting in that car. I am walking on my feet or riding a horse." He was young and short-tempered, and he was in a desperate situation. They were saying that the Tibetan military flag was said to be the flag of the independent Tibet. It so happened that the Tibetan flag was removed from the Panchen Lama's car and instread the India's flag as well as China's flag was flown. However, the Dalai Lhama's car flew the Indian flag as well as the Tibetan military flag. [laughter] In this way we went through all kinds of trouble on our way to Delhi. In New Delhi I stayed in our embassy, but since I was the interpreter who was purposely called by the Dalai Lama, I had to go to work every day in his residence, which was a king's palace called Hinrober. Under the circumstances, my access to see him was made very difficult, even though I had the pass. The Indian soldiers would stop me, while the people from the Jekhentsisum side didn't have this problem. Of course, for Mister Gyalo and Norbu, being his brothers, it was a different story, and they stayed together all the time since that made sense. All this boils down to one point. They openly declared that the Dalai Lama's trip to Indian was a great opportunity and a sign to engage in Tibetan Independence activities, and the Dalai Lama should not go back [to Tibet] from now on. They told him to stay in India and lead the Tibetan Independence. My relationship with Dalai Lhama was built over quite some time. I enjoyed his cordial manner towards me, and I would go to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and the Potala to see him. At that time, I was a director [Ch. qu zhang] of the United Front Bureau [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར་བུ] in the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན Ch. wei yuan Tib. ལྷན་ཁང]. Whenever there was a very important matter, I would go and make an appointment with the Dalai Lama, and Zhang Jinwu always took me to meet him. At other times, I was sent alone to give him a message. The Bodyguard Regiment gave me a special pass and later, when the bodyguards knew me well, they did not bother to look at my permit and they would just salute to me and I would go in. At that time, in our meetings, he used to say, "Oh, it is very difficult and there are troubles." But he did not specify what his difficulties were. I used to tell him, "Tell me what your difficulty is. We have our embassy here, and we will help you to solve the problems if we can. We can also report to the Central Committee if necessary." But he never said anything openly, and I guessed what his difficulty meant in my mind as the situation continued. After the religious ceremonial meeting was held, sometime in late November or the beginning days of December, Zhou Enlai visited Pakistan, and stopped in Delhi before and after, meeting the Dalai Lama. These two men had several meetings. They talked twice or three times. At the first meeting, Zhou Enlai didn't say much and he just asked him if things were going well with him, and if he was facing any difficulties, he should tell us if there is anything we can help with. The Dalai Lama said,"Well, I am running into a little bit difficulties, and I am doing my best to solve them. Probably, there will not be much of a problem." At the second meeting, Zhou Enlai brought forth a big envelope containing Chairman Mao's hand-written letter which was written beautifully with a brush pen. There were several pages. Zhou Enlai told me to interpret this verbally and then translate it into Tibetan and offer it to him. At this point, the Dalai Lama took out a small notebook and pen and said there was no need of translation as he wrote down the contents that I (verbally) translated for him. Usually, he kept a small notebook with a thin pencil in his monkzs shawl. The principal content of this letter was, "We have decided to postpone the democratic land reforms in Tibet for 6 years." It further said, "Please be at ease and come back after completing your religious activities in India."   

**Q:**  Did the Dalai Lama request such a postponing before?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama had not requested such a postponing before. Why at that time did such a thing happen all of a sudden, I will tell you some reasons. On April 22, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up. After the meeting, all the representatives went back home. When Giamda [Tib. རྒྱ་མདའ] County in Chamdo held a county level meeting, the representatives explained the contents of the speeches given by Chen Yi, the Dalai Lama, and the Panchen Lama. They held meetings for two days, and on the third, the representatives found that all the representatives who came from the localities were not there as all had gone to the hills with their guns and began to have a revolt under the leadership of Chimi Gompo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ]. This [meeting] ended at end of August. At that time, I was sent to this area at the request of the Dege Queen named Jamyang Palmo [Tib. 'jam dbayngs dpal mo] to make a political settlement of this revolt. She was mostly concerned for the safety of her 15-year-old son, Oga, who was abducted in the revolt. She was the Vice Director [Ch. zhu ren Tib. གཞོན་པ] of the Chamdo Liberation Committee [Tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ Ch. wei yuan Tib. ཁང] and was fearful for her son's safety in case there should be military action by the People's Liberation Army. The Central Committee's policy was not aimed at using military action, but rather on winning over the rebels by political means. At first, there were only 20-30 rebels, but later more and more joined. Our presence there was to do political work. We did our best, but they never listened to us. Before that time, members of Alo Chöndze Party wrote a long petition and handed it over to the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, the Tibet Work Committee, and the Kashag, etc. The main contents of this petition was: 1 - to maintain the political system of the combination of religious and secular [Tib. ཆོས་སྲིད་ཟུང་འབྲེལ]; 2 - to resolutely stand against the land reforms, and if implementing reforms persisted, Tibetans would cause bloodshed. In October, the opening meeting of the establishment of Branch Buddhist Association [Tib. བོད་ནང་བསྟན་ཡན་ལག་ཚོགས་པ] of the PRC Buddhist Association [ Ch. zhong guo Tib. nang bsran tshogs [pa] had started under the director Bomi [Tib. འབྲོག་མི] Rimpoche. The former director was Lhündrub Thabkhe [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ཐབས་མཁས]. During the inauguration meeting, some of the representatives shouted and spoke loudly and called all bad names. The main theme of the language was that they were dead opposed to democratic reforms. Some declared that this issue should be like the proverb, "If the fire goes out the smoke disappears naturally," [Tib. མེ་རང་ཤི་དུ་བ་རང་ཡལ] which means if the land reforms are stopped, the revolt would disappear. This association was headed by Lhündrub Thapkhe.   

**Q:**  I heard that Ngabö and Gyalwa Karmapa [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཀར་མ་པ] went to end that [revolt] in Chamdo, is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, but this was after we went. At first, some of us cadres went there. Our leader was Ya Hanzhang, the one who wrote the biography of the Dalai Lama. Under him, there were 3 cadres - Zhang Zengwu Song Ziyuan and me. Altogether there were 4 in our team. We were supposed to leave Chamdo the next day and go back to Lhasa. That evening, Ngabö, Karmapa and Pomda Topgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] came. Ngabö brought a letter from the Dalai Lama which was in his handwriting and with his bugtham [Tib. སྦུག་དམ] seal that urged people in the area not to revolt against land reforms. In this there is a very strange story that people told us. However, there is no proof, and I do not know whether it is true or not. This story said that the basic reason that these people went to the hills with arms originated from Dalai Lhama. The story goes as follows: during the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region meeting in Lhasa held on April 22nd, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> representatives with lots of offerings including their local products like meat, skins and the sweet potatoes and also little bit of money for the Dalai Lama, went to see Lobsang Samten [the Dalai Lama's brother]. At that time, he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མཁན་པོ] The highest monk official in the traditional Tibetan government. He was the head of the monk official segment, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s household and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s private storeroom [tib. dzbug].">Jigyab khempo</a>, and through him, they sent a petition to Dalai Lama. The content of the petition was, "What shall we to do after returning to Chamdo, either rely on peaceful means or use violent means [Tib. ཞི་དྲག་གང་དགའ]." In short, it meant whether we should carry guns and fight against Chinese Communists or what shall we do. A man told me that he can prove that there is such story extant. Nonetheless, I didn't get that document. They were left there for about a week without any response. After one week, since they sent the petition, Lobsang Samten called them back and he told them, "As for your petition and gifts, I handed them to the Dalai Lama and I reported to him in detail. As for the instructions, he [the Dalai Lama] said, "You Khamba people, have a customary way of doing things, so do whatever you think suitable according to the situation [bab la bltas nas byed shog]." The implication is that Khamba people are a warrior type of people and should act in their customary way and that was the reason why the revolt took place in that area. At that time, I had many good friends among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and one of them came to me just before I left Lhasa and said, "I heard that you are going to Chamdo, is that true?" I said yes. "What are going for?" I said, "We were sent by the Tibet Work Committee to win over the rebels headed by the Chime Gonpo. He said, there is "No use in going, It is futile." I said, "Why" He continued saying "You know why? This matter has its deepest reason. Whoever would go there, it will be useless." He told me all about this [Khamba petition] in detail. That man was a high ranking officer of the Local Government, probably he was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> or theji, but he was originally from Kham. He said, "I am a Khamba and I know the Khamba's matters, so I advise you to not go. You will be tired if you go there." I am telling you today clearly that the conditions for land reforms at this time is not ripe, so persisting will only bring bad results. So that was the reason that the Central Committee postponed the land reforms. The Dalai Lama, on the other hand, did not ask for any postponement. Normally, he [Dalai Lama] would send a letter directly to Mao Zedong or Zhou Enlai. Sometimes, he would close the envelope and bring the letter down and people were not allowed to open the letter. But, at that time, there wasn't anything like this. Recently I heard that the Dalai Lama said in foreign countries that due to his request, Mao has postponed the land reform in Tibet. As far as I know, there was no request from the Dalai Lama. Now back to in India, the second meeting between the Dalai and Zhou was a one day's meeting. The whole day Zhou explained party policy regarding how to help the Tibetan nationality and how to develop Tibet, etc. There were only three of us. All was said in clear language. Zhou stayed in the Presidential House and the Dalai Lama was invited there. We had lunch together, After lunch, we three rest in separate rooms. We talked until 6:30 and at 7:00 and then we joined Nehru's party.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did the Dalai Lama say? What kind of attitude did he show?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama mainly told Zhou Enlai about the difficulty he was facing in India. He said, "Some Tibetan officials formally remained in India, and they told me lot of complaints and suggestions [Tib. བསམ་འཆར]." However he did not mention even a word about their demands that he stay in India. The most complaints he mentioned were about land reforms and especially there were complaining very strongly about the land reforms that took place in Kham. If such reform were carried out in Tibet, the result would probably be same as in Litang and Ba. He said, "As regards to the Chinese cadres in Tibet, I do not have particular complaints against them on their work and how they respected me. Everything looks okay in the past 7 or 8 months since the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up. The thing that makes me most worried is: If we do not handle the troubles that we are facing in Kham now properly, the influence will have great impact upon whole of Tibet. So this will create a greater problem for us. This time, the Central Committee postponed the land reform in Tibet for 6 years and this is very good indeed. So while we have this time, we ourselves have to be stable and do our work. It is not good to do things in a hurried manner [Tib. ཚ་གི་ཚི་གི]." These are the principal suggestions that he made. Zhou Enlai, after explaining general policy in Tibet, particular talked about the revolt in Kham with his own analysis. Regarding land reforms, many representatives including Chagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་སྟོབས་ལྡན] agreed at the meeting, but some people talked and acted two-faced [Tib. རྒྱབ་མདུན་མ་ཚུངས་པ]. They went through the motions of lifting their hands and agreeing, but launched the revolt after going back. Thus the revolts were started, it is true. After the revolts, our policy was to settle the matter politically, but it did not work. They killed lot of people and destroyed many offices including military regiments, and finally we were forced to use force to crush the revolts. Zhou Enlai continuously said that under our lenient policy we released them and sent them home with the exception of few culprits. If you (Dalai) still feel uneasy, it does not matter. After your return, you can organize an inspection team to send to the spot to do some surveying. You can do this by ordering the Kashag." Dalai Lama said "Yes, I will do that." In this meeting the Dalai did not talk about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>'s scheme for keeping him in foreign country. But Zhou Enlai mentioned this to him as follows: "I heard that your two brothers and others have a plan for detaining [Tib. བཀག་ཉར] you to remain here in India. Is this true?" The Dalai Lama, "Oh! there might be a such a danger [Tib. ཉེན་ཁ་ཡོང་མདོག་ཁ་པོ་ཡོད]." The Dalai Lama acted very tactfully [Tib. མཁས་པོ]. Zhou said "About this matter you must think well by yourself. You are a deity [Tib. ལྷ]. The deity only has his majestic look when he is in his temple. He would surely lose this when he departs from his temple. So your temple is in Lhasa not in India. If you want to stay on Indian soil, your future is going to be a money begging future. When you beg for money, there is a condition and that is you would have to condemn the Communist Party, making speeches in the newspaper and radio." And that is what Zhou Enlai said. He further said:" At first when you condemn [Tib. གཤེ་གཤེ] against us strongly, you will get more money. But the second and third times, when you lose your strength of condemning, you would get small sums of money, and finally, they will not have money to give you. I heard you have some gold and silver bullions brought from Tibet. When you finished eating up the money you beg from foreign countries along with this, there is a danger for you people to become beggars."   

**Q:**  What did the Dalai Lama say to this?   

**A:**  Finally, the Dalai Lama said, "It is good indeed that you gave me this instruction which is very clear. It is a sign of loving care for me and you gave me your innermost [Tib. སྙིང་གཏམ] instructions. I think this is very important. I will think about your instructions. I will see you if you have time. If you do not have time, I will contact you through the embassy."   

**Q:**  This is after Zhou came from Pakistan, right?   

**A:**  Yes, one day in Mumbai when Zhou Enlai was planning to go to Nepal, Zhou asked if the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama would like to accompany him. The Panchen said yes, but the Dalai Lama said, "Regarding this, I am going to consult with my entourage [Tib. ཆིབས་ཞབས]." In this regard there was some chaos [Tib. ཟིང]. After some time, this was blocked mainly by Gyalo Thondup and Shagabpa, etc. Later, an answer came saying, "We cannot bear the responsibility of the Dalai Lama's safety since Nepal has lot of mountains and the plane is not stable, so it is better if he did not go." Zhou Enlai, being a statesman, knew very well what was meant and said, "If this is the case, the Panchen Lama does not have to come." Just before the end of his visit, we came to Kolcutta and they submitted a petition to the Dalai Lama asking him to go to Kalimpong where there are several thousands or tens of thousands of Tibetans residing. At that time, Zhou Enlai was not there. but through Ambassador Pan Zeling, Zhongyang told the Dalai Lama not to go to Kalimpong because it is very dangerous and the situation there is not good. I heard that the Dalai Lama said, "Probably, this is difficult. But it would not be okay if I didn't go there. It might be good if the Pachen Lama, me and Li Zuomin go together." Anyway, he wanted to go and no one could stop him. At that time, the Dalai Lama was staying in the Grand Hotel. Strangely enough one day the Dalai Lama went to see the Panchen Lama in another hotel and asked him if he would like to go with him. The Panchen Lama said in a short decisive way [Tib. སྐད་ཆ་རྡུམ་རྡུམ],"No, I am not going. My suggestion is that you should not go to Kalimpong. If you think we will have trouble when we go back to Tibet via Kalimpong, we will tell Zhongyang that we are coming back through Kolcutta to Beijing by air. If you insist on going there, you can go, but I am not going and I am sending a telegram to Zhongyang asking them to send a plane to receive me". After the Dalai Lama's return decision was made, the people like Alo Chöndze submitted a petition to him again in Kolcutta with the content about independent and those things. I heard that the petition said, "Our biggest hope is for the Dalai Lama to stay in India. But, looking at the current situation, probably that is impossible. In the future, please try not to cut the connection between the Kashag and the people outside." Later, probably, they made a Tibetan telegram [code] book for making the connections.   

**Q:**  You mean the secret code book, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When he returned and reached Shigatse; at that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, who later died from a heart attack in Shigatse was there. At that time, the leaders of the Party Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region had come to receive the Dalai Lama. So Ragashag came to me and said that he has a very important thing to report him. When he met they [the people's delegates] gave the secret problem to stop the Dalai Lama from returning. It was very hard tp stop them. So in order to fool them, them we made this secret telegram code book, for otherwise they would block our return which would make things more difficult. So before we use it at all, I want to give it to you before we reach Lhasa. Probably, the telegram book was made in Kalimpong. Then we reached Gangtok.   

**Q:**  Before that, did Zhou Enlai, the kalöns and Gyalo Thondup have any connections?   

**A:**  Yes, after the Dalai Lama talked, the three kalöns had a meeting with Zhou Enlai and talked about brief points which were discussed between the Dalai Lama and Zhou Enlai. At one time, Gyalo Thondup and Taktse Rimpoche, the two brothers, were invited to our embassy and had a meeting with Zhou Enlai and Helong, etc; I was the interpreter.   

**Q:**  What did they say?   

**A:**  In the meeting, Gyalo Thondup was very aggressive [Tib. ངར་པོ] and especially Tagtse mentioned about Chinese Communist aggression and oppression in Tibet useing very harsh language. Zhou Enlai on the other hand, was very calm and gentle and did not get angry at all and explained the policies about nationalities and religion, and future plans and many other things. He went into great details and spoke about two hours. He told them "If you do not believe me, you yourself should go to Tibet and do some observation. After returning, if you like it, you can stay there; if do not like it, you are free to come out. I will tell my people there to bring you out safely. If you are suspicious of us, you don't have to go. But you people better not instigate and better not to cause trouble. It is better for you to watch us and see what we are doing for a few years or wait for ten years and see what communist are doing. You will know clearly after some time passes." After his educative suggestions, they changed a little, especially Gyalo Thondup, who said, "It is good if all are like this. As for our returning, we will think about it. I thank you, such a high ranking official, spendimg time and giving us these suggestions." So after that, Zhou Enlai left for somewhere and we had dinner together. Mainly Gyalo Thondup talked. Tagtse, at the beginning, just said some scolding things [Tib. གཤེ་གཤེ]. Gyalo Thondup knew fluent Chinese. So when I interpreted, I was careful and I told him, "My Tibetan is not good. Please make corrections if I make mistakes." He said, "Oh! You are correct." So after that, Zhou Enlai left for somewhere and the consulate of our embassy and I served the two brothers a delicious Chinese food. [laughter] When we reached Gangtok, due to heavy snowfall in Natöla, we stayed there in the king's palace for 15 days. At that time, we didn't have any work and the Dalai Lama told me that every morning I have to go to see him. There were about 5-6 of us; the consulate official from our embassy and his English interpreter, 2 movie photographers and I were staying in another hotel. Every day, after breakfast, I would sit in a car to go to see the Dalai Lama and I would tell him, "How is it going today?" He would always say," Now, it is hard." On the 3rd or the 4th day, I was kidding said and told him, "Rimpoche! I am not going to come here from tomorrow." He said, "Why aren't you coming? I said, "You have these two words to say. So what is the use for me to come?" He said, "No, you should come." Sometimes, I would stay for about 20-30 minutes. Sometimes, I would just stay there and chit chat on the landscape, weather and the general livelihood. One day, he told me that we are going to leave [return]. I said that will be fine and I will leave whenever you leave. At that time, saying the road was blocked with snow was just an excuse. The real reason why we stayed in Gangtok for 15 days was that they had a plan. They had they secretly sent few people to Tibet to make contact with their side's people there. The aim was to create a trouble, regardless of big or small [in Lhasa], so that should trouble happen while we are still in Gangtok, this would create a situation where they could say that we cannot bear the responsibility for the Dalai Lama to return. This was their final plan.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and those others send those people [to Lhasa]? Or was it the main Kashag?   

**A:**  No, they sent the people. At that time, Lhukhangwa was there, and as soon as reached there he got together with them. After those agents arrived in Lhasa, nothing could be done so it was calm in Lhasa during these 15 days. The Dalai Lama didn't send the people. So now the Dalai Lama decided to go home. Also, about the above mentioned information about the uprising in Eastern Tibet, I am not sure; there is no proof whether Lobsang Samten said that or the Dalai Lama said that.   

**Q:**  Yes, it is hard to know.   

**A:**  Lobsang Samten might have used the name of the Dalai Lama and said that. Now he is dead, so I can't prove it and a third person told me that, but who knows whether this was true or not. However, the third person took an oath insisting that he could prove it. Anyway, there were a lot of chaos and trouble in between.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that internally, the kalön told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> that the Dalai Lama has to stay in India, but after some time, one of the kalöns, I don't know which, but probably you know that, asked them [Shakabpa, etc.] what proof do you have to show that you have the foreign support? How did that happen?   

**A:**  Regarding this, first Zhou Enlai gave the advice to the Dalai Lama and second he called in the shapes. There were three shape and Phala Drönyerchemmo, etc.; there was a kind of nucleus leading group [Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད་ཚོགས་ཆུང] consisted of 5-6 people who held a secret meeting at which they discussed about Zhou Enlai's advice. They agreed that this is the crucial moment in which they must discuss this thoroughly and must make the decision about what to do and show an attitude. At that time, one suspected the other, and nobody trusted each other. Finally, they arrived at the conclusion that we should not keep on doing like this and we should rather do something and take several steps [Tib. རིམ་པ]. First, on one point, we should have solidarity about on going back (home), and secondly, how do we answer the (pro-staying) people including Shakabpa. They worked out a plan to call them to a meeting and asked them the following questions: "You people talked a lot about Tibetan Independence and you have something great to do. But, in India, what proof do you have about getting independence and what kind of support and confidence do you have about getting help froom foreign countries?" This is one point that they wanted to ask them. They further said that after getting independence, what concrete benefit can you can get? Tell us each in detail. Just saying "good" is not enough.   

**Q:**  Did they call <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>?   

**A:**  It was mainly <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> alone. They were doing their work tactfully, they might have thought that since Gyalo Thondup is the brother of the Dalai Lama, it might be inconvenient to do that. At that time, Shakabpa was the one who told the kalön (shapes) that it will be good to get Tibetan independence. At the meeting, Shakabpa became very embarrassed and he didn't have any answer to give. After that, they [the kalön] told Shakabpa, "If this is the case, you do your own work and we want to go home and from now on, do not disturb and destroy our work."   

**Q:**  Was that in November or December?   

**A:**  This happened either at the end of December in 1956 or in January of 1957.   

**Q:**  Our [US] government sent a CIA person with Tagtse Rimpoche. Probably, it was not confirmed and I didn't get the document yet, though I asked for it.   

**A:**  Do you mean the CIA agent?   

**Q:**  Yes, at that time, he was in India. Later, he took 6-7 people of Andrutshang [for training] in 1957.   

**A:**  Before the Kashag's shape had the meeting with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, one day Ngabö had called Shakabpa and they had a meeting. At that time, Shakabpa thought the important man among the Kashag members was Ngabö. As for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, he regarded him as a honest man [Tib. བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག] who sides whereever the wind blows and he thought there would be no problem with Surkhang. So he went to see Ngabö. Shakabpa told Ngabö how good it is to gain independence for Tibet and he hoped to get support from Ngabö. They had a special relationship as they were colleagues when both of them were tsipön. Ngabö said, "It is good if there is really something coming out for Tibet. But it is useless to just say it is good. You must tell me one by one what are the guarantees for getting independence and depending on what. Also tell me after each in detail what would Tibet get from becoming independence. If you don't have any clear proof, I will not listen to you." So Shakabpa didn't have anything to say.   

**Q:**  What do you think about this? Gyalo Thondup was staying in India all the time and he was the one who made the connections with the US CIA. Though I don't have a document, a few people working in our government said, "We thought that Gyalo Thondup was the representative of the Dalai Lama in India." I didn't believe this. Did you know about this? Is this possible?   

**A:**  It was said that Gyalo Thondup was the CIA's man. Whether he is the CIA's man or not, we know that he had the relation with the CIA and he was working for the CIA. We did not think from early times that he was send to India as a representative of the Dalai Lama and there isn't anything to prove that. Gyalo Thondup, after coming to Tibet in 1952, instigated some troubles [Tib. ཕུ་དཀྲུག་མདའ་དཀྲུག] and he snuck out from Lhasa in Febuary or March of 1952. He had told his mother and his sister that he was going to Jora [Tib. སྦྱོར་ར] Estate, but in fact he snuck through Gyatsa [Tib. རྒྱ་ཚ] and Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང] into India. This made Yapshi family members very embarrassed and they said that he sold us out and they feared that the Chinese would suspect them. Gyalo's sister and her husband Phuntso Tashi came to see Chinese representatives and explain about it and they said none of us knew that he was going. He just send a message that he is going to the estate, so please, forgive us and do not suspect us. Phüntso Tashi came once and Tsering Drölma [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ] came once to say that. His mother didn't meddle into much. They told this several time to the leaders. The leaders told them: "He is doing his thing and you are doing yours. Please don't worry. We never thought of shifting his responsibility onto you."   

**Q:**  It is hard to know this history. The CIA officers won't tell liez. When I asked them,"With whom did you have connections in Tibet?" They knew only two names (people): Gyalo Thondup and Phala. They didn't know Surkhang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and Liushar. So I think that the US government thought that all of their works under orders from the (Tibetan) government. So it was to cheat both sides. They used the name of the Dalai Lama and asked for support. I think probably, such things happened.   

**A:**  Probably, it happened like this. You are an expert. You know better than we do about relationship between the CIA and Tibet. And I told you everything I know in my heart because I thought you are doing things honestly. There were strange things in this history. British and Russians took keen interest in Tibet and kind of grabbed it. After World War II, American was involved in Tibetan affairs, especially during the revolts in Tibet. The Americans supported weapons and it was clear that they had sent planes. One person told me, this though I do not have any documents and the person is dead now. In 1950, when the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> before signing the 17-Point Agreement, the American CIA sent a person. Did you know that?   

**Q:**  No, they sent a message. Probably, they didn't sent a person.   

**A:**  They didn't send a real person. The CIA man stayed in Kalimpong and through a Tibetan to Pomda Yanpel [Tib. spom mda; ཡར་འཕེལ] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> who was then the guardian or tshondzin [Tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> family saying that the message was from an American. The message said, "You are the tshondzin of Yabshi so you should made an effort [Tib. ཤུགས་རྒྱག] through Yabshi. If you are able to persuade the Dalai Lama to stay to India, we will meet the following conditions: 1. You will be the first Prime Minister [Ch. zong li] of Tibetan Independence. I swear by the three jewels that they said that. 2. Probably, at that time, Pomda had froze all the money in the American Banks and his money was also included in this and it amounted to about $300-400,0000.[So the message said] All of his money and his own property in the United States will be returned. 3. Your children and your relatives' children will have support from the governmnet for studying in the U.S.A. 4. You and your family members will have a three month holiday in the U.S.A every year and all of the expenses we will spent by the US government." He received this message with these 4 points. But, Pomda didn't accept this at all, and answered, "Thank you, you gave me very rich [Tib. རྫིག་པོ] and large-scale [Tib. རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ] conditions, but I cannot accomplish this duty and I am not going to do it."   

**Q:**  Probably, it was like this. I have the copy of the letter sent by the US government to the Dalai Lama saying that we will do this and that. The idea of the US government was to oppose the 17-Point Agreement and for the Dalai Lama to come to India. In the beginning, they thought of inviting the Dalai Lama to America. Later, it was to invite to another Buddhist countries like Sri Lanka. They had a lot of trouble and difficulties in sending the message [secretely] to the Dalai Lama. When they send it through people, they were not sure whether it will reach there or not. Therefore, it is possible they had the taken the method of doing it through Pomda.   

**A:**  At that time, they made an effort to iniduce the Dalai Lama to stay in India, but he came back. The Dalai Lama's return was supported by three factors: 1. Zhou Enlai's advice, 2. Nothing happened in Tibet, 3. Probably, Nehru told the Dalai Lama that he should go back. If you stay, we and you also would have a hard time. Of course Nehru and Zhou Enlai had talks on this. Since then, probably, the Dalai Lama had a very deep faith towards Mahadma Gandhi's conduct.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Indian Government in the 1950s, as you know, from one side, Nehru said that Tibet is a part of China. But some say that they supported Gyalo Thondup on sly.   

**A:**  Yes, they did that a lot. Even when we were there, it was like that. For example, when we were touring in India in the big and small cities and they would hold a welcoming meeting. It was very strange. The Dalai Lama talked about the relationship between India and Tibet in his speech and there was not a word about the PRC. Whereas the Panchen Lama talked from the beginning to the end on the historical relationship between the PRC and India or the relationship between the PRC's Tibet with India in areas of religion and culture. In some places, some of the Indian officials in their speeches treated the Dalai Lama as a head of an independent state. Since the officials from our embassy were there, they said that we are disappointed about this. [laughter] When Zhou Enlai and Nehru held their talk, he talked about this. In 1954, Nehru had said that I have never heard of any country who accepted that Tibet is independent. So Zhou Enlai told Nehru,"You said clearly that Tibet is a part of PRC, but some of your local officials did something different than what you said." Nehru answered it in a very strange way, "Some of our officials are very naive and do not know any politics." Have you ever heard this?   

**Q:**  No.   

**A:**  When they said that the Dalai Lama is going to Kalimpong and when Zhou Enlai said, "I don't have any other suggestion, can you guarantee the Dalai Lama's safety? " Nehru said, "No. I cannot take this responsibility because I know that Kalimpong is the international spy center." [laughter]   

**Q:**  That's right. At that time, Kalimpong was very strange.   

**A:**  Yes, there were some strange people staying there pretending to be on tour.   

**Q:**  This is what they verbally said. But was there any talk about the Indian Intelligence Office secretly supporting Gyalo Thondup?   

**A:**  There was, but we didn't prove it although we knew very clearly that they were doing. We could see that very clearly from their conduct.   

**Q:**  Do you think Nehru knew it or not?   

**Q:**  Oh! I don't think that Nehru didn't know that. [laughter] Nehru said that his subordinates do not know politics, but he was too clever on politics. [laughter]. I am just kidding and I will tell you a strange thing. In the past, I almost know all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> in Tibet. Around 1957, one day in Lhasa when we were enjoying a picnic, Surkhang came to me and asked, "Do you know what the Tibetan kudrak's politics is?" I said, "I am sorry. I don't know this because I am not a kudrak." Surkhang said, "Then I'll tell you. Among the Tibetan kudrak, regarding the meaning of politics, whoever is more deceptive and dishonest [Tib. གཡོ་ཟོལ] he is the best politician." [laughter] Nehru must have been one of those who were expert on politics.   

**Q:**  Among the three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> and Phala did they have different opinions regarding Dalai Lama's returning?   

**A:**  Yes, they had. And they knew what other were thinking, but they were all being cautious toward each other and no one said things openly. They were only watching one another.   

**Q:**  Who made an effort to get the Dalai Lama to return?   

**A:**  Of course Ngabö was the number one man to push hard for the Dalai Lama's returning, though he had a hard time because he was alone, especially in the beginning. After Zhou Enlai's diplomatic approach, Ngabö first told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> who was kind of honest and was staying there not knowing what to do. He was not insisting to be on the other side [of staying in exile]. The second person he told Jawdang Talama Rong Namse [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང་ཏ་བླ་མ་རོང་རྣམ་སྲས] who was a monk,and a kind of honest and stable person. In the past, I have contacted him many times. Surkhang was cunning and he was acting [not saying what he thought]. And then he told Bumthang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང]. Ngabö at first tried to find out what the other <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> were thinking and they said that at the meeting. Some people became very clear about wanting to return to Tibet. Zhou Enlai's instructions gave Ngabö some strength and Ngabö was also the main person in the nucleus leading group which was appointed by the Dalai Lama. Before they left Lhasa, Ngabö insisted that he would not go and he would stay and take care of affairs in the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region because he was the General Secretary. In the beginning, the Dalai Lama might have agreed, but just before leaving Lhasa, the Dalai Lama told Ngabö that he had to go with him to India and sought permission from Zhang Jingwu. Zhang Jingwu told Ngabö that you should go because the Dalai lama is requesting this and it would not be okay according to the old system and also according to the current work if you don't go. That's how it was decided. Ngabö knew that it was going to be hard for him in India, so he insisted on not going.   

