# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0022.01   
##  : Rinchen Tengye [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་བསྟན་རྒྱས]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Rinchen Tengye [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་བསྟན་རྒྱས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1921  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Rinchen Tengye [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་བསྟན་རྒྱས] was a monk in Drepung's Deyang Tratsang. In this interview, he details his experiences as a monk and how he became a monk musician because he couldn't manage the pechawa study program. He also discusses how he did the position of chabril and how he was part of the dobdo's toptsang organization for the chogyag competition. Additionally, he talks about how he did trade to supplement his monastic income and what happened to him after the uprising in 1959.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0022_01/M_0022_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell me how old were you when you first became a monk? And how old are you now?   

**A:**  At age 6. Now I'm 70. (Born in 1921).   

**Q:**  Where were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in Phembo Langthang [Tib. འཕན་པོ་གླང་ཐང].   

**Q:**  How did you become a monk? Did your parents take you to the monastery?   

**A:**  My mother's brother told my mother that I should become a monk and he took me to the monastery.   

**Q:**  Were there other gidru in your shag at this time?   

**A:**  There were 4 in our shag. Just before I got separated from my gegen, they kept three gidru who were all brothers of my mother, from the same parents.   

**Q:**  Who was your lord [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]?   

**A:**  My mother was a shungyuba.   

**Q:**  You were in Deyang Tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Which khamtsen?   

**Q:**  Hamdong Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Were your gegens pechawa or lagyüba?   

**A:**  They were all geshe lharamba, the best ones. They were good in pecha.   

**Q:**  When you became a monk did you know how to read letters?   

**A:**  No. I learned reading the alphabet in my shag after I became a monk.   

**Q:**  Who taught you?   

**A:**  My gegen taught me to read.   

**Q:**  For how many years did you learn the letters and the basic prayers [Tib. ཁ་འདོན]?   

**A:**  I studied pecha until I was 17 years old. Then at age 18, I was to start studying tsenyi. But I didn't understand it well so I learned to play the dung gyaling, which was done by the monks who didn't know pecha well.   

**Q:**  Is playing gyaling regarded as shöndre?   

**A:**  It is a shöndre for those young monks who do not study pecha. The khembo would ask "Do you want to study trumpet or gyaling." You had your choice and I choose the gyaling.   

**Q:**  Did you start playing the gyaling at age 18?   

**A:**  Yes. I continued playing gyaling for 12 years (from age 18 or from 1939). Then after this I served as the gyaling gegen for 12 more years. I learned the gyaling completely, that's why I can still play it.   

**Q:**  How did you subsist when you were young?   

**A:**  When I stayed with my gegen, from home, they sent a little bit of tsampa.   

**Q:**  Was your household rich?   

**A:**  My household wasn't rich, but my gegen's household was well off and they sent tsamba. There was also 6 khe of grain salary (Tib. དྲུཕོག [འབྲུ་ཕོགས]) from the tratsang. From the jiso, we got 2 junbo of grain, which had about 15 dre in one junbo. Like this we managed to subsist.   

**Q:**  What was your study program for learning the gyaling?   

**A:**  When the gegen taught us the gyaling, he taught us chapter by chapter [Tib. ལེའུ]. Then, in between, there was one called banda [Tib. བར་བརྡ] and gobjang [Tib. འགོ་བྱང] which he taught us in between the chapters. There were 4 or 7 different chapters. These are what you play at the start and in between. In Deyang there are 14 different fingerings for the gyaling. And there are also some fingerings that came from outside. When you become good at the gyaling you can tell what fingering the another person is doing just from listening to him playing.   

**Q:**  Are there any notes for playing the gyaling?   

**A:**  No, not for the gyaling. For the trumpet there is a note called thungtsig [Tib. དུང་ཚིག] but not for gyaling.   

**Q:**  When you started learning the gyaling, would the khembo tell you to learn the gyaling or the trumpet?   

**Q:**  It was our choice what to learn. The khembo would not tell us to learn this and that. The term to graduate learning the gyaling was 12 years. After 12 years when the old ones graduate, we went to the khembo and asked him to install a new class of gyaling players. Each year when we had to go take the test, the khembo would asked us whether we wanted to learn the gyaling or the trumpet. Then we would tell him whatever we wanted to learn. Then we would carry our bedding, tsampa, pots and fuel, and for 3 months we stayed under the big boulder and learned. There were 2 boulders. The trumpet players stayed by the west one and the gyaling players stayed by the eastern one.   

**Q:**  Did you have tents?   

**A:**  No, we slept under the boulders.   

**Q:**  For how many days did you stay there?   

**A:**  We stayed there for 3 months.   

**Q:**  Was it in the summer?   

**A:**  We did this in spring when the days are the longest. If we studied real hard for these three months we could learn.   

**Q:**  I heard that there were many ways of learning, like keeping a thorn under your armpit?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. At first when we learned the fingerings, we used a wooden stick with holes made on it like those on a gyaling. And then we practiced the fingerings while humming the tunes with our elbows outstretched. We had to look directly in front, neither up or down. I heard that they used to put a small bag of tsamba on [the] front of the stick to build up strength, but we didn't have to do this. If you learned like this, the ones who hummed the tunes well would be able to learn the gyaling well and play it with a pleasant sound.   

**Q:**  How many students were there with you in your gyaling class?   

**A:**  About 30 or so. The same number in the trumpet class. Usually when you are a musician, the tratsang won't ask you to do any other work except occasionally.   

**Q:**  Would you put a thorn under your armpit?   

**A:**  In our tratsang we didn't put thorns under our armpits. I heard of this, but we didn't do this. Maybe Drepung Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] was doing that.   

**Q:**  What happened after your 3 month training period?   

**A:**  Then you had to take a test before the khembo and the lene of the tratsang. There were two gyaling gegen. The gegen would tell the lene that we were doing this fingering or that fingering and we would have to play it. In 1 year there are 12 months, so we took off one boot strap and by lottery we picked which two monks would be on duty each month. Two were needed every month. The two who were picked would be on duty. This month you are on and have to go play in the tsog or wherever. If you get the 5th or 10th lunar month, there is a lot of work, so you often have to hire players to fill in for you in one place while you are at another place.   

**Q:**  Do you have many gyaling instruments?   

**A:**  In the past, we had many gyaling instruments. There were about 14-15 pairs of the gyaling for practicing and there were many better quality gyaling. Now, among the present gyaling, one was bought from the market by Rinchen Könchog [Tib. རིན་ཆེན་དཀོན་ཅོག] and one was fixed up by me. We only have two. We made a new set of copper large trumpets which cost 3000 ¥.   

**Q:**  Were there extra shares of phog when you were a musician?   

**A:**  If you go outside the monastery, then you get some amount of fee [Tib. kuyön]. This is left with the gyaling "club" (Tib. ཇིཔ [སྤྱི་པ]) and this is called jisog [Tib. སྤྱི་གསོག] and is used for giving gye, etc. when you graduate. The outside people would give us food and some money and they would say it was for buying bread. In the tratsang, when we played the gyaling in the assembly hall, we got nothing because this is the place where you get your food.   

**Q:**  Who invites you from outside of the monastery.   

**A:**  There were many like Thamba Simkhang [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་ཁང], Tenmey Simkhang [Tib. བསྟན་མའི་གཟིམ་ཁང], and Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང], and we had to go for 7 days each month to Norbulinga. Actually, our term is for 12 years, but if there are a lot of misc. young monks in the tratsang, after 10 years we would ask the khembo to let us graduate, which is called thöngyag [Tib. ཐོན་རྒྱག] and start a new group. We would make a list of the dabedobe (youngsters) and show this to the khembo and say please give us some new ones. Rinchen Könchog was a gyaling player with us. After he did his test, they didn't send him to play because he left it.   

**Q:**  Did you give the tonggo to become a drerampa in Deyang?   

**A:**  Yes. My gegen gave the tonggo and then I didn't have to do shöndre, and then you become a lagyüba and I had to learn the large trumpet and the gyaling.   

**Q:**  Do you call this part of the shamtabtre?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you do any other work in the tratsang?   

**A:**  After I took the gyaling test, when I became little bit more senior, I was made to do the tratsang's chabril job. Sometimes there were monks who asked for the chabril job and sometimes when no one asked, it was ordered from above. Mine was ordered from above.   

**Q:**  Did the tsondu appoint you?   

**Q:**  I was selected from among 6 candidates by the deity Thamba Shanggo [Tib. དན་འབག་ཞང་གོ], who was the protector deity of Deyang. They would submit a list of candidates for approval and the oracle would put a seal on it when he was in trance. It was usually a three year term, but I didn't stay the full years.   

**Q:**  You became the chabril while you were the gyaling gegen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you became the chabril, how old were you?   

**A:**  About 28, 29, 30 years of age.   

**Q:**  You became the chabril while you were the gyaling gegen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What does the chabril do?   

**A:**  His main work is overseeing serving the traja. He is also the servant of gegö and khembo. It has a middle status [Tib. thön] of lene. The chabril is also the one responsible for beating the gong at the tsog and chöra. The chabril has an extra share of gye in the tratsang.   

**Q:**  You also beat the gong to call for the traja, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and I got an extra share of the gye and phog from the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Was there an extra share of the grain salary?   

**A:**  Not a complete extra share, but we got 2 (Tib. ཇུནབོ [བཅུ་འབོ]) more (1 khe and 7 dre).   

**Q:**  If there was a traja today, what work would you do as chabril, starting from the morning?   

**A:**  First I had to beat the gong just after the mangja to call the monks to the shogchö. Then I had to beat the gong again to call the monks to the traja and then oversee serving the 4 teas.   

**Q:**  Did you have any work to do with making the tea?   

**A:**  No. That was the responsibility of the jama and the cooks.   

**Q:**  During the traja, would the chabril stand in the dukhang?   

**A:**  During the 4 teas in traja, the chabril had to stand in the dukhang and when the tea was going to be served, he would go in [in the rungkhang]. There is also a call made by young monks called thikey [Tib. ཐི་སྐད]. The young monks had to do this by turns, as a tax in the chöra regularly. Then, when the umdze and gegö stood up in chöra and put on their dagam cloaks, I had to beat the gong again. Then in the evening there was the kurim prayer session and again I had to beat the gong to call the monks to attend the session. Then my work was done.   

**Q:**  Was the chabril responsible to see to which row they have to serve the thukpa and tea?   

**A:**  The chabril also had to see that the senior monks at the head of the rows got tea with the grease [Tib. ཤག] and he had to count how many senior monks were in each row and how many chabdra pots he needed to send for each row and he would them tell the jama about this. The jama would then send the tea or thukpa. I had to know how many servers to send in each row to finish it off. [Note: The grease was determined by how the tea was ladled from the cauldron in the kitchen. At first the grease was on the top and this was ladled into the chabdra and served to the senior monks first.]   

**Q:**  When you were the chabril do you have to give a Tsogdam?   

**A:**  No. That was only done by the gegö.   

**Q:**  Did you have the right to beat the monks?   

**A:**  I was not allowed to beat the monks in the dukhang. That was the prerogative of the gegö. And I also was not allowed to beat the monks in the rungkhang. This was the right of the jama. My right was only in the space between the rungkhang and dukhang, but I didn't need to beat the monks much because Deyang didn't do much pushing like was the case in Gomang. Deyang was a small tratsang, so there were none of those disgusting behaviors.   

**Q:**  You were in the dobdo's tobtsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And you Deyang did a competition with Ngagpa [Tib. སྔགས་པ] College where the main item was the chogyag, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I joined the chogyag at age 18. I can't blame my gegen because he would have been glad if I had learned pecha. But I changed my mind and I couldn't learn the pecha. So after I was 17 years old, then I became a dobdo.   

**Q:**  Didn't your gegen scold you?   

**A:**  I stayed separate from my gegen. Rinchen Könchog and I were the same. I stayed in the tobtsang. I did the chogyag when I was 24 [1945] and Rinchen Könchog was 27 years of age. So I was in the tobtsang for 7 years and did the chogyag against Sera Ngagpa.   

**Q:**  You won the chogyag, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who was your leader [Tib. གེངོ]?   

**A:**  Our first gengo was Shang Atru [Tib. zhang ?]. Then we didn't get along well so we got a new gengo nicknamed Uncle Marmot (Tib. ཥང་ཆིབི [ཞང་འཕྱི་ཕི]). There were, however, other older dobdo who helped us. I think there was only 2 years between the Gomang's chogyag and ours. How old are you now? I am 70. It must have been in 1945-46 when we did the chogyag. Did Gomang do the chogyag before you did it? It was about 2 years before us when they did it in Lemthang [Tib. ?]. After that you started a new tobtsang, right? Yes. I heard that the tobtsang after you, wasn't able to do the chogyag competition. A new tobtsang was started but they never did the chogyag. Before that, Gomang and Sera Mey went to compete in Phembo Degong [Tib. འཕན་པོ་སྡེ་གོང྄], but the lene stopped them. Rinchen Könchog's tobtsang, where he was the gengo, did the Lhagye Chogyag where there was no winner or loser because Ngagpa didn't dare to do the chogyag. Did they set up a tobtsang after this? Yes. One was started. But it wasn't able to compete as the revolt took place. After how many years did the lene stop the chogyag between the Gomang? I think it was just before the revolt. [He is wrong it was earlier]. When did Loseling and Sera Jey do the chogyag? Did they do it after you did? They did it before us at the place called Bontö [Tib. འབྲོམ་སྟོད]. And probably Gomang and Sera Mey did the Lemthang chogyag. After that, Loseling did the chogyag and later we got their tent. I had kind of a suspicion [Tib. རྣམ་རྟོག] because Loseling lost. Were there any chogyag after yours? No. Was the Gomang chogyag stopped because Sera Mey wouldn't come or was it stopped by the lene? It was stopped by the lene. I think the phodrang depa and some others went to inform them. Did the shengo go? No. Did the laji go? I'm not sure. What was the reason for Deyang and Ngagpa not competing? Was it caused by the lene? Ngagpa didn't dare to compete. The leader of the Ngagpa didn't tell them not to compete, right? Yes. They didn't dare to compete because Sera Ngagpa was almost entirely dobdo. Usually they looked down on Deyang like a food ready to eat [easy to defeat]. But when we did the chogyag, they lost. After this, they were afraid to lose again if they weren't careful. So they told us they couldn't compete right now, but [to] wait a few years. We said no, and we said that we were going to do the Lhagye Chogyag so we did the Lhagye Chogyag. We played all of the 12 male games [Tib. ཕོ་རྩལ་སྣེ་ཁ་བཅུ་གཉིས] though we lost on the first item. I heard that they would not listen to it even though they had signed the agreement and there was a guarantor. There was no fighting when you did the chogyag, right? In our chogyag, we didn't have trouble with fights except for when a small kid hit us with a stone. After that, we competitors left by coracles to Dechen [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན]. Did you do any jobs after doing the chabril? Just before the revolt, I was supposed to go to Tö to the monastery called Tashi Chömpel [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཆོས་འཕེལ] in Tingkye [Tib. གཏིང་སྐྱེས]. There were three of us going [4 including himself], one as khembo, myself as chandzö and 2 servants approved by the deity Thamba Shanggo. The servants had gone ahead of us, but then the revolt took place before we left. One of them ran away to India and the other died in prison. Was the khembo to be the khembo of that monastery? The khembo was sent from among the tsenyi geshe. Was the monastery in Tö a big one? Yes. There was a monastery and nunnery there. Was this a shamtabtre or one's wish. Not my own wish. It was the deity again who selected me and the khembo. Were you in the Deyang tsondu? No. I didn't do the gegö. I did the chatsül so I didn't have to do gegö. My reading wasn't good, so if I became a gegö, I would have to read the gyabtho written in umey and I would have trouble reading it, so I did the chatsül to avoid it. Were you with your gegen when you did this? No. We had already been separated. What would you have to do if you become a chatsül? Did you have to give a tonggo? Yes, to do chatsül you had to serve 3 teas and 1 thukpa having the thickness of yogurt, and give whatever amount of gye. If one is capable, chatsül was a step on the road to being shengo. I wouldn't be able to do that because I didn't have the umey reading skills, though I could read uchen well. So I swear by the Buddha's Statue in the Jokhang that I didn't have a thought of becoming a shengo. But I could read uchen well. Did you have to do the nyertsang before becoming shengo? I didn't get the turn for doing the nyertsang. After you do the nyertsang, then you will become the candidate for the shengo position. Was the nyertsang term three years? It probably was. After you separated from your gegen, how did you subsist? I joined the shag with that sick guy in the next room. I did a little bit of trade and their families in Phembo sent some tsamba. We also got the grain salary. So there was no worry of livelihood in those days. What about your trade? I carried things on my back when I went to Tsöna. I went to Kalimpong 3 times. When I separated at age 18, I immediately went to Kalimpong on trade business. Where did you get your capital from? I borrowed it from the loan lenders. It was an interest loan with another monk acting as a guarantor. I went to Kalimpong to buy a load of tobacco and carried it back on my back. What did you take to Kalimpong? I took along with me a little less than one khe of tsamba. I had a relative in Tölung and I went to do the harvest with him. But I didn't know how to harvest well so I said I wasn't staying there since I couldn't do it. So my relative gave me a little less than a khe of tsamba and I returned to the monastery. I borrowed 6 dotse, which was in coins of three sang and ten sang, and I wrapped them in a woolen baby sock and hid them in the middle of my tsamba. I didn't have enough clothes to wear. Did you have a partner on the trip? On the trip to Kalimpong I had one. When coming back I was alone. I didn't have [proper] boots to wear. It is like recounting the poor people's suffering. I wore a pair of boots patched with a leather sole. I left on the 5th day of the 8th lunar month. At the Gampala mountain pass, my boots became worn out, so from then on I walked barefooted to Kalimpong. In the morning when I left I felt some pain in my feet, but after a while it became kind of numb. But when I reached the lodging inn I felt a burning sensation in my feet. [Trindor-- [not on the tape] when I was a kid most people went barefoot during summer and had hard soles on their feet. It hurt for a while but this soon disappeared.]   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  I am 70. It must have been in 1945-46 when we did the chogyag.   

**Q:**  Did Gomang do the chogyag before you did it?   

**A:**  It was about 2 years before us when they did it in Lemthang [Tib. ?].   

**Q:**  After that you started a new tobtsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard that the tobtsang after you, wasn't able to do the chogyag competition.   

**A:**  A new tobtsang was started but they never did the chogyag. Before that, Gomang and Sera Mey went to compete in Phembo Degong [Tib. འཕན་པོ་སྡེ་གོང྄], but the lene stopped them.   

**Q:**  Rinchen Könchog's tobtsang, where he was the gengo, did the Lhagye Chogyag where there was no winner or loser because Ngagpa didn't dare to do the chogyag. Did they set up a tobtsang after this?   

**A:**  Yes. One was started. But it wasn't able to compete as the revolt took place.   

**Q:**  After how many years did the lene stop the chogyag between the Gomang?   

**A:**  I think it was just before the revolt. [He is wrong it was earlier].   

**A:**  When did Loseling and Sera Jey do the chogyag? Did they do it after you did?   

**A:**  They did it before us at the place called Bontö [Tib. འབྲོམ་སྟོད]. And probably Gomang and Sera Mey did the Lemthang chogyag. After that, Loseling did the chogyag and later we got their tent. I had kind of a suspicion [Tib. རྣམ་རྟོག] because Loseling lost.   

**Q:**  Were there any chogyag after yours?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Was the Gomang chogyag stopped because Sera Mey wouldn't come or was it stopped by the lene?   

**A:**  It was stopped by the lene. I think the phodrang depa and some others went to inform them.   

**Q:**  Did the shengo go?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did the laji go?   

**A:**  I'm not sure.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for Deyang and Ngagpa not competing? Was it caused by the lene?   

**A:**  Ngagpa didn't dare to compete.   

**Q:**  The leader of the Ngagpa didn't tell them not to compete, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They didn't dare to compete because Sera Ngagpa was almost entirely dobdo. Usually they looked down on Deyang like a food ready to eat [easy to defeat]. But when we did the chogyag, they lost. After this, they were afraid to lose again if they weren't careful. So they told us they couldn't compete right now, but [to] wait a few years. We said no, and we said that we were going to do the Lhagye Chogyag so we did the Lhagye Chogyag. We played all of the 12 male games [Tib. ཕོ་རྩལ་སྣེ་ཁ་བཅུ་གཉིས] though we lost on the first item. I heard that they would not listen to it even though they had signed the agreement and there was a guarantor.   

**Q:**  There was no fighting when you did the chogyag, right?   

**A:**  In our chogyag, we didn't have trouble with fights except for when a small kid hit us with a stone. After that, we competitors left by coracles to Dechen [Tib. བདེ་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  Did you do any jobs after doing the chabril?   

**A:**  Just before the revolt, I was supposed to go to Tö to the monastery called Tashi Chömpel [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཆོས་འཕེལ] in Tingkye [Tib. གཏིང་སྐྱེས]. There were three of us going [4 including himself], one as khembo, myself as chandzö and 2 servants approved by the deity Thamba Shanggo. The servants had gone ahead of us, but then the revolt took place before we left. One of them ran away to India and the other died in prison.   

**Q:**  Was the khembo to be the khembo of that monastery?   

**A:**  The khembo was sent from among the tsenyi geshe.   

**Q:**  Was the monastery in Tö a big one?   

**A:**  Yes. There was a monastery and nunnery there.   

**Q:**  Was this a shamtabtre or one's wish.   

**A:**  Not my own wish. It was the deity again who selected me and the khembo.   

**Q:**  Were you in the Deyang tsondu?   

**A:**  No. I didn't do the gegö. I did the chatsül so I didn't have to do gegö. My reading wasn't good, so if I became a gegö, I would have to read the gyabtho written in umey and I would have trouble reading it, so I did the chatsül to avoid it.   

**Q:**  Were you with your gegen when you did this?   

**A:**  No. We had already been separated.   

**Q:**  What would you have to do if you become a chatsül? Did you have to give a tonggo?   

**A:**  Yes, to do chatsül you had to serve 3 teas and 1 thukpa having the thickness of yogurt, and give whatever amount of gye. If one is capable, chatsül was a step on the road to being shengo. I wouldn't be able to do that because I didn't have the umey reading skills, though I could read uchen well. So I swear by the Buddha's Statue in the Jokhang that I didn't have a thought of becoming a shengo. But I could read uchen well.   

**Q:**  Did you have to do the nyertsang before becoming shengo?   

**A:**  I didn't get the turn for doing the nyertsang. After you do the nyertsang, then you will become the candidate for the shengo position.   

**Q:**  Was the nyertsang term three years?   

**A:**  It probably was.   

**Q:**  After you separated from your gegen, how did you subsist?   

**A:**  I joined the shag with that sick guy in the next room. I did a little bit of trade and their families in Phembo sent some tsamba. We also got the grain salary. So there was no worry of livelihood in those days.   

**Q:**  What about your trade?   

**A:**  I carried things on my back when I went to Tsöna. I went to Kalimpong 3 times. When I separated at age 18, I immediately went to Kalimpong on trade business.   

**Q:**  Where did you get your capital from?   

**A:**  I borrowed it from the loan lenders. It was an interest loan with another monk acting as a guarantor. I went to Kalimpong to buy a load of tobacco and carried it back on my back.   

**Q:**  What did you take to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  I took along with me a little less than one khe of tsamba. I had a relative in Tölung and I went to do the harvest with him. But I didn't know how to harvest well so I said I wasn't staying there since I couldn't do it. So my relative gave me a little less than a khe of tsamba and I returned to the monastery. I borrowed 6 dotse, which was in coins of three sang and ten sang, and I wrapped them in a woolen baby sock and hid them in the middle of my tsamba. I didn't have enough clothes to wear.   

**Q:**  Did you have a partner on the trip?   

**A:**  On the trip to Kalimpong I had one. When coming back I was alone. I didn't have [proper] boots to wear. It is like recounting the poor people's suffering. I wore a pair of boots patched with a leather sole. I left on the 5th day of the 8th lunar month. At the Gampala mountain pass, my boots became worn out, so from then on I walked barefooted to Kalimpong. In the morning when I left I felt some pain in my feet, but after a while it became kind of numb. But when I reached the lodging inn I felt a burning sensation in my feet.   

**Q:**  I have been to Kalimpong. What did you do in Kalimpong? There is a place called 10th mile, right?   

**A:**  There were many Tibetans.   

**Q:**  There is a place called 10th mile, right?   

**A:**  I am not quite familiar because I only stayed for 7 days, since if I stayed longer my tsamba wouldn't last.   

**Q:**  How much money did you bring?   

**A:**  Six dotse. With that I bought tobacco and put it in a wooden box and carried this back. I returned to Lhasa on the 29th day of the 9th lunar month and I sold it in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How much profit did you make?   

**A:**  The profit from this was enough to let me live okay and to have enough money to spend. I made about 4 dotse net profit from this.   

**Q:**  You were very tough and courageous for being only 18 years old? Did you buy tobacco for all the three times you went to Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes. Then after I finished doing the chabril, I was about 32, and again I went to Kalimpong and this time and I brought back 4 copper water containers. I carried these on my back. Then I went also to Tsöna on trade.   

**Q:**  How long did it take to go from Drepung to Tsöna?   

**A:**  It took about 12 days from Drepung. It is about the same as for going to Phari [Tib. ཕག་རི].   

**Q:**  You took something to Tsöna, right?   

**A:**  No, I just took some money.   

**Q:**  What did you buy?   

**A:**  I brought back green peppers and wooden bowls from the Buthanese. These I sold in Champaling [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གླིང] (in Lhoka).   

**Q:**  Did you have donkeys or carry things on your back?   

**A:**  I hired yaks then. There were 4 of us so we had about 15 yaks. The wooden bowls and green peppers were cheap then.   

**Q:**  What kind of a place was Tsöna?   

**A:**  It was a poor place and the Buthanese would come up.   

**Q:**  Did they speak Tibetan? Was it easy to understand?   

**A:**  Yes, and the Buthanese also spoke Tibetan and it was easy to understand them.   

**Q:**  Was it a low altitude place where there were forests?   

**A:**  There were not many forests and not many households living there, although it was kind of well-known.   

**Q:**  Did you go with the group to Tsöna ?   

**A:**  Yes, we went in groups of 3-4 people. We borrowed some capital and went. If we made a profit, we divided it. If we made a loss, we made it up evenly.   

**Q:**  In what month would you go there?   

**A:**  We sold the things at the Champaling Fair at the start of the 7th lunar month.   

**Q:**  Did you have to ask for leave from the gegö?   

**A:**  Yes. We had to ask for leave from the gegö and khembo, though we wouldn't tell them that we were going to Tsöna. We had to ask for leave from the chöra.   

**Q:**  How many times did you go to Tsöna?   

**A:**  I went to Tsöna twice and also went to Metro Gongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] once to buy clay pots. These I carried back and sold in Lhasa. Then I would go again and buy more clay pots and carry them to Lhasa. And that's how I earned money. If you didn't do trade like this and just stayed in the monastery, you could manage your food and clothes. The pechawa don't do any trading at all, but they could still live happily. But I liked to go off trading during the summer and make some profit. I looked forward to it.   

**Q:**  Did you go to collect offerings and donations (Tib. büdü [འབུལ་སྡུད])?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did the fire [damage] in the rungkhang happened first or did the trouble between the gegö and the khembo happen first?   

**A:**  The fire was later. About 3-4 years later.   

**Q:**  How did the gegö trouble start?   

**A:**  It was something about the traja. But I was a young monk, dabedobe, so I didn't pay much attention. The leaders were on the top floor holding a meeting and we were below roaming around [Tib. འཁྲབ].   

**Q:**  What did the monk living inside do?   

**A:**  He did the nangma. His gegen was the shengo.   

**Q:**  Were the two of you related to each other?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  In 1959, were you in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes. I was put in the phodrang and stayed as a trerim for 8 months. I had been a chabril and chatsül, so that's why I was trerim. After 8 months they let me go. I was chabril and chatsül but I didn't exploit monks, but when they asked me, I had to say I did exploit and peeled off the people's skin. I was a trerim ngatsab. If I was in Lhasa I wouldn't have been classified as trerim. But the monastery was small, so they made me a trerim. Then during the Cultural Revolution, I made up a few rumors, so I spent 13 years in Trapchi Prison and the Labor Camp [Tib. ལས་མི་རུ་ཁག]. I wasn't in the revolt, but there was no way to say that. Then afterwards the government let me go. After a few months, after all my suffering, some officials came and said, your arrest was a mistake. They gave me a pass for redressing by situation and left one pass in the Department of Religious Affairs (Tib. chödön [ཆོས་དོན]) and left one in uyön lhengang [Democratic Management Committee] saying it was a mistake. After a few months, they gave me 300 yuan as something [supplement] for my livelihood. All of my things were confiscated except a little left here.   

**Q:**  What work did you do from when you were released from the phodrang to the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  I assisted blacksmith Tobgye's [Tib. སྟོབས་རྒྱས] work in the monastery, hitting the hot iron with a hammer.   

**Q:**  What wages did you get?   

**A:**  Dry Shit [Tib. སྐྱག་པ་སྐམ་པོ]! I got nothing. I swear by the Three Jewels [Tib. དཀོན་ཅོག] that for 6 month's work, they gave me 5 yuan, like giving it to a beggar . And I swear by the Buddha's Statue in the Jokhang [Tib. ཇོ་བོ་རིན་པོ] that I didn't have enough tsamba to eat when I had to hit that hot iron with the big hammer. They didn't pay me any work points, saying that they didn't get things from somewhere. I suffered a lot, so now I have serious pain in my knees.   

