# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0005.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Phu Dündül Chöying [Tib. བུ་བདུད་འདུལ་ཆོས་དབྱིངས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** /China  
**Date of Interview:** June 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Phu Dündül Chöying [Tib. བུ་བདུད་འདུལ་ཆོས་དབྱིངས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 73  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Phu Dündül Chöying [Tib. བུ་བདུད་འདུལ་ཆོས་དབྱིངས] was from an important family in the Pembar district which was part of the Shotalhosum area in Chamdo, Eastern Tibet. In this interview, he discusses the interactions between Tibetan officials and the People's Liberation Army and discusses his work in Pembar in the early 1950's. He also discusses how Andrutsang Gombo Tashi's troops arrived there in 1958 and the Khamba's revolt there.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0005_01/H_0005_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Where were you when Chamdo was liberated and where were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར] Dzong which was also known as Tardzong [Tib. སྟར་རྫོང] in the old society.   

**Q:**  Is Pembar located north of Chamdo?   

**A:**  When we go from Chamdo to Pembar, Pembar is on the southeast. The abbreviated name of the three dzong in that area is Shotalhosum [Tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ]: Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ], Tardzong [Tib. སྟར་རྫོང] and Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང]. I was born just near the dzong. We were not like chiefs (Tib. pön) or rich people, but my father was the clerk (Tib. ལེདྲུང [Tib. ལས་དྲུང]) for the dzong. After that, there was the previous Ngabö who was the Governor-General of the Chamdo area (Tib. དོཇི [Tib. མདོ་སྤྱི]).   

**Q:**  Was he from the same family?   

**A:**  Yes, he was from the same family and he was also the husband of the same lady. He died when he was the doji.   

**Q:**  This was in 1930-40.   

**A:**  During the former Ngabö's time, the dzong and the masses jointly submitted a petition that was approved. It said that our family should be the ledrung or clerk of the dzong from generation to generation so my father became the ledrung. When my father became old, he went to a hermitage and practised religion (dharma) and I became the ledrung at the age 21. When I was the ledrung, the dzong head was Kyarasiba [Tib. སྐྱ་ར་སྲིབ་པ].   

**A:**  Tashi Tsering: He was an aristocratic official from Gyatso [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ].   

**A:**  He worked as a staff officer in Chamdo so he sent an acting dzongpön to Pembar Dzong. After that, Narakyishong [Tib. སྣ་ར་སྐྱིད་གཤོངས] became the dzong head for 8 years. Then the 3rd dzongpön was the late Horsur [Tib. ཧོར་ཟུར] who was the bridegroom of Jagtrak [Tib. ལྕགས་སྤྲག]. He did it for 2 years. At this time, Chamdo was liberated and I was 31 years old then. This was in the Iron-Tiger Year [Tib. ལྕགས་སྟག] [1950]. I received a letter from the Bureau Office [Tib. དོན་གཅོད] probably in 9th month of that year, and Horsur fled.   

**Q:**  Did he flee to Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes, and Ngabö was arrested in Chamdo. Horsur told me to act as the acting dzongpön and I did this, but it was not approved form above. At that time not many People's Liberation Army troops came to Pembar. There were just 4 of them. Ngabö arrived in Chamdo in the 6th month of 1950. Lhalu arrived in Pembar in the 8th month after his doji term was over together with about 30 or so bodyguard soldiers. The place [Chamdo] was lost when Ngabö was there. At that time, probably, Lhalu received the order not to come back and to stay there [in Chamdo] and work with Ngabö jointly and take some methods to stop [the Chinese]. But since Lhalu had only 30-40 soldiers, he didn't dare to stay there and he came back. After that, 32 People's Liberation Army troops came to follow Lhalu and they came to Pembar. By that time, Lhalu had passed the Shargongla [Tib. ཤར་གོང་ལ] Pass and had already reached the Ngödrukha [Tib.? gru kha] ferry site. It was a three days horse back journey between these two places and the road was bad. So the [People's Liberation Army] couldn't catch up with him right away.   

**Q:**  Did the 32 People's Liberation Army come after Lhalu, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Before Horsur left, did he tell you to fight the People's Liberation Army if they came?   

**A:**  He left no instructions. We were on the road, so we heard from travelers that Chamdo had fallen. At that time communications through the government's system of messengers on horseback had already stopped. When our dzongpön fled, Lhalu had reached Ngödrukha. He also left some animals and told me to take care of them. If he had reported before that to doji and I was appointed as the acting dzongpön, I would have become a real acting dzongpön, but this was not done and Lhalu had already fled. I didn't have much to do as an acting dzongpön, but Horsur gave me the official seal and told me to do whatever needs to be done. This was my instructions. The people at this time had no idea of stopping the People's Liberation Army. If I may say so, although it would become insulting to the Tibetan government, internally, there were many taxes imposed on the people. The Chinese heard about that. I was thinking about the Labrang and the monastery, but nothing effective could be done. So the head of the dzong didn't tell me to do anything and I don't have anything to tell you about what work I did. After the dzongpön fled and before the People's Liberation Army soldiers who were chasing Lhalu came, some of the scattered soldiers of the Jadang Regiment that had been stationed at Riwoche came to our place. They stayed in our area and caused a bit of a disturbance. At this time, I hid out in another place. Then 32 cavalry from the People's Liberation Army came chasing Lhalu and the Jadang soldiers fled to Riwoche. The People's Liberation Army troops stayed at Pembar dzong for 2 days. I also fled a day's journey away and was hiding. While there, I got a message from home saying that I had to return to the dzong because the People's Liberation Army was there and they were not sure whether they were staying there or going, but it would be better to make friendly relations with them. So I went back to the dzong. Actually, I should say that I thought of surrendering, but the People's Liberation Army troops had already gone. I stayed at the dzong for about 10 days. At this time, the People's Liberation Army had taken over Lhodzong and Shopado dzong. When we count downwards towards Chamdo, Pembar is the first dzong under the doji then at 3 days journey you will reach Shopando. Then at 2 days journey you will reach Lhodzong. From our area if we go on horseback, it takes 22 days to reach Lhasa and it takes 12 days to get to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Trindor: If someone went directly from Lhasa to Chamdo it took 1 month and 8 days, right?   

**A:**  It would be hard to get there in 1 month and 8 days.   

**Q:**  How close is Pembar Dzong to Kongpo Giamda [Tib. ཀོང་པོ་རྒྱ་མདའ]?   

**A:**  It is towards Lhasa. From Pembar to Lharigo [Tib. ལྷ་རི་འགོ] is 7 days. It is another 4 days to Giamda - so it is 11 days on horseback. When I returned to the dzong the PLA soldiers had left, but after about 10 days, 4 PLA troops came with a translator from Dartsedo. We met and we made relations with each other. The People's Liberation Army told me, "Although we don't have any authority to appoint you as the dzongpön, but since you are the one left here by the dzongpön, so temporarily please do whatever work there is to be done in the dzong." They were very brave although there were only 4 of them." By this time, Lhalu had reached Lharigo and there was a lot of talk saying that Lhalu will recruit soldiers and make war, but he just stayed there holding the place [doing nothing].   

**Q:**  Do you know the name of the interpreter? Is he still alive?   

**A:**  I didn't meet him after that. He was from Dartsedo and he spoke good Tibetan. His name was Nyima.   

**Q:**  Tashi Tsering: Wasn't that the Nyima who became the Markham Dzongpön?   

**A:**  No. He was also a People's Liberation Army soldier with a rank. He came along with the People's Liberation Army and was not familiar with our place.   

**Q:**  Where did they stay?   

**A:**  They stayed in a big house where people used for accommodations for the officials of the Tibetan government [Tib. སྒྲིག་ཁང]. It was next to my house.   

**Q:**  How did they manage their food?   

**A:**  They had rice and flour. At the main regiment in Shopando there were many soldiers. The Regimental Commander [Ch. tuan; Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད] was staying in Lhodzong and at Shopando there was a Battalion Leader [Ch. ying; Tib. འགོ་ཁྲིད]. So I got a message from the Shopando Battalion Leader telling me to come. The message said that we need meat and butter and grain.   

**Q:**  Did you go alone to Shopando?   

**A:**  I and Pembar Labrang Chandzö went there. There we had a kind of meeting and they said we, the People's Liberation Army, have come from a long distance and we don't have many horses and mules so the grain for us can't come right away, but we won't impose taxes on the miser. So can you sell us grain and yaks from your area. Finally, they said that they need 200 yak and 4,000 khe of barley. They gave 1 dayan for each khe. For each yak, the best got 13 dayan and small ones got 7 dayan. So I returned home. I sold them 1,000 khe of barley and the rest the people sold. Then we transported it to Shopando. I worked as an acting dzongpön. I did that in the winter of 1951 and the Spring of 1952. In the Iron-Mouse Year [Tib. ལྕགས་ཡོས] [1952], in the 1st Tibetan month, a Chinese Section Leader called Gao Kezhang came. He stayed until the end of the 6th month as the leader of Pembar and I had to help him a lot and did a wide range of tasks. Then Ngabö appointed and sent Maya [Tib. རྨ་བྱ] who is from Gyantse as the dzongpön to replace Horsur and then I didn't need to do the dzong's work. Maya was the real dzongpön since he was a government lay official. Gao Kezhang treated me very nicely. Even after Maya came, I still did most of the work since Maya was not familiar with the area and he couldn't use his power as before. Then Gao said, "You are not appointed as the dzongpön by the Tibetan local government and we also didn't appoint you, so you can't become the dzongpön because the dzongpön came from Chamdo. But it is not okay to leave you as an ordinary person and we need you to work. We are going to start a new office called the "Support and Help Office" [Tib. རྒྱབ་སྐྱོར་རོགས་རམ་ལས་ཁུངས] and we are going to give you the name of the Vice Director [Ch. zhu ren; Tib. གཞོན་པ]. It wouldn't be appropriate for you to be the Senior Director as a Chinese will do this. You will be the 17th rank." Since then I became a person with rank.   

**Q:**  Was this before the 17-Point Agreement signed?   

**A:**  Yes, it was before Ngabö went to China. Maya was there as the dzongpön, but I did all the local work like helping the People's Liberation Army to buy meat, butter and barley and fodder. There were over 10,000 khe of barley sold. In that small place, my [economic] condition was a little bit better and I sold my own things and also collected things from the masses. At that time, the price that was paid was higher than the local price. The highest price was 1 dayan for a khe of barley and the gyama in our place was 4 times bigger than the regular kilogram [Tib. སྤྱི་རྒྱ] and it was 1 dayan for 1 gyama of butter and there were also sheep and goats sold. It was 7 maotse and 2 fen and some karma for 1 kilogram [of butter]   

**Q:**  At this time, was there any talk of land reforms?  

**A:**  No. Things were the same as before and there hadn't been any damage done. So in the beginning, all the people in Pembar liked the Chinese a little bit because in the old society there were whippings and taxes, but now all was bought with dayan. In the spring of Iron-Mouse year, Ngabö went down and after the 17-Point Agreement was signed and the contents of the agreement was announced and it was said that the previous lamas, monasteries and the lords [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] and the bourgeoisie will all be maintained as before. So people were relaxed and there was no talk about the land reforms. In the Iron-Mouse Year, in 6th month, Ngabö arrived in Lhasa. He came with Wang Qimei and many soldiers. When they came through our area, the majority of the soldiers stayed mainly in the empty areas and they didn't come to the villages. Finally, in our place, they made people study the 17-Point Agreement and held meetings. Ngabö and Wang Qimei left for Lhasa in the 6th month. The soldiers left in the 7th month. After that, about 30-40 People's Liberation Army soldiers stayed in all the dzongs and we named it as the Payroll/Supply Office, phokhang [Tib. ཕོགས་ཁང]. Many soldiers were going up and down. From this time on, the People's Liberation Army started buying animals from the people directly and [the people] they were selling old and sick yaks to them and they also got a quite a good price. After Ngabö left for Lhasa, Maya also got transferred and went back. Before he left, he told me, "You just take over the dzong." The Chinese office Gao also told me to take over the dzong." But I didn't take it over because the [Chinese] government had given me a rank, though I didn't have any salary.   

**Q:**  You were the 17th rank and at that time, the 17th rank had a high salary, right?   

**A:**  For about three years I didn't get any salary.   

**Q:**  This was an empty 17th rank, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was doing quite a lot of work. So after this, Maya handed over the responsibility of the dzong to the Chinese government.   

**Q:**  Did he hand it over to the Gao Kazhang?   

**A:**  No, he handed it over to some Chinese Payroll Officers [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན] like Liu Zhanzhang and Meng Zhanzhang and I was doing the job. They [Ngabö] all went to Lhasa. This was in the 7th month of the Iron-Mouse Year, probably 1951, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, it was 12th-13th of August in 1951 when Ngabö went back.   

**A:**  In 1951, after Ngabö went back, the Chinese wanted 200 horses to be sold and I and the masses sold them about 180 horses.   

**Q:**  How many horses did you sell privately?   

**A:**  I sold about 20 horses.   

**Q:**  How much did they pay for the horses?   

**A:**  The best horses was sold for 200 dayan. Others were 150, 80 and 60 dayan for the lowest price. At that time, they got that price, but later they didn't get a good price because of the situation. Like this, I supported them a lot. I sold privately sold most of the grain and butter they needed.   

**Q:**  You were rich then?   

**A:**  Yes, I was very rich. I would meet the people from the north and I would buy yaks from them and I would buy butter from the people from Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ].   

**Q:**  At that time, how many khe of land did you have?   

**A:**  I had 300 khe of land.   

**Q:**  That was a lot and you were a gerpa, right?   

**A:**  I was not called gerpa. What I had was the certificate issued in the past to become the ledrung. I was rich and powerful. Especially, when the nyerpa of the Narakyishong was the dzongpön I became very powerful and I did bad things. For example, on the one hand, I did business and gave loans to the miser and on the other hand I also took bribes in between the dzongpön and miser. After the Tibetan [government] was [over] and during the [Chinese] government, I didn't have a chance to take bribes. I didn't do well.   

**Q:**  Did you exploit and suppress the miser quite severely?   

**A:**  Yes, I did.   

**Q:**  Did you beat people and whip them?   

**A:**  Yes, I whipped and beat people a lot.   

**Q:**  In Ütsang, if a person had 300 khe of land they had miser under them working for them. What about you in Kham? Did you have ula or servants to work on your field?   

**A:**  I didn't have any custom to impose taxes on the miser because I was not a gerpa. In our place, there were gerpa who had miser, but I didn’t have any. I hired servants and maid servants to do the farming and paid them food and money. At this time, the livelihood of the masses in Pembar was poor. So the miser would rush to come to work for me and we would choose the good ones to work. In our area, it was 10 dre for [working] 1 khe [of land].   

**Q:**  This volume measure is called Junbo [Tib. བཅུ་འབོ], right?   

**A:**  No, the bo or tenzin kharu was the standard [with 20 dre], but the dre was bigger. So we gave 1 dre of barley per day of work.   

**Q:**  So they get 30 dre or 3 khe for a month, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was the wage and in addition to that, as for the food, we give them meals 5 times a day.   

**Q:**  You didn't charge money for the food, right?   

**A:**  We did not. For the 5 times, we give them as much tsamba as they wanted to eat and one meal was marbag [butter with tsamba] though the butter was not a large amount. In the morning and evening, I gave vegetables and tsamba soups.   

**Q:**  Would you give them beer?   

**A:**  There was no beer, but I gave one strong butter tea per day. We would use one tea brick for 10 people. They would say, "If you don't give us a strong tea, we can't move." For the tea at midday and evening, the tea had just a little butter. I had many animals and I would lease them for shey [50-50].   

**Q:**  How many animals did you have?   

**A:**  I had 200 [female] yaks [Tib. ནོར] and I kept 60-70 [male] yaks [as pack yaks]. I also had 10 some dzomo at my house. I also had 40-50 sheep that I left with another household. I had no goats. I also had 60-70 and almost 100 horses and mules, and among them there were very good trotters also. Later, I became richer and I also did trading with Lhasa and Chamdo and I sent a trader to each. I did trading in my own area and most of people from Powo would come to trade with me. I was trading in all kinds of things like exchanging salt and grain. At this time, when the trade was okay, one khe of salt would get 1 khe of grain. If the grain was scarce, sometimes they would pay only 8 khe of barley for 10 khe of salt. I would buy salt by giving one khe of barley. Later, when the Powo people come from the south, they would bring barley and they give 2 khe of barley for 1 khe salt. So we didn't need to go out, they would come to me to do the trading. We were located next to upper part of Powo called Potö [Tib. སྤོ་སྟོད] Dzong. It was just across the pass called Dangla and it took about 3 days on horseback. So most of the people coming to me to do the trade were from Potö and they were mostly rich people in that place though they were not chiefs.   

**Q:**  Please continue and tell us about your work in the Payroll Office.   

**A:**  After Ngabö and the Wang Qimei went up to Lhasa, most of the soldiers and all the leaders also went up. At that time, there was no County Leader [Ch. xian zhang] At this time, there was the Payroll Officer and I was doing all the work of the dzong with him. Before Gao Kezhang left, he held a meeting and appointed other committee members [Ch. wei yuan], but they lived in other places so they didn't do much work and I was doing all the work until probably 1953. In the beginning of 1953, the military representative, Jun Daibiao came and under him, I was the vice director and another vice director was the Pembar Labrang chandzö and some committee members were appointed. After this office was set up, two of us, the directors, started to get salary. The committee members under us got no salary.   

**Q:**  How much salary did they pay you?   

**A:**  In the beginning, they [Payroll Officer] didn't make good relation with me because when I was in the Payroll Office, they were holding loyalty towards their class and there were many people in the area who didn't like us and they listened to those poor people and he was looking at me with the class ideology and I didn’t get along with them [Chinese].   

**Q:**  Do you mean you didn't get along well with the Payroll Officer?   

**A:**  Yes, so my work was also done not so good. They [Payroll Officer] were close to the chandzö, but the chandzö and me were like this [probably showing a hand gesture that they were friends]. I was more powerful and the chandzö was not doing much work. In the beginning, they only gave me a low salary of 60 dayan/month. Probably, the government standard was higher than this, but since we didn't have a good relationship with the local officer, they didn’t give it tome. I worked for a about a year with a salary of 60 dayan.   

**Q:**  After the Jun Daibiao came, did he replace the Payroll officer?   

**A:**  No. The Payroll Office was still there and it had about 30 people working in it and the Jun Daibiao was just about 2 people. At this time, the reason why I didn't have a good relationship was because I had a big fight with the Battalion commander in which we hit each other. At this time, Gao helped me or else I would have been in severe danger because the regiment said that I was working was to revolt against the government. [This therefore happened before Gao left].   

**Q:**  They made a false accusation [Tib. ཞྭ་མོ་གཡོག], right?   

**A:**  Not really a false accusation because I did a bad thing and we hit each other. So they were not to blamed.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for getting into a fight with the Battalion commander?   

**A:**  This was about housing. The Battalion commander said that he wanted to stay in my house. While I was gone somewhere, some soldiers kind of robbed some mattresses from my servants. So I was disappointed about this, and when I returned he said he will be staying in my house. I said no and that's how the fight started. At that time, since the 17-Point Agreement was signed, even if we didn't get along well with the people staying there, there was no system that the government itself would say I don't want you to work. So Gao fixed this up and later, from the end of 1953, I got a salary of 190 dayan.   

**Q:**  How much did they pay to the chandzö?   

**A:**  It was the same.   

**Q:**  How long did you get only 60 yuan?   

**A:**  A little more than a year.   

**Q:**  For how long did you get 190 yuan?   

**A:**  That continued till 1957. In 1956, at the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region meeting I went as a delegate from Pembar County.   

**Q:**  What year was that when you got into the fight?   

**A:**  It was in 1951 before Ngabö and Wang Qimei went up to Lhasa. After the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region meeting, since I was one of the Vice Chairman [Ch. fu zhu xi] my salary was raised to 360, but it was in paper money (Chinese).   

**Q:**  From 1951-56, until the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, what were the biggest changes/reforms in Pembar Dzong?   

**A:**  During that period, the monastery and the masses became very good.   

**A:**  Tell us in detail about the changes.   

**A:**  There wasn't any wide range of work done by the government in our place because we were a part of Chamdo, but we were far from Chamdo. During this time, a group of poor people who didn't have food and clothing were given barley and money.   

**Q:**  Was this called relief [Tib. སྐྱོབ་གསོ]?   

**A:**  Yes, they also gave free interest loans of barley and money.   

**Q:**  This was given by the Chinese government?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were the people given jobs like road building?   

**A:**  No, because the motor road was being made from the southern route through Powo. So we didn't get this work. Some people made money from the transportation fees the Payroll Office paid.   

**Q:**  What kind of transportation?   

**A:**  It was transportation by yaks. In the past, traditionally the taxes were imposed according to the [amount of] land, but we didn't have that. All of the yaks that belonged to the monastery or miser were made into a list and the taxes were imposed on yaks for transportation. If a person had large land but no yaks, he had no tax obligation. The fee payment for transportation was good and that fee was increase gradually, but since there were too many things to be transported, the miser said that the fee was too low and it was increased again and we had to do transporting work for only 2 days.   

**Q:**  It was not like the transportation corvée tax as wages were paid, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Since 1951, did you collect grain taxes from the land as had been done in the past by the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't at all. In our place we didn't need to deliver barley to the Tibetan government in the past.   

**Q:**  What did you have to pay to the Tibetan government in the past?   

**A:**  We only had to send the transportation corvée animals from one satsig to the next.   

**Q:**  Did you have to pay money [to the government]?   

**A:**  No, we didn't need to. There were some loans taken in the early times from the Payroll Office [of the Tibetan government] in Chamdo. For that we had to pay a lot of barley every year for the interest. In the past, we had to pay a little bit of barley to the Payroll Officers, but later we didn't need to pay that during the new government. Our only obligation was to transport things, but this also received high fees. In the past, the dzongpön would collect some grain and there were different ways of measuring the barley called Simnyer or Pangnyer. These were eliminated.   

**Q:**  Did the local government collect this grain?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How much did they collect?   

**A:**  In our dzong there were 133 gang and dön. So from each gang, 5 khe and 12 dre of barley had to be given to dzong for their own use yearly. And they didn't need to deliver it to the local government. Later, since this was paid to the dzong, the new Chinese government also collected this barley and gave an exemption for the butter tax that used to paid to the dzong. The people were happy to have the butter tax eliminated and they could get the transportation fee [for that obligation). So the livelihood of the people increased during this time. This tax system stayed from 1951 to 1958.   

**Q:**  During this time, was the Branch Communist Party established?   

**A:**  No. The government paid the salary to directors, and the roughly 10 committee members didn't get a salary.   

**Q:**  At that time, there were no Tibetan Party Members, right?   

**A:**  Yes. No one asked people to join the Party and nobody said that they want to join the Party. At this time, according to the 17-Point Agreement, the Chinese made relationships with the elites and they didn't try to make relationships with the masses.   

**Q:**  At this time, if the miser had a fight among themselves, who would settled it? Did the directors have the power to settle it or did they have to consult the Chinese military?   

**A:**  According to the past customs, the miser of the Pembar Labrang would have their legal disputes settled by the labrang. And the disputes among the miser of the dzong, would be settled by the dzong. Since the 17-Point Agreement said that we will not change the previous system, the labrang [still] settled their own disputes and I would settle the disputes among the masses. The Chinese officials didn't meddle into it. Although the Jun Daibiao was there, they would not take much responsibility. Even if the masses told them something, they would consult us saying that you can do whatever you wants.   

**Q:**  In 1956 when you came to Lhasa for Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region meeting, in Lhasa, there were many people opposing [the Agreement and the Chinese] like the People's Association and Alo Chöndze and Andrutsang (Gombo Tashi) and also some delegations also opposed it. So what happened when you were in Lhasa?   

**A:**  At that time, there wasn't anybody opposing it in 1956. At that time, it was said that the reforms will be done from top [elite] to the bottom [masses].   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  This was in 1956 when the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up. At the meeting they said we have to have reforms quickly, but they also said the reforms will be different than in China. In China, the poor people rose up and did the reforms, but in Tibet will not be like that. In Tibet, the reforms would be done not from the bottom to up but from the top to the bottom. The reason for this is so the people in power can enjoy whatever they had before and to not harm the income of the monasteries. The decision was very good, but according to own my thoughts, I was fearful of that kind of reform. At that time, they held meetings and the kudrak also attended and they held meetings in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  You said that you were the Vice Chairman, do you mean you were the Vice Chairman of the Tibet Autonomous Region?   

**A:**  No. I was the Vice Chairman of Pembar County. At that time, I didn't accept this [reforms] with determination and I also didn't do much to cause it hindrance and it was also not easy to do. At that time, the masses didn't oppose it like they do nowadays. At the end of the 1956, the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama went to India and they met Zhou Enlai and because of this, the reforms got postponed in Tibet. So in 1957, after the reforms were postponed, all the Chinese were withdrew from Pembar and we were given the full local power.   

**Q:**  How many Chinese cadres did they withdraw?   

**A:**  All of them withdrew.   

**Q:**  In 1956, how many Chinese cadres were there? Were there 100-200?   

**A:**  No, there weren't. At the time of the transportation, there were about 30 Payroll Officers. They were withdrawn in the beginning of 1956 when the road was built. Then there were only 4 Chinese cadres in the county and they were also withdrawn in 1956. Since then they stopped paying me my salary in money. My rank was promoted to Senior Director and I got 18 khe of barley per month while the committee members got 13 khe of barley per month. . Before the 1956 postponement, there were many committee members, but after that there were only 10 officials including me in the county. Our salary came from the income of the dzong. So at this time, if the dzong had no income to collect, there was no salary and no work also.   

**Q:**  At the end of 1956, and start of 1957, did you hear about the revolt on the other side of Yangtze River?   

**A:**  Yes. It started at the end of 1956 on the other side of the Yangtze River. At the time they revolted. There was also was a revolt on this side of the Yangtze in the area below [south of] Chamdo area at Jomda [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ] which was under the Derge King [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་རྒྱལ་པོ] in the old days and there were many chiefs there. Now it is part of the Tibet Autonomous Region. In that year, Ngabö and the Karmapa Lama came and held meetings to tell them not to fight.   

**Q:**  This was at the end of the 1956, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the areas above [north of] Chamdo, it was calm and nobody was revolting and things remained very well. They just did self-defense things and didn't do any bad things to the masses. In 1958, in Tibet they [the Khambas] made the organization for offering a golden throne to the Dalai Lama and took the name of Chushigandru and began [their revolt]. Their base was in Lhoka. I think Andru Gombo Tashi [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] had about 1,000 men. At this time, they took the weapons from Shang Ganden Chöngor [Tib. ཤངས་དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར]. They also caused much harm and hardship in our area. Andru Gombo Tashi was unable to return with the guns to Lhoka directly because the People's Liberation Army stopped them, attacking them when they tried to go there. Finally, they ran away to our area. Probably about 500-600 arrived on horseback in our area.   

**Q:**  Was he trying to run away to India through Lhoka?   

**A:**  No. At that time, their base was in E Lhagyari [Tib. ཨེ་ལྷ་རྒྱ་རི]. Their revolt was started to delay the democratic reforms so they took over an area in Lhoka and started fighting. If and when they would get suppressed [Tib. དྲག་གནོན], then they planned to flee to India. But if they didn't get suppressed, they were to hold the place in Lhoka. We, the few leaders, had the thought of stopping democratic reforms, but we had no thoughts of revolting and we would not be able to do that. If they hadn't come to our area, we wouldn't have revolted.   

**Q:**  When Andrutsang came to your area, did he come to you or go to the dzong?   

**A:**  When they first came, they didn't come straight to us (in Pembar), but went to Sateng [Tib. ས་སྟེང] County which is now merged into Pembar Dzong. The People's Liberation Army chased them until they reached that area. At that time, they [the Khambas] reached the Tibetan area in Chamdo and the People's Liberation Army did a strange thing and they sent [let] the Khambas [go] to our area and then they (the People's Liberation Army) went back. So [then] it was up to them [the Khambas] to do whatever they wanted because they had the weapons and the horses.   

**Q:**  How many of them were there?   

**A:**  There were 500-600 fighters.   

**Q:**  All of them had horses, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When their food ran out and the horses were exhausted, they didn't know whether to go or stay and they arrived there (Sateng). Then they immediately made relations with us and started publicizing that they have come in order to protect the dharma and religion. So we should get united and share our happiness and sorrow.   

**Q:**  Did Andru send someone to meet you or did he come himself?   

**A:**  Some of his soldiers who got separated from the main force ran away to our area. So it became like we made relations because we didn't oppose them. Andru was also 3 days journey away [in Sateng], so some of his soldiers who first came to our area went back to where he was. Then they sent people to tell me to come up [to meet them]. After going back and forth many times, we had a relationship.   

**Q:**  When they first came, did they ask for your help?   

**A:**  They just used force and robbed things in our dzong.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, they didn't make direct relations with you, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When they robbed things, didn't you oppose and fight with them?   

**A:**  No. They were moving back and forth to where Andrutsang was. Among them there were many who had been traders in the past, so we knew each other and had some relations in having meals. In 1951 [actually 1958], Andru's troops came in the 9th Tibetan month [that would be between 13 October and 11 November]. Andru sent 200 soldiers to take over Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང] At this time, they acted very imposing. The 200 Khamba soldiers left our place and Shopando and went to Lhodzong and took over Lhodzong. Then Andru's forces took over the area of the 3 dzongs: Lho Dzong, Shopando and Pembar dzong [known collectively as Shotalho dzong], and stayed there.   

**Q:**  Were there any People's Liberation Army in these three dzong at this time?   

**A:**  No. They had returned earlier and everything was handed over to the dzong and we were doing all the dzong's work. So they [Chushigandru] could do whatever they wanted. When they took Lhodzong, they behaved very imposing and when something slightly didn't work out well, they killed 2 people who belonged to the dzongpön. After they took that place, they wanted us to make relations with them. I myself, personally didn't have thoughts of not making relations with them, but the people in general had no thoughts of making relations with him, but he started it. We didn't dare to tell the masses not to have relations with him, because compared to the miser, they were very powerful. Our peasants had no guns and didn't know how to shoot and we didn't have united leadership. So we decided to have a meeting between me and Karu pön [Tib. དཀར་རུ་དཔོན] of Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན]. Then the people from the dzongs and we sent a letter to Andrutsang saying we will support you. After he received the letter, he came in person to Pembar Dzong. Before that, they went back and forth and they had already taken over our place. Then Andru came to Pembar with all his troops. At that time, he hadn't recovered from his injury. This was in the 10th Tibetan month of 1958 [10th month started 12 November]. Then we decided to get united with them and we called a unity meeting to unite. People from Lhodzong and Shopando came and Karupön came. We all agreed to be unified and signed our names [on an oath].   

**Q:**  You were saying [in the document] that you are going to oppose and the expel the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When Andru took the 3 dzong, didn't you get any correspondence from the Chamdo Liberation Committee [Tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] for example, saying don't join Andru, we will send troops?   

**A:**  No, nothing like that happened. We received nothing. It was a long distance, so communications between us and Chamdo was hard as it was a 12 day ride and in the in-between area there wasn't a single Chinese. So we didn't dare to make relations [with the Chinese in Chamdo]. There wasn't anybody making relations from our dzong and Shopando. However, at that time, the acting dzongpön, who was a manager of the Lhodzong dzongpön named Changöpa [Tib. བྱ་དངོས་པ] and the nephew of the abbot Trerab [Tib. བཀྲ་རབ], who was the main person in the county, those two made connections with Chamdo, but later they [the Khambas] learned of this and two of them were killed by Gombo Tashi's soldiers.   

**Q:**  The reason for killing them was just that they suspected them, or was it because they didn't cooperate with them?   

**A:**  They had made relations with Chamdo and spread talk saying that the People's Liberation Army is coming up. They thought that if they said this, Andrutsang would get afraid and flee. Andrutsang heard of this and instead of fleeing, sent 200 soldiers towards Chamdo to intercept them. However, they met no one so they returned to Lhodzong and then they knew it was a lie and they killed these two. Because of this, they also took away a lot of wealth from three households, though they didn't do anything to the people.   

**Q:**  What was your goal when you decided to send the letter and fight against the Chinese who had 4,000,000-5,000,000 soldiers when Andrutsang had only 500-600 soldiers? Did you think a foreign country would help or what?   

**A:**  Andrutsang said that a foreign country's support is coming and they had [already] dropped weapons in Lhoka.   

**Q:**  Did he tell you this in person or write this in the letter?   

**A:**  He said this at the meeting where we signed [the document] to have unity. They had carried some guns and a few small hand grenades that had been dropped by the plane. He showed us this at the meeting.   

**Q:**  Did he have any wireless equipment?   

**A:**  No. But he did have a radio.   

**Q:**  Was Andru's talking about uniting all of Tibet to fight the Chinese or was he interested only in all the Khambas getting united and fighting?   

**A:**  He told us, "Internally, we are okay with the Tibetan government, but outwardly, they have not interfered with us. Now we must fight the Chinese, and we Khambas must take the lead in this. If we cooperate with the Tibetan government, the only way is to go on the path of the reforms. If we Khambas ourselves oppose the Chinese, the foreign aid will come to help us."   

**Q:**  At that time, did you think that Gombo Tashi just said that publicly, but internally Chushigandru and the local [Tibet] government were united?   

**A:**  Yes, I thought that, but I didn't make any relations with the Tibetan government. At that time, I was a small person, so I didn't make relations with anybody. But regarding what I was worried about and what I heard and what Gombo Tashi said, finally I and Karupön realized that they [Chushigandru and the Tibetan government] had relations and also that [government] people were included in that [Chushigandru]. But I was not saying that.   

**Q:**  Did you people in Pembar Dzong have greater loyalty towards the Khambas or towards the Tibetan government? The Khambas on the other side of the Yangtze River had more loyalty towards the Khambas.   

**A:**  We didn't really trust the Khambas deep down from our hearts and the masses were thinking and saying that they [Khambas] will not be able to carry this through to the end, and it is not right to oppose the [Chinese] government. But people like us who had the power, we just suppressed them [the masses] and they didn't have the strength to oppose us. And we, all the leaders, didn't realize that it was only the Khambas doing this [they had no help].   

**Q:**  You realized that they were same as the local government, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, we did a lot, but we didn't have good luck. At that time, we signed to become united and from the 3 dzong, we recruited 500 troops.   

**Q:**  You send these with Chushigandru, right?   

**A:**  Yes. We were going to make war on Potramo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་སྤྲ་རྨོག]. There were not many Chinese there. There was just an Administration Office [Tib. དོན་གཅོད་ལས་ཁུངས] and there wasn’t a single soldier so we felt it would be easy to take. If we could take it, unless a large number of People's Liberation Army would come, they would not be able to handle us. And [from there] there wasn't any hindrance to flee to India. So like this we attacked Tramo. We had 500 men [recruits from Pembar] and 500 horses, but no guns and they didn't have any training in making war. At that time, about 200 [of Andrutsang's] men went to Tramo. If we had attacked all of a sudden we could have taken it, but we weren’t able to attack [by surprise like that].   

**Q:**  Do you mean Andrutsang's 200 troops went there, but they didn't make the war well and they didn't win, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then what did they do?   

**A:**  If they had gone there right away and made war, they could have made the war. The Chinese and Tibetan cadres at Tramo had dug underground tunnels and were staying in the tunnels. The Chushigandru soldiers thought that there were many people in the tunnels and they didn't dare to go into the tunnels. So they remained like this for 5-6 days. The Chinese had wireless equipment and sent a wireless message to Chamdo to send troops, but at that time, probably, there were not many soldiers in Chamdo. So many of the students and cadres came up [from Chamdo] to reinforce them [in Potramo]. Before they were able to take the tunnels, Chushigandru was confronted with the reinforcements and they lost.   

**Q:**  Then soldiers came from Chamdo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then the Chushigandru troops fled and returned to Pembar.   

**Q:**  When they sent 200 soldiers, did you send your 500 people with them?   

**A:**  Yes, we went together.   

**Q:**  Is Potramo located at the south side of Pembar?   

**A:**  It was located at the southeast. It was a 6 day horseback trip to Potramo from Pembar and the road was rough.   

**Q:**  This was at the end of 1958 or in 1959?   

**A:** . It was 1958.   

**Q:**  What happened after they came back from Tramo?   

**A:**  There was a mt. pass called Dangla which was 4 days journey from Potramo. The People's Liberation Army chased them up to the bottom of this pass. If the People's Liberation Army had crossed the pass and come to our place, they could have taken our place, but probably, they had some kind of problem and stopped there and turned back.   

**Q:**  Where were most of the Andru's troops?   

**A:**  Most of his troops were in Lhodzong. Andru Gombo Tashi was in Pembar   

**Q:**  I heard he was wounded by an artillery shell explosion, is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was injured by a splinter of rock from a shell blast. They were planning to get to Lhoka via Drigung [Tib. འབྲི་གུང] but the Chinese had cut the road and they fought a battle there and many Khambas were killed in this battle. Andru was wounded in this battle. Then they were chased up to Sateng dzomg, and probably, they didn't have the strength to counter-attack.   

**Q:**  When he came to your area was he riding a horse?   

**A:**  Yes, he had rested up for a month at Sateng Dzong and he had recovered a little bit, so he came riding a horse. At that time he was experiencing severe pain, but it was not so bad that he couldn't move.   

**Q:**  Andru had lost battles and then had come to your area, so what did you think about this?   

**A:**  The masses didn't want to make ties with him, since we had reactionary thoughts. If we told the masses not to make relations, they would do that right away. But if we didn't make relations, the people were scared [of the Khambas] because the People's Liberation Army was far away. Therefore, we made the relations.   

**Q:**  So how did all these soldiers get the grain and food?   

**A:**  After we made relations with them, they took Lhodzong and Shopando where there was some leftover grain that the People's Liberation Army hadn't used in those places. They used that grain and their remaining needs were collected from the masses. I also gave them grain. Anyway, at that time, they not only had barley for themselves to eat, but they had barley to feed 1,400 horses. [note: in war Khambas often had two horses so they could switch and out distance the People's Liberation Army who only had one horse to mount per soldier (said by Trinley Dorje)] Then Andru and I took 200 troops to attack a Tibetan government armory at Pagshö Labrang [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད]. We obtained ninety 305 English Carbines and 90 boxes of bullets. This was in the 12th Tibetan month. So I went and stayed with Andru at Lhodzong until after the new year.   

**Q:**  Was this in 1958?   

**A:**  This was in the 12 Tibetan month of 1958 [the 12th month started on 10 January 1959]   

**Q:**  What happened after that?   

**A:**  We stayed for the New Year there and after the New Year [the New Year started on 8 February], Andrutsang held a meeting and said, "Now you people stay here and defend your own territory. We are going to go to Lhoka. After we get there, guns will be dropped from abroad and we will send these back to you, so you should send people [with us] to get the guns [and bring them back]. So from the 4 dzongs I sent 200 riders to get the guns. In the meanwhile, they did some immoral [Tib. མ་རབས] things and they [the dzongs] sent people who were pro-Chinese and had been directors [Ch. zhu ren] and committee members [Ch. wei yuan] to get the guns in order to avoid letting them to instigate the masses not to go to get the weapons from Lhoka. In the 1st month, when Andrutsang reached Lharigo [on the way back to Lhoka], the revolt had already broken out. When Andru learned of this, he and his men fled to India via Lhoka. They [Chushigandru] were like swindlers and didn't like me. Kharchen [Tib. མཁར་ཆེན] Chandzö, who was in Gombo Tashi's regiment, almost killed me.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  They didn't think deeply and they couldn't differentiate good and bad. Actually, I enabled them to survive and made their men and the horse fat so they could leave.   

**Q:**  The reason that he almost killed you was he implying that you were for the Chinese government?   

**A:**  It was regarding the matter of giving hay for the horses. He said I gave better hay to Andrutsang and didn't give him as good hay. The 200 men we sent didn't like to go there and they didn't trust Gombo Tashi's group and they didn't go with him [to Lhoka] but instead returned to Pembar.   

**Q:**  They were the ones who went to get the guns, right?   

**A:**  Yes, their leader was Phu Gyajin Tsewang [Tib. བུ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ཚེ་དབང] who was from Pembar Dzong. He led the our soldiers and came back and he is still in Pembar.   

**Q:**  Did you go with the 200 soldiers to get the guns?   

**A:**  I didn't. I was staying in Pembar. At that time, Gombo Tashi told them to defend their place and they signed their name [on a document].   

**Q:**  What kind of a person was Andrutsang.   

**A:**  He was huge, strong and fat, but he didn't know how to write. However, he was good in reading. He was a monk when he was small so he could read religious books [Tib. པེཆ].   

**Q:**  Was he articulate?   

**A:**  He was articulate and smart. He was best of his troops.   

