# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0065.01  
##  : with Narkyid, Ngawang Thöndrub [Tib. སྣར་སྐྱིད, ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Dharamsala, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Narkyid, Ngawang Thöndrub [Tib. སྣར་སྐྱིད, ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 61  
**Date of Birth:** 1931  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngawang Thöndrub [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ] was a young monk official in the 1950s. In this interview, he talks about the arrival of the Chinese, the subsequent fighting and also the loss of Chamdo. He discusses the various opinions concerning the 17-Point Agreement, and Gendün Chömpel's ideas of change and development for the Tibetan system, as well as an internal oath that his youth group took. He describes in detail going to study in China in 1952 on the advice of Gendün Chömpel and how he and several other students secretly formed a small group of Tibetans to protest Chinese actions. He talks about the Dalai Lama's visit to Beijing in 1954-55, how he took leave to go back to Lhasa from Beijing and then stayed in Lhasa, and how he was then appointed to different positions. He also talks about receiving a letter from Gyalo Thondup telling him to stay and work for him in Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0065_01/H_0065_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1949, when the Chinese came to Kham and Chamdo was lost, where were you living at that time?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What kind of news did you hear regarding the Chinese coming? Did people think that the Chinese would not be able to come up? Many people were thinking that the Chinese could not come and the situation was not that tense. My father was saying that the situation was not so tense. So how was the situation then?   

**A:**  People were not thinking that the Chinese would come. It was not so long after Ngabö went down there [to Chamdo]. During that time we didn't hear any news, but when Lhalu was there, we heard that they fought with the Chinese many times and the Chinese lost the battle, and they seized the Chinese and took their radios. Back then, the people in Lhasa were saying that it was not easy for the Chinese to come to Tibet because the Khambas would not let the Chinese come up easily, and we also had the regiments there. The Tibetan government also recruited a lot of soldiers when Lhalu went down. So we didn't think that the Chinese would occupy Chamdo and Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What were you doing in 1950?   

**A:**  At that time, I was working as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> staff [Tib. ལས་བྱ] in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Office.   

**Q:**  After Chamdo was lost, the Dalai Lama took political and temporal responsibility and went to Yadong. There were two groups down there. One of them said that the Dalai Lama should go to India and the other said he should return. What kind of changes took place after he came back?   

**A:**  Before that, we broadcasted on the radio that we were going to fight, even after the men were killed and only women were left [Tib. ཕོ་ཟད་མོ་ལ་ཐུག་ཀྱང་འཛིང་གི་ཡིན]. All people were determined to fight. But then, all of a sudden, the Chinese came up. I heard that when they heard that Chamdo was lost, the Kashag were enjoying their party and they didn't take notice of that. At that time, some people were saying that Ngabö surrendered and some people were saying that he was arrested. Later, I heard that Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས] surrendered and he brought the Chinese up. Anyway, Chamdo was lost and the Dalai Lama had to leave all of a sudden.   

**Q:**  What happened after the Dalai Lama came back? As you said, the people were enthusiastic to fight, but later it became like they surrendered and signed the 17-Point Agreement. Did the people hear about that or was it kind of a secret?   

**A:**  Let alone the people, even the Tibetan government officials didn't know about that clearly. I didn't know about that.   

**Q:**  Even after the Dalai Lama came back, you weren't attentive about the Agreement, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I just heard that the Agreement was signed, but we didn't have to know all the points in detail.   

**Q:**  After Ngabö arrived at Lhasa, a meeting was held where all the government officials attended. At the meeting, Ngabö and the other officials with him said that they had done their best and they didn't have regrets, even if they were to be punished. And the officials attending the meeting reported to the Dalai Lama that there was no other choice but to accept the 17-Point Agreement because the Chinese had already arrived. After that, the Dalai Lama sent a telegram to Mao and accepted the Agreement, and Mao also sent an answering telegram saying that it was good for him to accept the Agreement. Did the people hear about those things?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. I just heard that Ngabö made an explanation regarding the Agreement at the meeting and also at the flat area of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིང་ག] A park/grove in the southeast part of Lhasa by the river.">Tsidrung Linga</a> Park to the people. I don't remember clearly. Ngabö said, "The Chinese are coming to Tibet to help Tibet. Other than that, they will not make changes to the position of the Dalai Lama and the situation of the government. This was written in the 17-Point Agreement. We worked hard on this matter and this is the outcome. We didn't have the chance to ask about that, but we thought it would be good to accept it. If it was done right, that's it. If it was done wrong, please give us whatever kind of punishment [you want]."   

**Q:**  Do you mean he announced that at the meeting held in the Linga?   

**A:**  He announced that at the meeting and also to the people [in the park].   

**Q:**  Did they hold a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a> meeting?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then all of the officials had to attend the meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But I don't think that Ngabö explained it at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> gyendzom. I don't remember clearly. Regarding this matter, Kungö Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས], Lhautara [Tib. ལྷཽ་རྟ་ར] and Thönsurla [Tib. ཐོན་ཟུར་ལགས], who have good memories, might have something to say. Actually, they should have distributed that document [to all], but they didn't.   

**Q:**  I might have asked them, but many of them were not clear about that. After that, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> probably opposed the Agreement and didn't get along well with Ngabö, right?   

**A:**  Generally speaking, all people were opposed to the Agreement. I can say that nobody accepted the Agreement and they were saying that the Chinese coming to Tibet was wrong.   

**Q:**  In 1952, when there was the Water Dragon Year People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ], were you in Lhasa or China?   

**A:**  At the beginning, when they were holding the meetings, I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] was in that association. There was also a second People's Association in 1954 in which Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག] and Alo Chöndze were in. The Chinese said that the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were behind them. Did you hear anything about that?   

**A:**  Yes. I heard that the Chinese said that the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> motivated the People's Association. In the end, the Chinese insisted and the Dalai Lama had to make them resign.   

**Q:**  When you went to China in 1952, had they already set up the Youth Association and such groups?   

**A:**  At that moment, there wasn't a real Youth Association. Among the youth we had some groups [Tib. ཚོགས་པ], but those didn't come out openly. Those groups were there before the Chinese arrived. I was influenced by Gendün Chömpel [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ] and he gave me advice. We were saying that the way the Tibetan government was governing should be reformed. Gendün Chömpel was especially saying that the system of people owning people [Tib. བདག་པོ་རྒྱག] should be reformed.   

**Q:**  What do you mean people having the ownership of people?   

**A:**  I mean the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and the estates, and they were owning the people. For example, the miser of Tsarong had to seek permission when they had to go out [leave], right?   

**Q:**  Yes, they had to pay the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་བོགས] A status wherein a peasant &quot;leased&quot; his/her &quot;freedom&quot; from his/her lord to live and work where he/she wanted. The peasants with human lease status still belonged to their lord and were required to pay an annual fee (&quot;human lease fee&quot;) to their lord. The children of human lease peasants inherited this status from parents of the same sex (i.e. sons of a male belonged to their father&#x27;s lord).">mibo</a> tax.   

**A:**  And they could not own the land. So we were saying that this semi-feudalism should be reformed. At that time, as Marx-Lenin said, we didn't exactly follow the Chinese, but we had semi-feudalism. Gendün Chömpel was a monk and came out of the monastery, but he was saying the monasteries didn't need to have estates at all. I joined the service of the Tibetan government in 1948. At the time of the second world war, we had a group and we took an internal oath [Tib. དམ་བཅའ] that it was not allowed to be revealed to the outside.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1946, just after the second world war ended and India gained their independence. At that time, we were not allowed to say that Gendün Chömpel told us about that. We took an oath to be fair, and not oppress the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> and take bribes after we entered the service of the Tibetan government. We had many plans for reforming things. Gendün Chömpel also suggested that public toilets should be built everywhere, and we should impose taxes on the rich households and spend the same expenditures for building the public toilets on their spaces as they spent for their own houses. Gendün Chömpel was talking about many strange kinds of things. When we were in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ] The school for training monk officials in the Potala that was run by the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office.">Tse labdra</a> school in the Potala, water was scarce. There was a spring at the Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] Hermitage located above Sera Monastery, which was known to be the place where King Songtsen Gambo [Tib. སྲོང་བཙན་སྒམ་པོ] used to go in retreat. We were talking about a plan to build houses from the Phabongkha down to the places near Sera. The houses would be supplied for the people's residences and pools would be made on the roofs of the houses to lead the water to the Potala and then below the Potala to Lhasa. At that time, the newspaper called the "Mirror" [Tib. གསར་འགྱུར་མེ་ལོང] was published by Tharchin Babu [in India] and was very useful for us. Before that, we didn't know about the outside world. But in that newspaper, it was written about the second world war, and he also produced maps in the newspaper. After that, I knew about the independence of India and I got the idea that we should do something outside. After reading the newspaper, I met Gendün Chömpel. At that time, we didn't give names like the "Youth Association," but the purpose of the group was to do reforms. We called it "repairing" or "fixing" [Tib. བཟོ་བཅོས]. Terms like "reforms" [Tib. བཅོས་སྒྱུར] or "improvements" [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས] are new words. We were saying that we had to change the system of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and the monasteries, and that the workers and the farmers should have their own rights and improve their livelihoods. My grandmother and my mother both were doctors in the countryside, and they were also very religious and practiced the Nyingma sect. When I was going to the Tse labdra, they would always advise me not to oppress or beat the miser and not to take a single coin of bribes, and I should treat the miser kindly. That advice had a deep impression on me. In the beginning, I only had thoughts of opposing the Chinese, but later, when the Chinese came, Gendün Chömpel advised me to go to China. At that time, the Tibetan government had to send students to China according to the 17-Point Agreement, but nobody from the among the officials wanted to go to China. At that time, Gendün Chömpel was seriously sick. At first, Gendün Chömpel's plan for us was to go to India, but before that was confirmed, the Chinese came up and he told me to go to China and learn the Chinese language. "You shouldn't stay in your own house. You should know the situation of the enemy." On the other hand, the Chinese propaganda was also working well, saying that they would make developments [in Tibet], which we also liked to do. They were also saying that they didn't have any thoughts of eating [annexing] Tibet and they were going to go back to China. At first, when the Chinese came, they looked really good. They were just living in regiment barracks of the Tibetan government soldiers called the New Regiment [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ], and they didn't come to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street recklessly [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང]. So on the other hand, I also had a kind of hope, so internally, we volunteered. Among us there were Sursur Jigme [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར་འཇིགས་མེད], whose father, Surkhang Dzasa, knew Gendün Chömpel. Surkhang Dzasa also told us to go to China and he said that we should make changes. There were three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>. Ngawang Senge [Tib. ངག་དབང་སེང་གེ], who was also called Lobsang Yeshe [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ཡེ་སཧེས]. At that time, he didn't have a high status [Tib. མཐོང] because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་ལུང་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Talungdra</a> [the Regent] had to resign. We were schoolmates and I knew him from the early times. There were 5-6 of us in the Tse labdra who decided not to give bribes to get admitted as tsidrung and to study to the end, so we stayed like that. Later, Ngawang Senge told the Chandzö Chemmo, the Chief Manager of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, and I got admitted as a tsidrung. Ngawang Senge was my neighbor and I told him about the group, and he said that that was good and he wanted to join with us. Other tsidrung were named Kelsang Thöndrub [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དོན་གྲུབ] and Yeshe Yönden [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡོན་ཏན]. These two tsidrung also had the same kind of thoughts [regarding making reforms]. At that time, the Surchong [Tib. ཟུར་མཆོངས] Kashag was set up for talking with the Chinese and Ngabö was there [in charge]. So we told the Chinese through the Surchong Kashag that we were going to China voluntarily because nobody was going there. We had an internal group, and we also had documents and we took an oath.   

**Q:**  The group consisted of the people going to China for study, right?   

**A:**  Yes. There were also some people who stayed in Lhasa and supported us.   

**Q:**  How big was that group? Was that from among the people?   

**A:**  It was a small one. There were some people from among the people, like the son of Buitsang. He was influenced by Sursur Jigme. There were also people from among the people in Lhasa and in the countryside. At that time, the first school was set up in Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] and the Chinese also set up a political training class [Tib. སྲིད་དོན་སྦྱོང་བརྡར་འཛིན་གྲྭ].   

**Q:**  What year was this?   

**A:**  This was also in 1952. Some of the young lay officials and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> also joined that school. And there were two football teams. We had the A and the B team, and I was on the B team. I went to play football and Sursur Jigme played very well.   

**Q:**  Being a monk, you might have had to tell the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> about that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, because at that time, I was working in the Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  What did you tell them?   

**A:**  We didn't get the chance to tell them [the Yigtsang] directly. We reported to the Dalai Lama through the Surchong Kashag and we made an internal report to the Dalai Lama. We wrote about going to China and our goal. The main purpose was for oneself. We wrote in the report that no one was going to China and [so] we were voluntarily going to serve the Tibetan government. That was also our oath.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you go to China for study or to understand the actual way of Chinese thinking, because they were talking a lot about their policies?   

**A:**  The main purpose was to know the situation there. Gendün Chömpel had advised us to, "Stay in China for a couple of years, and study the Chinese language and try to know the situation with the Chinese. Then you should come back. If you want to defeat the enemy, how can you defeat them without knowing their situation." We didn't have a chance to say that to anybody. If we had told other people about that, Gendün Chömpel would have been whipped again. We named our group "Oppose oppression," or "Tsengöl [Tib. བཙན་རྒོལ]," but we didn't announce that. We were talking about that, but we didn't make any document and distribute it to other people.   

**Q:**  What were the government officials and the people in Lhasa saying about you guys going to China?   

**A:**  Later, the Surchong Kashag reported to the Dalai Lama and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> also reported the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>. So everyone was regarding us as pro-communists [Tib. གུང་ཕྲན་ཕྱོགས་གཏོགས]. Actually, I was among the older staff workers in the Yigtsang and I was writing most of their documents. Since they knew about me going to China, it was inconvenient for them to tell me to get out (of the office), so I was going to the Yigtsang as usual, but I didn't have any work to do. I would just stay there, so I would just write something for myself and read something. Usually, we could see and hear when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> were talking. They would just sit on a little bit of a higher floor. Since they knew that I was going to China, they didn't talk in that place saying that I was a Chinese spy and pro-Chinese. The officials were also not talking with me much. It took a long time to make the decision, and later when it was decided to send [a tour of] representatives [of the Tibetan government] led by Liushar [Tib. སྣེཨུ་ཤར] to China, the Dalai Lama told them to send us to China and he gave 25 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> for each of us. The Yigtsang didn't know about that. At that time, I was living with the late <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Yeshe Lhundrup [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ], although we were not in the same <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a>. Serkong [Tib. སེར་ཀོང] Rimpoche was living in our shagtsang, so I used to seek advice from him. At that time he scolded me and after that, all the people were scolding me. drunyichemmo Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] told me to go to China, saying it would be good. Similarly, Jawdang [Tib. ལྕོགས་སྟེང] also said that it was right to go. After that, the Yigtsang submitted plans to appoint me to be in charge of reforming the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་སློབ་གྲྭ] The school for training monk officials in the Potala that was run by the Yigtsang (Ecclesiastic) Office.">Tse labdra</a> school. Before I left [for] China, Drunyichemmo Jawdang said, "It is good for you to go to China, but if not, we were also planning to give you a position." I used to go seek advice from Khenche Lheding [Tib. ལྷ་ལྡིང]. I told him about going to China before we submitted the report. He told me that I should go to China.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was the Water Dragon Year People's Association, and they were holding the same point of view as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> who were against the Chinese. Those people also didn't like you people going to China, right?   

**A:**  We didn't have the chance to meet the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, but it was definite that he didn't like it. But Sitsab Lobsang Tashi had been to China. The people who had been to China had a different point of view.   

**Q:**  In 1952, you went to the Nationality Institute [Tib. མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What did you do after you got there, did you still have the group?   

**A:**  After we got there, there were only the people who went together [with us], so there weren't many people in the group. Gradually, we watched the situation and we made a lot of internal contacts. Nobody came out openly. We were gathering things on time and doing what we should have done internally. Our main purpose was to study hard and keep quite, and try to know [find out] the Chinese situation. There were some students from Kham, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>, Xinjiang and Mongolia. We also made internal contacts with them. Later, we had quite wide relations with them.   

**Q:**  What did you tell the students from Xinjiang and Mongolia?   

**A:**  We told them, "We are not part of China according to whatever kind of history [one looks at], and what they wrote in the 17-Point Agreement is not true and we don't accept it. You also have a similar thing. In the future, we should hold hands [join forces] and oppose the Chinese." Those Mongolians were very good and I don't need to mention about the Amdowas. There were very good girls at that time, like the daughter of the Chief [Tib. དཔོན] of Jone [Tib. ཅོ་ནེ], and also the chief himself.   

**Q:**  At that time, the youths wanted to develop the country and the Chinese were also talking about that. How did you find the Chinese conduct? In the beginning they treated you well and later, they became different, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In the beginning, the Tibetans had some privileges. For example, the other students were sleeping on bunk beds, but we were sleeping on single beds. In the 17-Point Agreement, it was written that the customs and habits of Tibetans shall be respected. When we arrived there, we told them we didn't have beds in Tibet. Even if we did, we only had singles. According to our customs, we wore talismans on our bodies, and since our childhoods, we had received dharma teachings and had deities [statues] with us, so we would never put dirty things on top of us. Therefore, the Tibetans were sleeping on single beds. We also had a Tibetan kitchen where Tibetans ate separately. Some of the students brought dried meat and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> from Amdo. We were given clothes for summer and winter and no one was suppressing us. When there were some among us violating the rules of the school, we treated them severely, but internally, we shouldn't have drank alcohol or have sexual misconduct. But there were some Tibetans doing those things. There were Chinese girls among the students and there were also some places to go do those things, though it was very strict in China. At that time, we didn't hold meetings, but two or three people would talk to each other and pass messages when playing ball. We would get in touch in that way. We were suspicious of Chinese spies. We assumed that there were no spies among the Tibetans, but later on, we came to know there were spies among us. This went very well until 1954 when the Dalai Lama came to China. In that year, Shölkang Jedrung came to China with the Youth Association. They said that the Tibetans didn't need any privileges and Ngawang Senge supported them. The two of them ganged together [Tib. ཁ་འཐབ] and didn't adhere to our previous regulations, and Ngawang Senge joined the Youth Association. So we had trouble. Furthermore, the Chinese knew all about our matters. After that, Phala Drönyerchemmo and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Liushar called me and Kelsang Thöndrub. They said, "The Chinese told us about your group. You should hand over all the documents. Don't set up the group again." Ngawang Senge informed Shölkang Jedrung about that.   

**Q:**  Shölkang Jedrung had already started the Youth Association in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were sent by the Chinese. This was the first tour group [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ] of the Youth Association.   

**Q:**  What kind of trouble, or why didn't you get along with them well at that time?   

**A:**  This was because they were doing whatever the Chinese told them to do and they were saying that the Chinese were good, and they were not holding the ideology of the Tibetans and said that we Tibetans didn't need any privileges. That we should get mixed in with ordinary people. At that time, some of the people from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> supported Ngawang Senge. After that, we didn't have privileges and our organization was also dispersed or destroyed, and we had to hand over the documents. From then on, the Chinese started setting up spies for each Tibetan. We talked with Ngawang Senge separately and we also beat him up.   

**Q:**  Did you beat him up?   

**A:**  Yes, this was a Tibetan custom. We just expressed our feelings. Otherwise, we didn't have anything to do because it was finished.   

**Q:**  They just said that they didn't want the privileges, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They said that, but they shouldn't have told them about the group. Ngawang Senge told about the group to Shölkang Jedrung and Shölkang told the Chinese. As for the privileges, they were not that important, but we should have kept those on because it was written in the Agreement that Tibetan customs shall not be changed. After that, we didn't have the group, but we were keeping the name Tsengöl in our minds. Trekhang Kelsang Thubden [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཐུབ་བསྟན] was also in that group and he was good and trustworthy.   

**Q:**  Who else was there in the group?   

**A:**  Panden Phüntso [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ཕུན་ཚོགས] was there. He is a teacher in Darjeeling. He is related to Dogönpa [Tib. རྡོ་དགོན་པ] and Shölkang. He was not in the group in Tibet, but when we arrived in China he joined the group.   

**Q:**  I heard that one person in Switzerland was also in that group, right?   

**A:**  There was a person called Lobsang Namdrol [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྣམ་གྲོལ] in Switzerland. He was not in China, but he was holding the same thoughts with us.   

**Q:**  The trouble occurred when the Dalai Lama came to China, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that was in 1954.   

**Q:**  Until what year did you stay in China?   

**A:**  I stayed there until 1957. I studied the Chinese language from the beginning. The language was just the tool. The main subject was about the system of communism, and about the Long March of the Red Army [Tib. དམར་དམག་རྒྱང་སྐྱོད], Marxism, Leninism, math, geography and Chinese history.   

**Q:**  In 1954, when the Dalai Lama went for the tour in China and stayed almost a year, did you people stay in the school?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that, in 1955-56, it was said that the reforms must be implemented in Kham and later, the monasteries were destroyed. What was the effect on the Tibetan students?   

**A:**  The students in the school in China didn't hear about those things. I am not bragging, I was the only lecturer [Ch. jiang shi] among the Tibetans in that school.   

**A:**  After that, I was told to be the Tibetan teacher for the Chinese students, but I refused and told them that I couldn't do that without an order from the Tibetan government. After 4-5 months, they brought the order from the Tibetan government for my being a teacher. So I worked as a teacher. My Tibetan was the best among the students who were with me. In 1954, I was promoted to a cadre, and I continued my studies and they gave me the title of lecturer. I also compiled the textbooks. They had an internal newspaper which was not distributed outside. The teachers above the lecturer were allowed to read that newspaper. But we were not allowed to tell the contents of the newspaper to anybody. And we couldn't keep the newspaper for a long time. If we got it in the morning, we had to hand it in in the morning. In the newspaper, I read about the revolt in Kham and I used to tell the people who had internal relations with me about that. And I also told the Khambas internally. Otherwise, the ordinary people didn't know about that.   

**Q:**  You learned a lot about going on the socialist path. Did the Chinese tell you that you should put that into action when you got back to Tibet?   

**A:**  Yes. They told us, "You were trained here, so you should go back and teach this to the Tibetans and implement the reforms in Tibet."   

**Q:**  Did you hear anything about Kham outside the school?   

**A:**  No, we didn't.   

**Q:**  Didn't you meet anyone, like traders in restaurants and such places?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. At that time there was only the Nationality Institute, otherwise, there weren't any Tibetans living there. There were just a few Tibetan monks, like Cholo [Tib. ཆོས་བློ] and some other translators. There was a very small number of Tibetans going to China and there wasn't any historical record that Tibetans went to the school in China. There were also some traders staying in China for a short period and going back to Tibet.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama came to China, you were told to stop your group, right?   

**A:**  Phala and Liushar told us to stop the group. The Chinese didn't tell us anything about that and they didn't interrogate me.   

**Q:**  After that the group didn't exist, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after that, the Chinese set up spies and later it was proved that they had set up a spy for me. Wang Yao was appointed as the assistant teacher with me. He was very smart and cunning, and was an unreliable person. He had a very good memory and he was knowledgeable. He would deceive people. He was also a hard worker like Mel la. He could talk with every person very tactfully. Mel la is also like that. He is very tough [Tib. གྱོང་པོ]. When I was working with him and when I called him from Washington D.C., sometimes he would speak like a Tibetan and say "Oh. Yes! That is right. I will do as you said [Tib. ལགས་རེད་ད་ག་རང་རེད། བཀའ་གནང་རང་རེད། ངས་ཞུས་ཆོག]." He was skilled in verbal communication. But, when some other people in the school told him something, he would show a sulking expression and talk in a harsh manner. At that time, I was thinking that he was able to act [Tib. འཁྲབ]. Wang Yao was also like that. He was very knowledgeable and capable, and a hard worker. And he was the spy. At that time, he was not a party member, but the Chinese were using him very much.   

**Q:**  How did you come back from China after staying until 1957?   

**A:**  I came back all of a sudden because there was the event in Kham and the Dalai Lama came back to Tibet in 1955. The rectification [Tib. ཞེང་ཕེ༹ང] movement took place in China and they held many meetings regarding making changes, like "Let a hundred flowers bloom and a hundred schools of thoughts contend [Tib. མེ་ཏོག་བརྒྱ་བཞད། མཁས་བརྒྱ་འགྲན་གླེང]." That was the time when they destroyed the opponents of Mao Zedong, and destroyed Hufeng and those people. They said that scholars should contend and talk like a hundred flowers blooming, and they would not investigate about that in the future. That you could make whatever kind of criticism you wanted against the Party. Actually, they were spreading the net for catching fish. They made propaganda and held many meetings. So the scholars criticized the Party and all of their [the Party's] opponents came out, and many of them were arrested and destroyed. After 1954, in the school they lessened the classes teaching Tibetan and they even destroyed the temple. Ngawang Senge was in the Youth Association and he was also one of the students saying that we didn't need those things [like the temple]. When the Chinese teachers were teaching the students, they were using terms like reactionary [Tib. ལོག་སྤྱོད་པ; Ch. fan dong pai]. They pointed their fingers to the Potala Palace and said that this was built by the reactionaries. And that this was the building from where the reactionaries ruled [Tibet]. They did something that violated the 17-Point, like not letting the teachers teach Tibetan and not respecting the Tibetan customs. At that time, we took one teacher as an example, and we drew [his image] and underneath we wrote the main three points in Chinese. Internally we had solidarity with the [other] students. There were about 800 students and we were linked [Tib. སྦྲེལ] together everywhere. Among the girls, Tangme Kelde [Tib. ཐང་སྨད་སྐལ་བདེ] was one of the toughest. Back then, she did a lot, but nowadays, I heard she is doing great with the Chinese because of the influence of her parents. Similarly, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Tsewang was also very good. Later, the Chinese shot him dead. At that time, we stuck up a big character poster. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> Kelsang Kunga [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཀུན་དགའ], who had been working with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. yab gzhis drung yik] The &quot;title&quot; of the secretary/clerk of Gyalo Thondup whose personal name was Lhamo Tsering.">Yabshi Trunyi</a>, was also enthusiastic and very good. He is still alive.   

**Q:**  Where is he now?   

**A:**  He is in Delhi working in the Indian Intelligence Office.   

**Q:**  Were they in the school?   

**A:**  Yes, we were together and he was one of the teachers. And some other people went to stick up the posters. We discussed internally and some of us sacrificed ourselves and came out openly with names. That was the first urgent meeting in the school, held all of a sudden where they announced about sticking up the big character poster. That was the first poster stuck up in the schools. The officials came from the Nationality Office [Tib. མི་རིགས་ལས་ཁུངས] and advised us, and they told us to submit our opinions. We were assigned our work and I was assigned as the spokesman. We went on the stage and debated and criticized the teachers. They considered the settlement tactfully [Tib. མཁས་པོ] and said that the teachers were wrong and that they made a mistake regarding the nationality policy. "So we will educate the teachers. You all are young and you should study and remain in school, and we will make the decision in the future." They considered [Tib. བསྙལ] the settlement during the summer. Internally, they were investigating the matter among us and meetings were held often. At that time, they had reported the matter to the leaders of the Dalai Bureau [Tib. ཏ་ལའི་དོན་གཅོད་ཁང; Ch. da lai ban shi chu]. The head of the representative office of the Dalai Lama was Yingön Yeshe Targye [Tib. དབྱིངས་དགོན་ཡེ་ཤེས་དར་རྒྱས] and Thönwang [Tib. དོན་དབང] Khenjung. They came to advise us. We reported the reasons for the matter to them. After that, meetings were held with the Chinese. They were still saying that the teachers were wrong and we were good. Later, when they had concluded the work of the rectification, they were planning to arrest the ringleaders and send them to transform themselves through labor by making them work as janitors in the school. They made the principal [Tib. སྤྱི་ཀྱབ] of the school work as a janitor. Actually, I knew that I was in danger, and there was Tsadora [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར་བ] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Champa Tendar [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར]. At that time, he was an ordinary tsidrung. And there was Panden Phüntso and Yingön Chöndze, who was related to Yeshe Targye. At that time, the old woman, Mola [Tib. རྨོ་ལགས], said that the five main persons were [in danger], so all of them should leave. Hence, I told them "Let's go. It is dangerous to stay here." At that time, Champa Tendar and Panden Phüntso left. Yingön Chöndze and the other people didn't leave. I received a letter from my mother saying that she was not feeling well and that I should come to see her. I asked for leave for 4 months to go see my mother. When I came up [to Lhasa], I just had a trunk and a bag to take with me. I left the other things in the office and I came back with the last tour group of Tibet.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1957?   

**A:**  Yes, that was in the 11th month of 1957. After I came back to Tibet, the school had accumulated my salary for a year. After 6 months, the Chinese United Front [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་གྱུར; Ch. tong zhan bu] contacted me in Lhasa and told me to go back to China. Then I asked for some more leave. In the meantime, they also sent some of my salary to Lhasa. After that, I was appointed as the official in charge of the Lhasa Nyertsang Office. That was in 1958. In 1957, I was selected to work in the Legjö Legung from among the 7th rank <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, and I also worked on the renovation of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>. After the renovation of the Jokhang was over, I was told that I had done well in renovating the Jokhang, so I was appointed as the Lhasa Nyertsang because I had to make contact with the Chinese. That office was a mayoral committee in charge of foodstuffs and housing. After that, the Chinese didn't call me to return to the school. In the meantime, I heard that struggle sessions and investigations took place at the school in China. Before, when I hadn't decided not to go back, they didn't criticize me. After that, they started criticizing me, saying that I committed the most serious crime and spread poisonous weeds, and they were going to take me to China and they had to hold struggle sessions against me.   

**Q:**  They didn't say anything in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you were in China in the years like 1954, the Chinese were talking very pleasant, and you were among the younger people who had modernization thoughts. So when you came back, the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region was established and they had done the reform in Kham, and they were talking about doing the reform in Tibet. How did you find Lhasa at that time?   

**A:**  At that time, I found that there were Chinese everywhere. Furthermore, there were Chinese everywhere and so many people among the Tibetans were engrossed [Tib. དབྱིངས] with the Chinese. In terms of the way people were talking, there was great Chinese influence, which I had never seen before. Especially the military influence.   

**Q:**  When you came to Lhasa, the Dalai Lama had already come back from India, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, I was thinking that I should report the matter to the Dalai Lama and if it would be necessary, I was planning to go back to China and receive the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐམཛིང་ཙོནདུ (འཐབ་འཛིང་ཚོགས་འདུ); ch. 斗争会] Public accusation meetings at which the masses criticized and attacked (struggled against) class enemies and reactionaries, etcetera. Typically, the object of a struggle session would stand in front of the meeting bent over at the waist while the masses questioned and criticized, and often beat him/her.">struggle session</a>, and go transform myself through labor. If it would be necessary, I would reform myself and join the Party also. But, after I came back, I didn't get the chance to have an audience with the Dalai Lama. In the end, when I stayed in Switzerland for 2 months, Phala granted me an audience with the Dalai Lama Back then they were suspicious of me being a Chinese spy. Even the date of the ceremony for getting appointed as the Nyertsang was also told by Phala Drönyerchemmo to my uncle. The Dalai Lama was not there. It would have been very good if I would have gotten the chance of an audience because when the Dalai Lama came to China in 1954, he called me secretly through Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche. In the past, this was kind of an impossible thing. At that time, I was on the team where they were translating the Chinese constitution into Tibetan. I was the only government official on that translation team. The Dalai Lama wanted to know about the content of the constitution, and he probably wanted to know about the situation as much as possible. The Dalai Lama was talking about democracy and about the constitution, and he told me that the 13th Dalai Lama was also concerned about those things. He told me, "You are working on that team. What is written in the constitution?" Actually, at that time, the constitution was in the printing house and it was going to be published and distributed at the meeting.   

**Q:**  Was that in 1954?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  According to their plan, after the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, didn't they make people study the constitution?   

**A:**  Yes, that was later on. In 1954-55 when the National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མེ་ཚོགས་ཆེན] was held in China, they distributed the constitution at the meeting. I was the youngest translator on that team from Central Tibet. Cholo was also on that team. At that time, I had a long audience with the Dalai Lama and I knew him well. I was supposed to stay for quite a long time, but I had to leave all of a sudden because of the situation. Even after I arrived in India the Dalai Lama fully trusted me, but all of the elderly [exiles] probably were not trusting of me and they were always suspicious of me.   

**Q:**  When the reforms were postponed for 6 years, you were in China, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In 1958, the situation had become worse, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, many Khambas had arrived in Central Tibet and they went to Lhoka, and it was very dangerous and they were ready for there to be a confrontation with the Chinese. Internally, it was also dangerous, and among the Tibetans, people didn't trust each other.   

**Q:**  Did the situation become tense after the arrival of the Khambas? How was the internal situation?   

**A:**  Yes, it became tense mainly after the Khambas came. Many Amdowas also arrived.   

**Q:**  When you were in charge of the Lhasa Nyertsang Legung, did you have to get involved with the housing and the spaces for putting tents up for the Khambas?   

**A:**  The territory under the Nyertsang Legung was within the Lingkor [Tib. གླིང་སྐོར] Road, and they put their tents up outside the Lingkor Road, like where <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s new house was built and where there were fields. In the housing areas that belonged to the Nyertsang Legung in Lhasa, we had appointed a Nangsen clerk to be in charge of reporting travelers' arrivals and departures, and from where the travelers had come. They also had to report about people's deaths, and then the Nyertsang Legung would give a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> and some money. They also had to report the newborns, and they were given khata and underwear which was called gyedar [Tib. སྐྱེས་དར]. We had traditional books for those records.   

**Q:**  In 1958, Andru Jinda and those people held meetings and they thought that many people would be arrested, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Chinese were also taking notes of the population of the Khambas in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and they were told that they could no longer stay in Lhasa. The list was probably taken by the Tibet Autonomous Region.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Chinese also sent back Chinese people, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the Khambas were told to go back. Therefore, having no place to stay, they just went outside [Lhasa]. Internally, there was a lama called Shogdrug Lama from Kham who wanted to offer a golden throne to the Dalai Lama for his longevity. The lama reported this to Phala and Phala used this opportunity so that Andru Jinda could seek advice from Phala...   

**Q:**  There was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> also, right?   

**A:**  Yes, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Andrutsang were neighbors. I had good relations with Namseling and he used to ask about the news in China. We were also neighbors. My maternal aunt had sexual relations with Namseling and she had a child. That child was in Lhasa. Phala gave instructions for making the golden throne and it was decided to build the throne in the Sungjö rawa. The golden throne was built by the people from Kham led by Andrutsang while <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was set up internally. They got donations from everywhere and the Khambas were holding meetings in that place. They were asking Phala and Namseling about what to do.   

**Q:**  At that time, they were unable to hold meetings formally, right?   

**A:**  They also went to the monasteries, like Sera and Drepung, for pilgrimage and held meetings. After that, they decided to go outside. In the beginning, they were supposed to send <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Trekhang Samjö [Tib. བཀྲས་ཁང་བསམ་མཆོག] to Lhoka to tell the Khambas not to launch the disturbances/revolt. At that time, Namseling asked Phala to send me as his staff. Internally he consulted with Phala. That was because I knew the Chinese language, and I also listened to the news on the radio every day and I was promptly telling Namseling the news. Internally I was prepared to go, but when we were about to leave, Phala told me, "This time you are probably not going with Namseling. It is not convenient. Later we will think about it." At that time, Namseling stayed with my aunt in E Gombo Khangsar [Tib. ཨེ་མགོན་པོ་ཁང་གསར]. Namseling's wife knew about that a little.   

**Q:**  Your aunt was the wife of the Chandzö of Lhagyari, right?   

**A:**  Yes. One of their sons had entered the service of the Tibetan government as a lay official.   

**Q:**  There was also Kotse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was from Dakpo. Kotse <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</a>, Gombo Khangsar's wife Nubcho Jola [Tib. ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་ཇོ་ལགས], and my mother were all brothers and sisters from the same parents. Later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> stayed in Dharamsala for a long time and we talked a lot about those events. He told me, "At that time, Phala told me not to take you to Lhoka and to be careful." I don't know why. Later, when I met Phala in Switzerland, I knew that they were suspicious that I might be a communist. I heard that Ngawang Senge told them about that. He was envious and it was because we didn't get along well [in China]. Furthermore, back then, Ngawang Senge plotted together with the people from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> and did many things. People were not writing the truth. Actually, Ngawang Senge had homosexual relation with Phala Drönyerchemmo and he didn't stay 4 years in China. He just stayed for about 2 years. I met Andru Jinda in Lhasa. At that time, there was a couple from Kham called Minyag Abo Yönden [Tib. མི་ཉག་ཨ་ཕོ་ཡོན་ཏན]. Later he died. They had asked for lodging in Kotse Jola's house. I had a plan to go with them because I knew the Chinese language and the radio. They had relations with the Guomindang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a>. When I had a plan to go with the Khambas, I received a letter written in Chinese from Gyalo Thondup. Later, I knew that that was the handwriting of Yabshi Trunyi. It was written in the letter that I should stay in Tibet and do something, like setting up a wireless machine [Tib. རླུང་འཕྲིན], and that people would be sent gradually. The letter was delivered through <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Tempa. I knew him and Thubden Nyinji [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉིན་བྱེད] before that.   

**Q:**  Three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I knew them from the early times. Furthermore, after I came back from China, I had relations with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> Tempa. After I received the letter from Gyalo Thondup, I didn't leave [Lhasa]. One of the most important jobs of the Nyertsang Office was to arrange the ceremonies for the monastic exams taken by the Dalai Lama in the three great monastic seats. I accomplished that task. After that, I contacted people and my plan was to go to India. I was also the internal clerk for Tsarong Kungö. I was living near the house where Seshika [Tib. ཟས་གཞིས་ཀ] was living. The house used to belong to the Chief [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] of the Muslims, and after he went to India, I got his house. I got that through the help of Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] Ama la. Tsarong use to call me and I had to tell him the news. At that time, he was writing letters regarding sending his daughter, Tsering Drolma [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ], to Japan. You probably knew about that.   

**Q:**  Later my aunt [Tsering Drolma] went to Japan.   

**A:**  That was after she came to India. At that time, Tsarong had two plans. One was to make iron printing letters for the Kangyur text. Another plan was to send Tsering Drolma and three girls from the Panam district to Japan to learn machine knitting. He was planning to set up a knitting factory in the countryside. At that time, letters should have been written in printing form [Tib. དབུ་ཆེན] and I was his secret clerk. Thöndrub Drolma [Tib. དོན་གྲུབ་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལགས] was also there, but he kept this secret from everyone. When I went there, he would give me some gifts and some money. He used to give me a lot of tomatoes.   

**Q:**  When Andru Jinda was in Lhoka, the Chinese were probably saying a lot about that to the Kashag, telling them to stop the disturbances of the Khambas, and they also reported that to the Dalai Lama. Later, a meeting was held, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Chinese were telling the Kashag a lot of things, and did the Kashag report to the Dalai Lama or did the Chinese report to the Dalai Lama directly?   

**A:**  I also heard that the Chinese were reporting to the Dalai Lama directly. But mainly, they were reporting to the Kashag. That was for quelling the Khambas' disturbance and to mollify Zhongyang.   

**Q:**  Later, the Dalai Lama probably told them to hold the meeting, right?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea about that.   

**Q:**  Did you attend the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, but I don't remember clearly. Anyway, they were talking about quelling the Khambas' disturbances and mollifying the Chinese. I don't have any idea whether they passed a resolution. Thönsur la has a very good memory, you better ask him.   

**Q:**  I heard that in the beginning, Surkhang gave a good speech and said that it would be better if they discussed this in teams. After that, the representatives of all the ranks held meetings separately. Don't you remember that?   

**A:**  I don't remember that. In the end, they decided to send <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and Samjola.   

**Q:**  Don't you remember the persons who attended that meeting?   

**A:**  No, I don't remember. Let alone that meeting, I don't even remember the meeting held on March 10th.   

**Q:**  Was that the meeting held in the Shabden Lhagang and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Lhagang [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད་ལྷ་ཁང]?   

**A:**  Yes, and they also held small team meetings. I don't remember who attended the meetings.   

**Q:**  There were also representatives of the soldiers, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were representatives from everywhere. Gyagpön Keldram [Tib. སྐལ་དགྲམ] has a good memory. Did you interview Jangtrela [Tib. བྱང་བཀྲས་ལགས]? You better ask him.   

**Q:**  There were probably several people in that [group], like Barshi Jedrung [Tib. བར་གཞིས་རྗེ་དྲུང], saying that they were going to see it through until the end [Tib. མཐར་སྐྱེལ]. And also some people were saying that it probably would not be good to do reckless things when the Dalai Lama was there. What do you remember about that?   

**A:**  Do you mean in 1959?   

**Q:**  I mean in 1958, when they were talking about quelling the disturbances of the Khambas. I heard that each team wrote a kind of statement about their opinions, right?   

**A:**  We called that a statement [Tib. ཚིག་ཐོ]. I don't remember clearly about that.   

**Q:**  Where were you staying in 1959?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  You probably didn't know that the disturbance was going to occur in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>?   

**A:**  That is out of question.   

**Q:**  Some people knew about that.   

**A:**  On the night before the Dalai Lama was said to be going to be invited by the Chinese, I received that message. At that time, there were some Amdowas in the courtyard where my father used to live. I know them well. Just after dark, two of the Amdowas came over and said that the Dalai Lama was going to be invited by the Chinese. [That] we should not let them do that. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Sambo and Liushar were living near my house. This was also near the house of Trijang Rimpoche. The main thing that I used to tell them was the Chinese news from the Voice of America. I asked the Amdowas whether this message was reliable. They said it was reliable. Then I told them this was really dangerous, and it would be better not to have a disturbance. For them to go ahead and tell the other people about this. I thought of going to see Kalön Liushar and dressed myself in my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> uniform. Khenjung Kelsang Ngawang [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ངག་དབང] was also living near by and we had relations, as he wanted to hear the news. And we were internally thinking in the same way and doing something secretly.   

