# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0101.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Tian Bao  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China  
**Date of Interview:** 1996  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tian Bao  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tian Bao [Sangye Yeshe] was in the first group of Tibetans who joined the CCP during the "Long March" and later became a senior Tibetan official in the CCP in Xikang Province and in Sichuan. In this interview, Tian Bao discusses how he joined the army. He describes the positions he had in the army, the Anti-Japanese War, and also the political turmoil during that time. Additionally, he discusses his time at the Party School.   

---  
### Tape   

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0101_01/H_0101_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I would like to ask you why you joined the Red Army when you were young? Who introduced you to the Red Army?   

**A:**  I was born in Aba [Tib. ཨཱབ་བ] [in 1920] and was very poor. My father had passed away a long time ago, so it was my mother who supported the household by herself. Including me, my mother had three boys. During that period, according to tradition, if there were three boys within one family, two of the three boys should be sent to a Buddhist monastery to be monks. Since I am the oldest of the three, when I was 7 years old, I was sent into a small monastery in our local area. In 1934... (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan for Goldstein.)   

**Q:**  Was your family background farmers or herdsmen?   

**A:**  We were farmers. Our hometown is located in one area where both agriculture and animal husbandry co-existed. Some people raised livestock and others planted grains.   

**Q:**  What is the name of the small monastery where you were sent?   

**A:**  It still exists now. It is called Tashiling. It is very small, and belongs to the Nyingma order.   

**Q:**  How old are you now?   

**A:**  In this year I am 76 years old. In 1933 or 1934, in my hometown, some people said the Red Army had arrived in Northern Sichuan. At that moment, the people didn't know clearly what the Red Army was. Some said the soldiers of the Red Army treated the poor people very well, yet some others said they were cruel. In Spring in 1935, many troops of the Red Army arrived at my hometown. The troops of the Red Fourth Army [Ch. hongsi fangmian jun] arrived in Aba from Northern Sichuan. The troops which were led by Chairman Mao and Zhu De, arrived in the area near the Luding Bridge (Ch. lu ding qiao) from Liangshan. The troops led by He Long and Ren Bishi arrived in Ganzi from the border area of Yunnan. Then the troops of the three Red Armies joined together in my hometown. (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  When the troops of the Red Army arrived, where were you? Were you in the monastery then?   

**A:**  Yes I was in the monastery. The monks of the Nyingma order do not need to stay in monastery all the time. Only when it is... (unclear) ...should the monks should go to monastery. The rest of the time, the monks can stay at home. (For about two minutes, this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  As a result, I joined the Red Army. First, I joined the local troop (Ch. difang budui), which was called the Young Pioneers (Ch. shaonian xianfeng dui). (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:** At that moment, did you know clearly what a "revolution" was, or not?   

**A:**  When the troops of the Red Army arrived, since they treated us very well and never beat or attacked us, we joined them. (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  During that period, they launched a movement, redistributing the lands and attacked the local tyrants (Ch. fen tudi da tuhao), and they also attacked the Han officials [Ch. hanguan] and the chiefs/headmen [Ch. tusi]. The Red Army confiscated the property of those people and then distributed their property to the poor people. (For about half a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  At that moment, were there officials in Aba?   

**A:**  Yes. There were some chiefs/headmen [Ch. tusi] then, but many of these escaped. In Ganzi and Aba, the troops of the Red Army stayed for one year and four months. It was really a long time. (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  What did the Red Army do during this period?   

**A:**  First, some young people of my hometown, some progressive people, joined the CCP. So we all belonged to the first group of Tibetan people who joined the CCP in history. (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  The second activity the Red Army did was to establish a regime owned by the Tibetan people themselves. In Dajing, Aba, a government called Geliedesa Government was established. In Ganzi, a government called Böba Government (Tibetan Governmnet) was established. Thus, the native Tibetan people got the right of self-government. (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  Thirdly, the Red Army helped us establish a local military troop. This troop consisted of two divisions, of about 2,000 soldiers. (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  Who was the commander of this troop of 2,000 soldiers? Was he from the Red Army?   

**A:**  Yes the Red Army dispatched and appointed the commander... (one sentence unclear).   

**A:**  At that moment, some famous people... Geda Lama (Ch. geda huofo) participated in the Böba Government. And Xiageduodeng, was also one of the leaders of the government. (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  I served as the director of the Young People Department of the government (Ch. qingnian bu buzhang). I was in charge of the matters concerning the young people. (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:** How many Tibetan people joined the Red Army then?   

**A:**  At first, there were about 2,000 Tibetan people who joined in that troop. Later on, when the troop arrived in Minzhou, Gansu, we issued a policy saying that all the Tibetan people who joined the Red Army, would be permitted to leave if they wanted to return to their hometown. We would give even of them a gun, a horse, and 10 silver coins. So, most of older Tibetans who had earlier joined the Red Army, left and returned. However, more than ten younger Tibetan people insisted on continuing to follow the Red Army. (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  Among the young Tibetans who continued to follow the Red Army, there are several still. For example, in Tibet, there is a person called Hu Zonglin, who has retired now. In Beijing, there is one named Zhaxi wangxue. Do you know them? There are about 4 or 5 people of these who are still alive now. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  Is Xiageduodeng from Derge or Aba?   

**A:**  Xiageduodeng is from Derge. He was the butler of the headman of the Derge chief (Ch. dege tusi).   

**Q:**  Did the Böba Government govern Derge?   

**A:**  Yes. The Böba Government governed the area east of Jinsha River [Ch. jinsha jiang]. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  (not clear)... The two Party Secretaries of the two governments had the same task. The one in Dajin governed Aba, and the one in Ganzi governed the area of Ganzi. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  Who was the main leader of the Geliedesa government in Dajin?   

**A:**  At first, the main leader was a person named Keji. Later on, he left and returned to his hometown. After he went back, the reactionary government attacked and punished him. When I went to look for him afterwards, I found his situation was very bad and before long he passed away. His name was Keji. (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  After arriving in Minzhou, several young Tibetan people started to study because at that moment we couldn't speak Chinese well and couldn't read Chinese characters at all. So some people were dispatched to come and teach us Chinese. (For about half of a minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  And then the Anti-Japanese War (Ch. kang zhan) happened. And then the Xi'an Incident [Ch. xi'an shibian] occurred. Then we arrived in Yan'an, Northern Shaanxi. In Yan'an, a special study class was organized for us, helping us study in the Party School of the Central Committee of the CCP [Ch. zhongyang dangxiao]. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  When we arrived in Yan'an, it was in the winter of 1936 [He was then 16 years of age]. The weather then was really cold. Later on, after the full-scale Anti-Japanese War started, some people from Inner Mongolia also came to Yan'an. And some Hui people (Chinese Muslims), as well as some from other ethnic groups came as well. Therefore, in order to help these people to study, in Yan'an, the Central College for National Minorities [Ch. zhongyang minzu xueyuan] was established. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  Some leading cadres of the Yan'an College for National Minorities (Ch. yan'an minzu xueyuan) were Gao Gang... Do you know Gao Gang? Gao Gang served as the nominal president of the college. In fact, he worked chiefly in the Shan-Gan-Ning Border Region [Ch. shan gan ning bianqu]. Ulanhu [Ch. wu lan fu] was also one of the leading comrades. And Gao Kelin was also one of them. Gao Kelin was actally a Han Chinese. After 1949, he worked on the Committee for Discipline Inspection [Ch. jiancha weiyuan hui]. These three people were in charge of the general work of the college. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  This college lasted for... The Japanese invaders gave up in 1945, so the college was disbanded in that year. After that, a large number of cadres who earlier studied in the college followed Ulanhu [Ch. wu lan fu] to go to the Mongolian areas to work. Some schools were moved to Dingbian, the area in the most northern part of North Shaanxi, which was very close to the Mongolian areas. (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:** During this period, did you go to Dingbian, as well follow Ulanhu?   

**A:**  Yes, I went to Dingbian. And then I was dispatched to work in an area near Dingbian, the area called Eerduosi and Yikezhaomeng. (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  During the period between the moment you arrived at Yan'an and the year 1945, did you study all the time?   

**A:**  At first I studied in the Party School [Ch. dang xiao]. Then I stayed in Xinjiang for one year. In Xinjiang I studied Russian. And then I returned. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  During this period, what was the situation of the people's regimes that had been previously established in Aba? Were they destroyed?   

**A:**  They were all destroyed by the reactionaries. Lots of people who once worked for the people's regimes were attacked and punished.   

**Q:**  How long did these people's regimes last?   

**A:**  The people's regime of Aba lasted for more than half of a year. And the one in Ganzi lasted for two or three or four months. (For several seconds this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  After arriving in the Mongolian area, at first I did the masses' work [Ch. qunzhong gongzuo]. Because the Mongolian people respected Tibetans very much, this facilitated my work. So I did this work for a long time. And then, civil war happened in the Mongolian area. Some Mongolian people supported the CCP while others supported the GMD. So the two groups of Mongolians started to fight against each other. I started to do military work, and served as a young military training instructor [Ch. qingnian jiaoguan] in the local troop. (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  Later... In February, 1949, the Central Committee of the CCP sent a telegram to me, asking me to go to Beijing to attend the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [Ch. zhengzhi xieshang huiyi]. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  Now I will talk about my experience after the founding of the PRC. In early April of 1949 I arrived in Beijing to attend the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference as a representative of the Tibetan people. On October 1st, the PRC was formally founded... (one sentence unclear) (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  When I was attending the conference, I encountered Liu Bocheng and Deng Xiaoping. We were acquainted with each other before and they told me to follow them to go south to Sichuan, rather than return to Inner Mongolia (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  When you were studying in the Party School and the College for National Minorities (Ch. minzu xueyuan), how many Tibetan CCP members were there?   

**A:**  There were only 7 or 8 Tibetan CCP members there then. This number was not very many compared to that of some other ethnic groups. For example, at that time there were about 10 CCP members who were Yi nationality. And especially, most of the CCP members then were Mongolians and Hui, because in southwest China, there were more Mongolians and Hui. (For about twenty seconds this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  All these people serve as the leading officials in the Autonomous Regions now. For example, Buhe from Inner Mongolia, who was the former chairman, was one of my classmates. (For about twenty seconds this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  Later on, every time I arrived in one area, I tried to look for the Tibetan people who lived in the inland area [Ch. neidi] then. For example, in Beijing, I found Duoji caidan, who was studying in Beijing. In Chongqing, there was an office of the Panchen Lama (Ch. banchan banshichu). Some people, such as Senggebadeng, who lived there then, now work in the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. We explained some policies to them in order to win them over, and tried to unite with them. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  In December, 1959, I arrived at Chongqing. (For about twenty seconds this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  Was the policy that "All the property should be bought peacefully by the government," [Ch. heping de baoxialai] made by Sichuan province or by Xikang province?   

**A:**  The leaders of Sichuan made it. And it was made during the meeting of the People's Congress [Ch. renmin daibiao dahui]. (For about twenty seconds this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  Was the policy that the property should be bought peacefully carried out in 1955?   

**A:**  It should be in 1955... (one sentence unclear)... We lived there to protect them. (For about two minutes this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  Now I will say that the rebellion happening in Xikang had close relations with the Dalai Lama. Why do I say so? At that moment, the Dalai Lama went to attend the meeting of the People's Congress [in Beijing]. He went to attend the meeting by way of this route, and returned by way of this route as well. One of his bodyguards was from my hometown. Afterwards, we found that the Dalai Lama and his followers did something bad...(two sentences unclear)... And then, we found some evidence proving it. The events happening next I will not mention now, since all of those have passed. (For about twelve minutes they talked in Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  When did the rebellion happen in Xikang?   

**A:**  It happened in the midst of the democratic reforms. In 1956, we attended the meeting of the Preparatory Committee... (unclear) (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  Did the rebellion in Xikang happen before the policy of democratic reforms was issued, or after it was issued?   

**A:**  The rebellion happened after the policy was issued. It happened after the meeting of the People's Congress of Sichuan Province had finished. At that moment, Xikang had been incorporated into Sichuan. (For about two minutes and a half this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  In the meeting of the People's Congress of Sichuan Province, this policy was issued, so when did the democratic reforms start formally in the agricultural and pastoral areas?   

**A:**  It started after the meeting, in 1955 or so. We had already made enough work to try and persuade the people then. We had held all kinds of small-unit meetings [Ch. xiaozu hui] for the masses. We sent many work teams [Ch. gongzuo zu] to collect people's opinions. During the meeting of the People's Congress of Kangding, we particularly met some upper-class people and tried to persuade them. We also tried to persuade the masses, who supported us firmly.   

**Q:**  That is to say, the decision of democratic reform was made in 1955?   

**A:**  Yes. (For about one minute and a half this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  Was the decision made at the end of 1955 or not?   

**A:**  It should have been made in the summer of that year, when the weather was still very hot.   

**Q:**  Did the rebellion happen in January and February in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  It is said that some armed work teams (Ch. wuzhuang gongzuodui) were dispatched to go to Xikang to confiscate the guns and other weapons from the headmen there.   

**A:**  This happened later on. At that moment we had discussed it. At first, some people put forward that we should send some troops there to support the masses. Yet this suggestion was rejected because we thought implementing reforms by means of military activity was not good. So at first, we did not send the troops there. As a result, under this situation, they besieged our governments in those areas. (For about one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  Were the troops sent there in 1955?   

**A:**  After the rebellion happened, we dispatched troops there.   

**Q:**  Now my question is: When we planned to organize some local troops at first, some headmen in the local areas objected to this decision. When did this happen? In 1955?   

**A:**  Maybe in 1955.   

**A:**  (Here some people rather than Tian Bao were speaking in Chinese.) After the policy of land reform was issued, many comrades in the local areas asked us to permit them to organize local troops. However, our leading comrades disapproved of their request. So at that moment, there was no troop in the local areas. As a result, after the reform was launched, the rebels besieged our local county governments one by one.   

**A:**  Yes the rebels attacked our county governments one by one.   

**A:**  (Here some people rather than Tian Bao were speaking in Chinese.) Under this situation, we realized that we needed to send troops there. (For about half of one minute this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  There was another problem then. At that moment our regime did not have enough cadres from the masses. Most of county heads were previous headmen themselves. As a result, they turned traitors in the end. For example, there was one person named... (unclear)... He once served as the county head of Xinlong.   

