# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0101.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Tian Bao  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China  
**Date of Interview:** 1996  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tian Bao  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tian Bao [Sangye Yeshe] was in the first group of Tibetans who joined the CCP during the "Long March" and later became a senior Tibetan official in the CCP in Xikang Province and in Sichuan. In this interview, Tian Bao discusses aspects of the Sichuan rebellion that started in 1956.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0101_02/H_0101_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  At that time, the local troops [Ch. difang wuzhuang] were required to be organized. What were the differences between those troops? For example, in Litang, were there local troops there?   

**A:**  The weapons were all privately owned. Many Tibetan people had their own weapons. Later on, the "Autonomous Regulation" (Ch. zizhi tiaoli) was issued. According to it, the Autonomous District [Ch. zizhi qu] was permitted to establish "troops of public security" [Ch. baoan budui]. So in Aba, a Tibetan troop [Ch. zangmin tuan] was established, and in Ganzi, a Tibetan troop was established as well. We recruited the local Tibetan people into these troops. The Tibetan Troops played a very positive role in our work of quelling the rebellion and launching the reforms, because they were all very familiar with the lives and situations in the Tibetan areas. (For about two minutes and a half, this was translated into Tibetan for Goldstein.)   

**Q:**  Before launching the democratic reforms, had we ever considered the possibility that as the democratic reforms went on if the plan of the reforms did not fit the situation, therefore a rebellion might happen?   

**A:**  Yes, that was a problem. At that moment we didn't consider this possibility because most of the people agreed that we should launch the reforms and we thought that after many years of our work the situation had became stable and orderly. As a result, because our neglect of this possibility, as I had mentioned a moment ago, we didn't even dispatch the PLA to go to those areas then. It was only after the problem occurred, that then we had to dispatch troops there. (For about half of a minute, this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  When was the rebellion eventually quelled?   

**A:**  It may be in 1956... (asking another person present) When did the rebellion happen in Tibet?   

**A:**  (another person answered in Chinese) The rebellion happened in Tibet in 1958-1959.   

**A:**  (Tian Bao said the answer once again.) Some rebels in Sichuan surrendered to us, and so after they returned we awarded them. The other rebels escaped to Chamdo and Tibet, and then they participated in the rebellion in Tibet. And those rebels finally escaped to India.   

**Q:**  How many rebels were there?   

**A:**  About tens of thousands. They first made trouble in Kangding, and then crossed the River and arrived in Chamdo. Then some of them went further to Lhasa. (For about half of a minute, this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  Our policies then were very lenient. Once Chairman Mao discussed an example: "Capturing Meng Huo seven times" (a historical story from Chinese ancient history during the time 220-280 CE). Chairman Mao said, "We, the CCP, should show more leniency than that showed in the story." We followed Chairman Mao's wise decision. (For about a minute, this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**Q:**  The last question...   

**A:**  I welcome him [Professor Goldstein] very much. From now on we will be acquainted with each other. If he has any questions, he can contact me... I am very happy that you choose to do research in the field of Tibetology. You are a person with insight and courage. (For about half of a minute, this was translated into Tibetan.)   

**A:**  I don't say only Tibetan people are good. Certainly we should achieve that all the ethnic groups in China unite together. However, among the dozens of ethnic groups in China, only Tibetan people can be comparable to Han Chinese people because Tibetan people have a long history and a rich culture as well, even though I also accept that every ethnic group has its own advantages. (For about half of a minute, they talked in Tibetan.)   

**A:**  As you know... For example, Tibetan people have a Tibetan Tripitaka, which is really rare and unparalleled. Tibetan people have a very rich culture for researCh... OK. Bye. [end of the tape of H.0101.02]   

