# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0101.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Tian Bao  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China  
**Date of Interview:** 1996  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous and Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Tian Bao  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 76  
**Date of Birth:** 1920  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Tian Bao [Sangye Yeshe] was in the first group of Tibetans who joined the CCP during the "Long March" and later became a senior Tibetan official in the CCP in Xikang Province and in Sichuan. In this interview, Tian Bao discusses the conferences held in Ganzi regarding democratic reforms. He elaborates on his role during this time period, and talks about several other policy makers and "comrades" that he worked with.   

---  
### Tape 03  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0101_03/H_0101_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  It is on November 21, at 3:30 pm, and we are starting to interview Tian Bao. The first question is... I would like to know how long you worked in Ganzi... When were you appointed there?   

**A:**  I arrived there in October, 1956. In November of that year, the Autonomous District [Ch. zizhi qu] was established.   

**Q:**  Are you referring to Xikang?   

**A:** At that time, there was no "district." Only after the Constitution of China was issued were those districts established. When our district was established, the Constitution had not been issued. At that moment we only had "a common guiding principle" [Ch. gongtong gangling] approved by the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [Ch. zhengzhi xie shang huiyi]. According to it, we named it as the "Tibetan Autonomous District of Xikang Province". This district is the first one where the policy of "regional national autonomy" [Ch. minzu quyu zizhi] was carried out after the PRC was founded. Before 1949, before the PRC was founded, in Inner Mongolia, Ulanhu [Ch. wu lan fu] established a district where the policy of "regional national autonomy" was applied. Yet after 1949, our district of Ganzi was the first one where this policy was implemented.   

**Q:**  At that moment, was your position the chairman?   

**A:**  I was the first chairman of Ganzi.   

**Q:**  When did you leave the position?   

**A:**  Later on, the position was re-named as "governor of the prefecture" [Ch. zhou zhang]. I served in that position from 1956 to the start of Cultural Revolution. Then, I served as the Party Secretary. First, my position was called Chairman. Then, it was called Governor of the Prefecture, and then it was called Party Secretary of the Prefecture.   

**Q:**  When were you appointed as Party Secretary? In 1956, or 1955?   

**A:**  At first, I served as a Prefectural Party Secretary [Ch. diwei shuji] in Kangding. At that moment, a Han Chinese cadre, Miao Fengshu, served as the Party Secretary, and I served as the chairman. Later on, after the Constitution of China was issued, I started to serve as the governor of the prefecture. And then, in the year I can not remember clearly now... I started to serve as the Party Secretary and remained in the post until the Cultural Revolution.   

**Q:**  That was a long time.   

**A:**  When it was close to the end of the Cultural Revolution... In 1969, I went to Tibet. So until 1969, I served as the Party Secretary. During that time, the number of the cadres from ethnic minorities was small. Besides in Ganzi, I also served as the governor of Aba for some time. Namely the autonomous district of Aba. The number of ethnic minorities was small. I also served as a member of the Southwest Committee for Military and Political Affairs [Ch. xinan junzheng weiyuanhui], and as a deputy director of the Southwest Committee for Ethnic Affairs ([h. xinan minwei] and as a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. Later on, I also served as a representative attending the 1st meeting of the People's Congress.   

**Q:**  In 1955, the democratic reforms were launched in the prefecture of Ganzi. And during this period, the preparatory works were done. It is said that at that time in Chengdu, a meeting for upper-class people was held. Did you attend the meeting? And what were the preparatory works that you did then?   

**A:**  In early 1956... It was about the event in Wenrang (unclear)... The policy then was that the democratic reforms in the areas of ethnic minorities should be done in a way similar to that done in [with capitalists] inland China, where the policy of "buying" [Ch. shu mai] was implemented in order to buy the properties previously owned by the capitalists, so as to accomplish the reforms. According to this policy, as was the case with the capitalists, the lives and status of the upper-class people would not be affected, and we would not mobilize the masses at first. In order to achieve this goal, in the area near its guest hotel [Ch. zhao dai suo], the Sichuan Committee for Ethnic Affairs gave many houses to the upper-class people at Chengdu and asked them, as well as their relatives and followers, to live in the houses, so as to avoid the masses' possible interference. At that moment, our policy was approved by all of the people. Yet the real relationships were very complicated... First, since we wanted to change the old society, certainly our actions would cause some struggles. Second, some political factors also played a role here. In Tibet... the Dalai Lama went to Beijing to attend the meeting. So he went to Beijing by way of our area, where he noticed our works of doing the reforms and then he supported some people here. The Dalai Lama had a teacher for teaching classics [Ch. jing shi] called Chijiang [Trijang], who was born in Litang. So Chijiang led some people to do some activities to oppose the democratic reforms.   

**Q:**  Did they do these activities when they left Tibet?   

**A:**  They left and returned to Tibet both by way of this area. So they came to our area two times. At that moment, it was by vehicles. If there was no road, then it was by foot. Therefore, the internal reason why the rebellion happened is that the people of the ruling class would not withdraw from their historical position willingly. The external reason was that some imperialists interfered. As a result, because the rebels had risen to revolt, we had to change our old policy. We had to start to quell the rebellion and at that same time, start the democratic reforms. For the people of the ruling class, at first we wanted to carry out a moderate policy. We would confiscate their lands and livestock,and then redistribute them to the peasants. Yet we still tried to maintain their life standards and give their high political status.   

**Q:**  I have a question. When the people of the upper-class went to Chengdu to attend the meeting, we gave them some houses. Were these houses old ones built earlier, or new ones built just for them?   

**A:**  These houses were new ones built just for them. At that time, building houses was not as complex as now. These houses were all two-storey ones equipped with lamps and telephones. The quality of these houses was very good, and many of these are still used now.   

**Q:**  How long did the meeting last? Did you attend it?   

**A:**  The meeting of the People's Congress didn't last too long. Yet the discussions and negotiations around the meeting lasted for a long time. The discussions and negotiations were done among a large number of different groups of people. The people attending the discussions and negotiations included Xiageduodeng, Jiangbei (unclear), and many other key figures. And also, some of them had worked in the CCP for a long time. For example, Masu Headman [Ch. masu tusi], who was from Ganzi...(not clear)... Now, he is the Vice Chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference of our area.   

**Q:**  When the meeting was held, were there some upper-class people opposing the democratic reforms?   

**A:**  Of course there were many. When the local governments of our autonomous prefecture were established, except that we dispatched the military representatives [Ch. junshi daibiao], most of the county heads were the previous upper-class people, including some later rebels such as Jiarinima (Gyari Nyima). These people played a double-dealer role regarding our work of the implementing the reforms. Openly they pretended to support the reform, yet in secret, they joined in the rebellion. So the rebellion happened. As a result, on the one hand, we dispatched the troops of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> there, and on the other hand, we organized some Tibetan Troops [Ch. zangmin tuan] in these areas. However, finally, some of the rebels escaped into Tibet.   

**Q:**  Now some people say that in 1956, during the period when the meeting of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference was held, some people of Yi ethnic group [Ch. Yizu] launched the rebellion first. Then, very quickly, some servants of the upper-class Tibetan people fled from the conference and went to the Tibetan area of Ganzi and then the rebellions happened in Ganzi and Batang. Is this true?   

**A:**  No, this is false. As I mentioned a moment ago, our policy at that time should be approved in a legal way. So our policy should be approved by the People's Congress of the province first. And the members attending the meeting all supported the policy. However, on the other hand, some people from the local areas opposed it, namely those in Ganzi. They even made troubles in Ganzi then, which is true. However, there were no people escaping away from attending the meeting. Thus, the situation then was that some people understood the situation and accepted our policy of reform, some doubted it, and some took a role of a double-dealer, who on the one hand approved the policy in the meeting yet on the other hand, made troubles in secret. Thus, we implemented the policy of reform as well as the policy of quelling the rebellion. Later on, after 1956, the Preparatory Committee of Tibet was established. At that moment, the Central Committee of the CCP dispatched a large-scale delegation to go to Tibet. The head of this delegation was Chen Yi. I served as the deputy head of it. After the establishment of the Preparatory Committee, comrade Chen Yi returned to Beijing by air. As for me, I was ordered to lead the Chongqing Acrobatic Troupe [Ch. chongqing zaji tuan] to return to Sichuan. On our way to Sichuan, the members of Chongqing Acrobatic Troupe held lots of shows. Also, there were other leading comrades who were from ethnic minorities, serving as governors of prefectures and other leading positions together with us coming across these areas. In these areas such as Chamdo, they got information about our work such as quelling the rebellion. Before long, the meeting of National People's Congress was held in Beijing. During that meeting, these representatives, who along with us had been in the areas from Tibet to Sichuan, put forward some issues to discuss, such as about confiscating weapons. They also put forward some other issues to discuss, including the problem that some policies were not being implemented well, or the problem that some local cadres violated some of the discipline. Afterwards, some representatives of Sichuan Province were invited by Chairman Mao to go to his home located in Zhongnanhai. Among the representatives who were invited, there were two from ethnic minorities. One was me and the other one was a governor of the Yizu Prefecture of Liangshan called Wazhangwuji (not clear). We both sat next to Chairman Mao. In front of us there was a map. Chairman Mao asked us to show in which areas the rebellions happen and we told him according to the map. The other leading comrades invited included Liu Yihan and Liao Zhigao, who hen were working in the Party Committee of Sichuan Province.   

**Q:**  Didn't Li Jingquan attend it?   

**A:**  No. Li Jingquan was not there. At that moment, Miao Zhigao served as the Party Secretary. So we reported the situation to Chairman Mao. Chairman Mao talked with us about how to deal with the enemies captured in quelling the rebellion. He told us a historical story: "Capturing Meng Huo seven times", and asked us, as members of the CCP, to carry out a more lenient policy for the enemies captured. That is the first point Chairman Mao told us according to my memory. His words should also have been recorded by the United Front Work Department of the CCP Central Committee. The second point of Chairman Mao's instructions was that he thought we should confiscate the weapons.   

**Q:**  Did it mean that the weapons should be confiscated and would not be returned to their owners?   

**A:**  Yes. We should do it in case that the problem of killing people might happen. Chairman Mao commented that first, it was right and necessary to launch the reforms because only through the reforms could every ethnic group have a bright future. However, we also should implement a more lenient and moderate policy [Ch. zhengce fangkuan] so the upper-class people's living standards and political status should be at least maintained or even improved further. Thus, according to Chairman Mao's instructions, there was an important change for our policies. After we returned to Sichuan, we implemented the new policies, which were welcomed by most of the people. We released the rebels who were captured by us earlier and the guns were all confiscated. Under this new situation, some rebels felt that they could never make trouble here so they escaped towards Chamdo or Tibet.   

**Q:**  I heard from others that when you met Chairman Mao, Chairman Mao asked you about the policies implemented in the Tibetan area of Ganzi. You told Chairman Mao some of your own opinions about the work of doing reforms in the monasteries and the pasture areas and Chairman Mao agreed with you completely. What were the opinions you put forward then?   

**A:**  At that moment, Chairman Mao asked me, "What should we do about the monasteries?" I replied that, "The reform work for the monasteries should be postponed and we should first launch the reforms in the agricultural and pastural areas. We should do it for the monasteries last." Immediately Chairman Mao said, my idea was right, and that the reform work for the monasteries should be postponed. So later on, when carrying out the policy of reforms, we limited our work to be within the agricultural and pasture areas outside the monasteries. Of course, the monasteries were required to accept our policy. They were forbidden to join in or support the rebellion and they should only focus on religious affairs.   

**Q:**  When did that happen? In 1956?   

**A:**  You can check the date later... According to my memory, perhaps it happened in the summer of that year. First in 1956 the meeting for establishing the Preparatory Committee was held, and then, before long, the meeting of the National People's Congress was held.   

**Q:**  I heard from others that in 1956, the State Committee for Ethnic Affairs [Ch. minwei] held a special meeting to discuss the work in Ganzi. This was was conducted by Liu Geping or Wang Feng.   

**A:**  Liu Geping went to Ganzi to hold a meeting. The people of the State Committee for Ethnic Affairs often came to attend meetings. They came to almost every local area of Ganzi, and they conducted a lot of meetings.   

**Q:**  Can you remember that in 1955 in Beijing, there was a meeting held to discuss whether the work of reforms should be launched in Ganzi? Comrade Li Jingquan attended this meeting.   

**A:**  In Beijing... there was not such meetings held in Beijing. They came to Ganzi then... At that moment a lot of people came here from Beijing. We discussed this issue many times. During the period when Xikang Province still existed, the policy to launch the reforms in Ganzi had already been made. Later on, Xikang was incorporated into Sichuan, in 1955 or so. It should be in April, 1955. Xikang province lasted for about 4 years in total, from roughly 1950 to 1954... It should be in 1954 when Xikang was incorporated into Sichuan. We had discussed the issue many times, and we had held a variety of meetings to discuss it.   

**Q:**  Before 1956, namely before the rebellion happened in Kham, what was the attitude and position held by Party Committee of Sichuan for the work of reform? And what were the instructions given by the Central Committee?   

**A:**  The situation in Kangding was as follows. In history, the area where the CCP contacted Tibetan people earliest is the area near Ganzi and Aba. During Long March, the troops of the Red Army crossed the area of Ganzi, where the Böba Government was established and Geda Lama welcomed the Red Army. From then on an intimate relationship had been established. Many young Tibetan people joined the Red Army. Second, for the autonomous regime established in Dajin and Ganzi, it was a province-level regime of the people. Thirdly, a military troop of the people was established. Fourthly, among the Tibetan people who joined the Red Army, some good comrades become members of the CCP or the Communist Youth League. During the Long March, the troops of the Red Army stayed in Sichuan for one year and eight months. Within that period, they stayed in our two Tibetan Autonomous Districts for one year and four months, which is really a long time. What did the Red Army do? They established a military unit, local regimes and CCP organizations. Some people who joined the Red Army then are still alive now, including Zhaxi wangxue from Ganzi. For Geda Lama, General Commander Zhu De talked with him many times. Geda Lama even treated Zhu De as a living Buddha [Ch. fo ye]. Geda Lama told me that when the Red Army left, Zhu De told him that they would return in 15 years. As a result, when we returned in 1950, it was just 15 years since then. When they were leaving, the Red Army left some (not clear) to Geda Lama. In order to avoid the ruling class finding them, Geda Lama hid them behind the statue of Buddha in the monastery. Some material about him are exhibited in the Military Museum in Beijing. Some wounded soldiers of the Red Army were not able to follow the Red Army to leave, so they stayed in Ganzi. Later on, when Ma Bufang came here, he suppressed and punished some of them. Yet anyway, some of these wounded soldiers are still alive now. The brother-in-law of Geda Lama was a young soldier in the Red Army. Recently we even found that the Red Army left some young teenage soldiers in Ganzi and they were raised by the Tibetan people there. Now they are grown up. Yet although they are Han Chinese themselves, they can only speak Tibetan—so they are completely Tibetanized. Therefore, as early as 1935, the CCP and the Tibetan people had already had a close relationship. After the founding of the PRC, we went south. In December 1949, I arrived at Chongqing. Then the People's Daily published an editorial to celebrate driving the imperialists out of Tibet. Before long, I was dispatched to go to Leshan by the Southwest Bureau, to meet with Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan, and to work with the 18th Army Corps to advance towards Tibet. So I left Chongqing for Leshan. In Leshan, the Tibet Work Committee was established. I was one of the earliest members of the Tibet Work Committee. The situation of Xikang was better than many other areas, because, first, the Red Army had done some work there before. Since Liu Wenhui decided to pay allegiance to the CCP, his troops didn't resist militarily and withdrew from the local regimes peacefully, so we smoothly took all of them over. For each local regime, we dispatched one or two military representatives there to observe the situations there. After we finished making the plans in Leshan, we organized a vanguard team, which was led by Wu Zhong, who once served as the commander of the 52nd Division, and who passed away several years ago. Wu Zhong and I worked together. At that moment, I still worked as a member of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. Between Ya'an and Ganzi, there was no road, so we had to walk by foot until we arrived in Ganzi. We continued to do preparatory work in Ganzi. At that moment, the Central Committee tried to achieve the goal that Tibet be liberated peacefully. In Ganzi, the preparatory work we did included training the troops and adapting them to lives in the highland areas. For example, on the first day we asked the soldiers to eat rice and then to climb a mountain. On the second day we asked them to eat Tsampa and butter tea and then to climb a mountain, in order to compare which food is better for climbing mountains. At last we found that Tsampa and butter tea are better then rice, because if the soldiers ate rice, they would become hungry once again quicker and rice is hard to boil in highland areas. Our preparatory works also included making preparations for crossing the Jinsha River. Tibetan people were good at crossing the river by means of cow-leather boats (coracles), yet Han Chinese people were not good at using them. So we had to train the Han Chinese soldiers to use these boats. Besides, we did united front work to try and communicate with the people in Tibet, so as to liberate Tibet peacefully...(one sentence unclear)... However, the government in Tibet rejected our suggestions. As a result, we had to launch the Chamdo Battle [Ch. changdu zhanyi], which disabled their main force. After that, Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme did a good job to solve the problem, and then the 17-Point Agreement was done. After I stayed in Ganzi for some time, the Central Committee asked me to return to establish the Tibetan Autonomous District of Xikang Province. The reason why the Central Committee wanted to establish it is that they wanted to make a model to let the people of Tibet see. At that time, Chamdo belonged to our area. Yet at that moment the Dalai Lama asked the Tibetan troops to occupy Chamdo, and so there was only the Jinsha River between their troops and ours. Our areas have had a close a relationship with Chamdo, even from very early on in history. During the Chamdo Battle, our areas offered a lot of support for the PLA. For example, in the several counties of Ganzi, according to our statistical data, we mobilized more than 100,000 livestock, such as cows or horses. We also mobilized a lot of people to the extent that, for a long time, most of the cadres working in Tibet were those from Sichuan. Even today it is still so. Among the five chairmen of the government of Tibet, two of them were born in Sichuan. The first chairman is Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme, the second chairman is me, the third one is Duojie caidan (Dorje Tseden), the fourth one is Duojiecairang (Dorje Tsering), who was born in Gansu or Qinghai, and the fifth one was born in Ganzi... First, we tried to cultivate the Party Secretaries, such as Redi. Do you know him? Another cadre was Basang, who is a female comrade. Both of them were cultivated during the time when we worked there...(unclear)... In 1981, I returned. In 1980, I accompanied some representatives of the National People's Congress and went to visit France. After returning from France...I was already very old. I was 66 years old then. They asked me to work in State Committee for Ethnic Affairs in Beijing, yet I declined and expressed that I wanted to returned to my hometown. So I returned to Sichuan.   

**Q:**  Among all the Tibetan people, your experience is legendary. At first, you were a soldier of the Red Army. Then you served as a leading comrade of Kham or Ganzi. And then, you served as a leading comrade in Tibet. You devoted all of your life to the revolutionary cause, so I would like to ask whether you have any plans to write a biography or a memoir, to make some summary for your whole life?   

**A:**  Recently, when I went to give a talk at Tsinghua University, I said something about this. Our revolutionary work is completely different from many others. They do revolutionary work by means of their study on Marxist-Leninist works, and according to the experiences of the Soviet Union, such as the October Revolution of 1917. For us, at first, we didn't know this stuff at all. As you know, my hometown is a very closed and backwards area, so we couldn't find these materials. So for us... As Chairman Mao once said the, "Long March is like a seeder or a propagandizing team"... So we followed and joined in the great trend of revolution. It was not because we believed in some faith at that moment... Our lives were extremely difficult then, to the extent that some young people now don't even believe our words. My household was very poor. My parents died very early, and I have two brothers. During that period, the people like me can be regarded as having received some education because I studied in a monastery for some time...(one sentence unclear)... Religion belongs to one sort of superstition. However, large parts of religious doctrines are still about educating the people to be good men, such as forbidding the people to lie, forbidding them to suppress or exploit others, asking the people to do good things, asserting that if a person commits a wrongdoing, he or she will be sent to hell after death, and that if a person does good things, he or she will be sent to heaven after death. So in the monastery, we received some elementary education. Though we didn't know Chinese characters, we could read Tibetan, since we had to chant in Tibetan. At that moment, the monks didn't teach us the meaning of the Buddhist classics. They just asked us to read, chant, and recite them. In that spring, when the Red Army arrived in the area of Northern Sichuan, the vendors doing small businesses were called "huolangzi". They discussed this with each other and there were two divergent opinions among them. Some said the Red Army was bad, yet some others said the Red Army treated poor people well. They also told us that the leaders of the Red Army were "Zhu-Mao", which means Zhu De and Mao Zedong, yet we didn't understand then. When the Red Army was approaching, the people of the ruling class were frightened. They tried to hide their property, and drove their livestock away into valleys. Since we didn't have much property, we just waited. When the Red Army was arriving, almost all the people ran away. Only very old men or women who were not able to escape, as well as the people who suffered severe illnesses, were left in the houses. After dark, after we returned, we found that the Red Army had left food and clothes in our houses. And the people who previously suffered severe illnesses were also in good moods, and told me that the soldiers of the Red Army were all very nice, and that they gave them a lot of food and clothing. As a result, after hearing this news, we all returned. And then, helped by the Red Army, we organized local self-defense regimes, and a series of activities such as punishing local tyrants and redistributing lands [Ch. datuhao fentiandi] were also launched. The work of redistributing lands and properties was done very fast. For example, if we confiscated lands from one rich person, on the same day we would redistribute them to the poor people.   

**Q:**  Which troops of the Red Army arrived at your hometown?   

**A:**  The troops arriving earliest were those of the 4th Red Army. Later on, the troops of the 1st Red Army arrived as well. Then, because Zhang Guohao wanted to split the troops, the 1st went to Gansu by way of the Grasslands [Ch. guo cao di]. Besides, from Yunnan the troops led by He Long arrived in Ganzi where they joined together with the troops of the 4th Red Army. In 1936, the troops went north. On October 22nd, they arrived at Huining, Gansu. So the Long March lasted for 2 years, from October 21st of 1934 to October 22nd of 1936 -- until all of the troops joined together at Huining, Gansu. When crossing the grassland area, our organizing form was modified a little. Some former organizations such as the Young Pioneers were re-organized as one troop, the "Tibetan Independent Division" [Ch. zangzu duli si]. At that moment I was appointed the Party Representative [Ch. dang daibiao] of it, namely the Political Commissar of it.   

**Q:**  How many Tibetan people were there in this division?   

**A:**  Most of the soldiers were local Tibetan people. Some of its leading comrades were from the Red Army, yet most of the people were Tibetan who were from Aba or Ganzi. Later on, after we arrived at Minzhou of Gansu, we held a meeting there. In the meeting, we decided the people who wanted to return to their hometowns were permitted to leave. The people leaving could take away their own guns and horses, and each of them could get 10 silver coins before leaving. So, most of the people who were older, especially those who had wives or children in their hometowns, were happy to leave and thus they left. We had more than 10 young children. Thinking that if we returned we had to bear difficult lives, we decided to continue to follow the Red Army. Because there were only a very small number of Tibetan people, we were given special attention and care. For example, even though some soldiers of the Red Army didn't have enough food to eat, they still gave some of their food to us. At last we arrived in the area of Northern Shaanxi [Ch. shan bei]. In Northern Shaanxi, there were Tibetan people like us who came from Sichuan, and there were also people of the Yi ethnic group who came from Liangshan. The number of the people of our two ethnic minorities there was ten or twenty or so. So we together were organized into one class to study in the Central Party School of the CCP [Ch. zhongyang dangxiao]. Miao Zhigao served as the main teacher of our class. Later on, Yan'an College for Ethnic Minorities [Ch. yanan minzu xueyuan] was established, and we started to study there.   

**Q:**  I have another question... Do you know Fan Zhizhong? He passed away just last year. Some people had interviewed Fan Zhizhong. With regards to the work of the reforms in Ganzi, Fan Zhizhong had his own ideas. According to him, the work of democratic reform in Ganzi was supported by the leading comrades of the Party Committee of Sichuan, such as Li Jingquan in 1955. However after 1956, after the rebellion happened and after several meetings held by Central Committee... His ideas are that he thought the work of democratic reform after 1956 was the result of wrong guidelines, and the work became far too radical [Ch. guo ji]. Li Jingquan however thinks that it is wrong to attribute all the problems to him only. What is your opinion on Fan Zhizhong's ideas?   

**A:**  Comrade Fan Zhizhong was an old comrade. At first he served as the commander of a division. After his troops were stationed in Kangding, he started to serve as the commander of the Sub-military District [Ch. jun fen qu], and at the same time, I served as the Political Commissar. Generally speaking, this comrade was a very good person. However, during the work of the reforms, we had some different opinions on some issues.   

**Q:**  What are the main different ideas between yours and his?   

**A:**  Our differences focused on the policies for launching the democratic reforms, such as how to deal with the enemies captured in the battles, how to classify the people into different classes, and so forth. We also had different opinions on the disciplines which should be observed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> in quelling the rebellion.   

**Q:**  What was his position on these issues?   

**A:**  He held a too leftist position. So we had very big disagreements with each other.   

**Q:**  Fan Zhizhong, was a cadre of the CCP, so when he was implementing the policies, were there some leading comrades such as Li Jingquan supporting his actions? Or were these leftist actions just the result of his own position?   

**A:**  Of course some people within our Party shared similar ideas. It is impossible that only Fan Zhizhong held such a position. Some people within our Party thought that, "Since in the past you killed our people, now, we will take revenge." However, I thought that when doing revolutionary work, we should not try to solve the problems by "taking revenge". Rather, I thought we should solve the problems according to our Party's policies for ethnic affairs. In the midst of the rebellion, certainly there were some people who insisted in serving either for their own interests, for some foreign people, or for the local government of Tibet. Yet the number of this kind of people was rather small. Most of the masses were actually deceived, because the rebels tried to trick the masses in the name of religion or the Tibetan nation, which managed to incite many people. That is to say, the vast number of the masses failed to be able to tell the truth from the lies...(one sentence unclear)... His position was rather too leftist. So during the time when attending meetings, we often debated with each other. Afterwards, the facts proved that his ideas were wrong. Yet also I should say, he worked very hard and he was a seasoned comrade.   

**Q:**  When Chen Yi arrived in Tibet in 1956 to attend the meeting for establishing the Preparatory Committee of Tibet, did he know that at that moment in Xikang, a rebellion had happened?   

**A:**  He knew it, yet he didn't know it clearly. I didn't talk with him on this issue.   

**Q:**  Did comrade Deng Xiaoping have some instructions on the work in Xikang?   

**A:**  Xikang Province was under the leadership of the Southwest Bureau. He had talked a lot about the policies on ethnic affairs then. For example, he had many talks with the upper-class people, such as Xiageduodeng.   

**Q:**  What was his position regarding the democratic reform?   

**A:**  He paid close attention to the implementation of the policies. He educated the cadres and asked the cadres to deal with problems from a larger perspective. He said, though from a smaller perspective some things were permitted, from a larger perspective these things should be forbidden. He cautioned us that the Tibetan area of Sichuan was not an isolated area, rather, he told us, we should consider the relationship between the Tibetan area of Sichuan and the whole Tibetan area. Later on, not only in regards to the policies and instructions in Sichuan, but also to those in Tibet, he participated in and helped to make [them]. So, every time when the cadres came out of Tibet by way of Chongqing, Deng would meet them. All the time he cared about the policies for ethnic affairs because he had been on the Long March and therefore knew of its importance.   

**Q:**  Some people say in 1956, because a rebellion happened in Ganzi which affected the position of some people in Tibet, the Central Committee, including Premier Zhou and Chairman Mao, put forward a policy of "Six Years No Reform" in Tibet. The Central Committee also invited them to go to Ganzi to visit and investigate and Zhang Xiangming also participated in these activities. What are your opinions about this?   

**A:**  All of these should have been recorded. Recently, I hear that in Tibet the biographies of seven people were written. The biography of Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme (Ngabö) has been written. The one of the Panchen Lama has been written as well.... Many people within the Kashag participated in the rebellious activities in Xikang in secret. Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme had said much on it... Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme was very familiar with the situation in Chamdo... He tried to persuade the rebels, yet they didn't listen to him.   

**Q:**  Have you seen the biographies of the seven people written by the Office for the History of the CCP of Tibet [Ch. xizang dangshi ban]?   

**A:**  I am still reading them, since they asked me to read them... They wanted to hear my suggestions on the books.   

**Q:**  Among the seven biographies, is one about you?   

**A:**  They have finished two of the seven. The draft of the one of Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme has been finished, yet we should continue to revise it. The one of the Panchen Lama has been finished as well. And also, they will write biographies for Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua.   

**Q:**  Do you have some idea for the biography devoted to you?   

**A:**  At first I said there is no need to write one particularly for me, since my actions will be recorded in other people's biographies... If we tell the truth we should say, in history, for many times, some people in Tibet tried to make Tibet an independent country. Before 1949, the problem had already existed. Even in the Qing Dynasty this problem existed. So it is a problem rooted in history. Thus we should try to solve it according to the historical facts in an objective and gradual way. Only after the people have confidence for their nation, can this problem be solved. Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme's idea on this point is very clear. Anyway, from the perspective of history, the Tibetan people have the best relationship with others within China. Since the Yuan Dynasty, the period of Genghis Khan, Tibet had already had a relationship with China. Many ancestors of noble Tibetan families are not from the local Tibetan people. Rather, they are descendants of Mongolian people. Even the ancestors of Ngapoi are Mongolian people. So, in fact, there was never a nation whose blood was pure... In the Qing Dynasty, there were Ambans who were sent to Tibet to resist the foreign invaders together with the Tibetan people. Once the soldiers from Sichuan also participated into the war driving the invaders away...   

