# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0067.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Kündeling, Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 15 December 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 77  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kündeling Dzasa was a monk official and one of the top officials in Kündeling Labrang. In this interview, he discusses the Dalai Lama's decision to go to China and meet Mao and the PRC leadership face-to-face in 1954-55. He also discusses the Dalai Lama's further attempts at negotiating a solution with the Chinese and avoiding violence, and describes the Dalai Lama's eventual departure from Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0067_01/H_0067_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  There is one subject of which I would not like to talk about now. The reason being that my book is about to come out. I have hopes that it will come out before the Tibetan New Year. For example, on subjects like the uprising, the Legjö, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, the time when the Dalai Lama went to China and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, and all the things that you have asked—regarding 1959, I am writing a book, and so is Gusung Depön. Our accounts will be about the same and if it is not in mine, then you can consult Gusung Depön. So I think that for the time being, I would not like to talk about that. Now, if I tell you about the Legjö from all that I have written, then I think it will be alright to tell you about that. Regarding your question as to why the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] in the 17-Point Agreement was not instituted and the Tibet Autonomous Region was started instead, I don't think I have it in detail in my book. However, how it was started is included, [as well as information] about the meetings and the arguments about whether the Dalai Lama should or should not go to China. Finally, the Dalai Lama, himself, decided that it was better to go. For example, when we first discussed with the Chinese, they said that they were going to greatly assist with the development of Tibet. "At this moment, we are just talking with some of the Chinese leaders in Tibet, and we have not met face-to-face with the main leader, Mao Zedong, and the people who shoulder the main responsibility. So I think it is better to go than to stay." That's what the Dalai Lama said. Anyway, they did not listen to what the Dalai Lama said and there were some arguments. Finally, in the traditional Tibetan manner, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> divination was made at the Gombokhang Temple at Norbulinga. The divination said that it was better for the Dalai Lama to go. So he went and in China, and towards the end of the National People's Congress, there was a personal meeting between Mao Zedong and the Dalai Lama. There were a number of articles of advice, like [about] the Military Administrative Committee, the transfer of Tibetan currency and the use of Chinese currency, and that the Tibetan Army would be combined with the People's Liberation Army. Since the Panchen Lama was also there, it was thought that it was a good occasion to try and resolve any differences between the government and the Labrang. Finally, it was agreed that since the Military Administrative Committee was mentioned in the 17-Point Agreement, and since it was related to the military, the Tibetan people were suspicious, and since our peaceful work did not agree with a militant one, that it would be better to do away with the Military Administrative Committee and begin the Tibet Autonomous Region. It was also said that this was also Mao's thinking. The Dalai Lama said that he would have to consult with the other officials and that he would let Mao know. The Dalai Lama informed the Kashag and they called a meeting. There were many discussions and it was finally said that since the Military Administrative Committee was a militant work, it was better to have the Tibet Autonomous Region since the word autonomous, itself, implies that one would have greater say for oneself. And so this was agreed to. Anyway, it was said that it was not something that could be started right away, but [it had to be] thought about and discussed and planned for many months and years. So in the meantime, a Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was to be set up and a date was agreed on for that. After the Dalai Lama left and after the arrival in Lhasa, preparations were made regarding it, and on the occasion of its inauguration, Chen Yi came as a representative from the Central Committee. That was the reason why the Tibet Autonomous Region was instituted. The Military Administrative Committee was changed to the Tibet Autonomous Region, that was the reason and nothing else.   

**Q:**  In the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region there were many representatives from Chamdo, Labrang, and the Local Government. Would the Military Administrative Committee have been the same?   

**A:**  Yes, it would have been the same. Until the [Tibet] Autonomous Region started or until 1959, the Tibetan government remained as it had always been. Separate from that was the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, making preparations and having no business with government politics. They (Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region) did their own separate things, like justice (which they should do according to the situation in Tibet) and economics. The Tibetan government, the politics of the Dalai Lama, remained as before. So it was not a case where the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region had arrived and the Tibetan government had no power. Then after the uprising in 1959, the actual [Tibet] Autonomous Region was established.   

**Q:**  All of these talks took place during the meetings in China, right? [With] the Kashag and all?   

**A:**  Yes, at the meeting with the Kashag. After the talks there, a framework was worked out. After that, about 50 to 60 pages were wired to Lhasa where they had a meeting. The discussions were sent down to China.   

**Q:**  In China, who was there?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama was there. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Surkhang was there. Ngabö was there. Then I think Jigyab Khembo Lobsang Samdenla [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན]. Phala Drönyerchemmo. I was there, Künsangtse Tsipön, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> Ngawang Thöndrub [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ]. There were a lot mainly from the Dalai Lama's entourage, about 100-200. Among this, there were those who were at the meeting.   

**Q:**  Then who was at the meeting in Lhasa?   

**A:**  In Lhasa it was the Kashag; the whole office was there.   

**Q:**  Even though the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> were down there?   

**A:**  It was not only the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, there were many. Even in Lhasa, the Kalöns were there. There was Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར], Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང], Ragashag.   

**Q:**  So they met?   

**A:**  Yes, and as usual, there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> gyepa [Full Assembly].   

**Q:**  So they called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</a>?   

**A:**  Yes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> hragdu gyepa (Abbreviated Full Assembly) would probably [have] met. When they held the tsondu gyendzom, there would have been more people.   

**Q:**  Before going down to China, there must have been a lot of talk about whether [the Dalai Lama] should go down to China or not?   

**A:**  Yes, there was.   

**Q:**  Some were saying that it would not be good to go down, [right]?   

**A:**  Some were saying that it was possible that the Dalai Lama might not be able to return. That they might give [him] a grand title and insist that he stayed there. The Panchen Lama was kept in China for a long time, right? Yes, like that, and if that would have happened, then we would not have been able to tolerate that. Yet, others were saying that if the Dalai Lama went down and met [with the Chinese officials] face-to-face, then if they made strong statements, then the Dalai Lama would be too meek and would have love and compassion [Tib. བྱམས་སྙིང་རྗེ]. Then we would have been at a loss. So instead of that, it was better for him to stay and talk from here . Then there were talks like if the Dalai Lama went down to attend the National People's Congress. Just by attending a Chinese national meeting as a people's representative, the self-esteem [Tib. མཐོང] of the Dalai Lama would have degraded. There were a lot of talks like that. Then there were those who said that [the Dalai Lama] should go and attend, participate in the discussions, listen to what they said, tell them what we thought, and take a look here and there. That it was not only us, but that many other leaders were going and so it would be good to meet and get to know them and discuss with them. That this was what we should do, rather than stay in a corner and think that we were so great. We couldn't manage them. Finally, the Dalai Lama himself decided that he should go since he felt that it was better to go than to stay. Now, this was a brief one [a brief explanation], did you understand the gist of that?   

**Q:**  Yes, yes.   

**A:**  Regarding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> and others going to Drigutang [Tib. གྲི་གུ་ཐང], the Chinese, themselves, made the appeal [Tib. འབོད་སྐུལ] to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there a meeting at this time?   

**A:**  No, no meetings. At that time, [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  A meeting was called in which it was said, let me remember, that if the Tibetan Army was sent to squash the revolt, then [question not finished]   

**A:**  As you said, you know the Dalai Lama has written it down very clearly, if you look at his biography in Tibetan. For example, the Chinese said to the Kashag that "The reactionary Khambas are saying that they are going to revolt against the Zhongyang. They have gathered in some place there and are saying and doing this. However, whether they are revolting against Zhongyang or not, they are making difficulties for your own <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> by robbing and eating things up, and raping women, and beating their husbands and putting them into the prisons. They were doing all of these bad things. The fact that you can take all of that is very strange. The reason why we always come to the Kashag and say things about the reactionary Khambas is because you are tolerating [Tib. ནད་འཁྱོག] all of these things. They must all be destroyed, but there is no need for the Zhongyang to do that. But the Zhongyang will help with any salary and things like that. The Tibetan government has soldiers and they can be sent to destroy them. They need to be destroyed." They were speaking very strongly and giving the Kashag a lot of difficulties. The Kashag said, "We will send the soldiers as you have said. However, you have to take one responsibility. The soldiers have to be sent with arms and we can't just send them with sticks and fists. But if the soldiers, instead of fighting the Khambas, join them and fight back against us, then it would be like sending reinforcement soldiers for the Khambas. We will not accept the responsibility for this. Instead of this, I think you Chinese should be peaceful and patient [Tib. ཞི་འཇམ] and restrained, and we, on our part, will advise them and tell them not to do this and tell them about the consequences. We think it's better to do this peacefully and with reason." The Chinese said that if that was the case, then to go ahead and persuade them. Samjola and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> were appointed to go. Anyway, they were not sent to be against the Chinese, nor were they sent to destroy the Khambas. They were just sent by the government to advise them. The government, as usual, always tried to pass the time with a peaceful policy.   

**Q:**  After they arrived there, then [what]?   

**A:**  After they arrived there, they said that they were talking [for] a month, two months, about this and that and such and such. When they met, they had to talk, right? They gathered all the Khambas and all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> under the Lhoka area, and talked and advised them. They had to since they were representatives of the government. When they said that, the Khambas said, "What are you saying? There is no way we are going to listen to that." Likewise, the people said that they supported the Khambas and the government couldn't just do that. So they supported them, and since they [the miser] supported them [Khambas], then they [representatives] also did not return. They [the miser] told them that they [Namseling etc.] must stay.   

**Q:**  Even though the government sent them, privately, they must have had something against the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  Since Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was also in the secret group.   

**A:**  Yes, that is said, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> has even written about it.   

**Q:**  The library has a small book with bits and pieces of many things. I wonder if he's really written [about this] in there.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, it must be there. If there was a secret group, then they should have written about that. If it's not in there and we start writing that there was a secret group, then we will become false [liars]. If the person who was in the secret group does not write about it and we, who were not in the group, write about it, then we will become false. If there was a secret group, then they must have written about it. It is mentioned that the content is based on materials from when he was alive and that the materials were put together after his death by Tashi Tsering [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང].   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s book?   

**A:**  Yes, it was requested by his wife and the one in Sikkim [Prince Georgela's wife]. Therefore, that is reliable. Regarding whether there was a group or not, what else do you have ? Regarding Yügye-Lhüntse [Tib. གཡུལ་རྒྱལ་ལྷུན་རྩེ], where the government was established, I was not there. The reason being that the Dalai Lama was arranged to be in front and I stayed behind with my soldiers. There was not so much danger in front since the whole of Lhoka was held by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, but behind there was the danger of the Chinese chasing [us]. So I was not there. When the Dalai Lama went this way, I went that way via <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a>. The reason being that, at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, there were a lot of Chinese soldiers. In addition to that, there was the 52nd Division [Ch. wu shi er shi]. They were at Gyantse and Shigatse. In addition to that, a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> soldiers who were said to be the bodyguards of the Panchen Lama, and paid for and kept by the Chinese. So in the Tsang area, there were a lot of dangers. Passing down from Tsang to Yamdrog [Tib. ཡར་འབྲོག] and Nangkartse [Tib. སྣང་དཀར་རྩེ] to Tsöna, the route was very easy to block. For this danger, the Dalai Lama went to Yügye Lhüntse where a new government was begun, and I went that way.   

**Q:**  So there were no previous plans?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. What should I say? There were no plans to start a government. The reason being that when [the Dalai Lama] left Lhasa and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> crossing, at Liu [Tib. སྣེའུ] Dzong, he sent a letter to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a>. He said, "You have looked at the behavior of the Chinese and you, the people and the tsondu, have requested for me to leave since you cannot not bear to see my life in jeopardy. So I have left. However, I cannot abandon the people of Tibet, and I will stay in some appropriate [Tib. གང་འོས] border area and will discuss [the situation] with the Chinese. There will most probably be some discussions. When this happens, then I will appraise you of the situation. Until then, you are not to take action against the Chinese militantly. Try to find peaceful means as much as possible. As many of you government people can cross the river over to Lhoka, do so, but don't do any militant action because your life will be wasted." Such advice was given. "At a safe border area, I will stay and talk with the Chinese." This, he said. That safe border area Yügye-Lhüntse. If he stayed at this place—it is in a Himalayan range and a pass away is India. This side of the pass is Tibet. The border is not that close, but this is what happened and [the Dalai Lama] did think along these lines. But from the Chinese side, let alone the idea of discussing, they just sent the soldiers and just chased them in full strength. So even at Yügye Lhüntse, no decision was made as to whether the Dalai Lama should face and discuss with the Chinese or turn his back and go abroad. At that time, it was said that they were going to start a government and then decide what the best alternative was, whether it be peaceful or militant. While such a situation was in place, the Chinese were chasing them from land and planes were flying above. Now there was no way to stay, and then it was said that it was better to go. So from Yügye Lhüntse, [the Dalai Lama left] for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྣ] A district in southern Tibet.">Tsöna</a> and people were sent to notify the Indian government. The Indian government agreed to receive [the Dalai Lama]. So there was no one telling us to hold on to some land and that they would help militarily. Besides, no one was helping at that time. For example, the Americans were helping secretly. But it was very secret and even the pilots hired were Asians and the Americans themselves were not openly coming, isn't [that] it? They did give arms, a little, but they were not helpful.   

**Q:**  Since I'm not familiar [with things], I do get the suspicion, and think that the U.S. asked the government to hold on to some land, and even [for] the government to send representatives to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> to [question not finished]   

**A:**  The government was in with the Chushigandru. But the Dalai Lama's thoughts were dead against killing. He would say, "What would come of it? Yes, go ahead and shoot. They are chasing from there with strength, and we shoot and people get killed on that side and this side. Even if we kill ten of their people and they kill only one, we still loose. They have a lot more people. The ones who are killed, they are not our enemies. We are killing someone who is not our enemy. The enemy is behind the lines and they don't come to fight. Do you think that these people are your enemies? If there are peaceful means of talking, then no matter what, you must pursue them. If we have to do things militantly, then there is no way I can do anything on this land. So instead, it's better to run away."   

**Q:**  Yes, the Dalai Lama was thinking along these lines, but, among those who were working outside, what were they thinking? To hold on to Lhüntse Dzong, and that the U.S. along with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and everyone from the inside and outside would work together? Was this what the Americans were thinking?   

**A:**  I don't really know what the Americans were thinking. Nor do I know what other government officials were thinking, but take, for example, myself. I had no belief in that at all. The reason being, the Americans were saying that they would not do anything. That, "You guys are part of China and you have to settle this internally." They were previously saying this and they were saying it later. Internally, through Gyalo Thondup and others, the CIA was parachuting people, supplying arms, wireless, guns and cannons. Whatever it was, they were doing something. So this is false through and through [Tib. རྫུས་མ་རྫུས་ནག] .   

**Q:**  So those who were working there, did not have hope?   

**A:**  There would naturally be those who had hope and those who did not. I did not at all. I thought that it would be great if we could just quietly get to India and then start putting our asses on the ground and start looking around and say something. If we did that , a lot of people would get killed and dead bodies would pile up. They had already pounced on us in one fell swoop. That's exactly what I used to think. I just went through the motions of going with guns and soldiers to protect the Dalai Lama, but I never thought about fighting the Chinese and leaving a mark.   

**Q:**  As I said earlier, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> used to consult Drönyerchemmo Phala, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that's true.   

**Q:**  Andru Jinda and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> also used to consult Phala. So did all three of them have any thoughts about establishing themselves at some place at the border and about fighting the Chinese with American arms?   

**A:**  Those who did have hope for support were making connections with [?]. But this was the situation. On the one hand, in the Kashag, since there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> besides Ngabö who were friendly with the Chinese, there was a thinking that, "Oh, I don't think anything good will come out of that." So there was that hindrance [Tib. འགལ་རྐྱེན] on thinking that made people lessen their trust [Tib. ཡིད་ཆེས་ཆུང་དི་འགྲོ]. Secondly, the Chinese were always pressing the Kashag. They were telling them that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> reactionaries and the Kashag had connections, they were always giving the Kashag a hard time. Because of this, the Kashag was saying that they had no connections at all. What the Kashag said was really true. The Kashag had no relations. The relations were with Drönyerchemmo and no one was making any connection with any of the Kalön. What Drönyerchemmo did was bring everything together and report it to the Dalai Lama, the Kashag, or to somebody else. He channeled it and it was not a situation where the Kashag was left to one side because people did not believe in it, and Drönyerchemmo was left to one side. The Kashag told him to take responsibility and it was something he did after he received permission from the Kashag. Otherwise, he was not allowed to.   

**Q:**  But all of this was towards the end, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right.   

**Q:**  What about before, in 1956-57? What I was asking you earlier, about the organization where there were 6-7 people like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla? This may have already started by '56-57?   

**A:**  It could have been, but I don't know much about this since around that time, when the Chinese were coming up, I was in Kham. So I was not in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  However, you must have heard something?   

**A:**  Not really, I never asked them if they started an organization and things like that.   

**Q:**  Let's just suppose that they started an organization around 1956-57, do you think they started one because the Chinese were pressuring the Kashag and the Kashag had no clout [question not finished]   

**A:**  It was not quite like that.   

**Q:**  Or was it because they wanted to establish secret relations abroad, with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  Yes, they may have started to have relations with them. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> connection was not one with a view to having relations with the organization. They (Jenkhentsisum) mainly needed to have relations with the government, but they could not do so with the Kashag or the Dalai Lama since the Chinese were not making it easy on them. A channel for communication was opened where they examined things and materials were transported here and there. Matters that one needed to decide were decided by oneself. For example, let's just say that they established relations and they needed and requested a certain document. You didn't have to ask a higher up or lower down. You just went to where the document was kept and copied it or sent the document itself. If one had to ask something, saying that there was such and such talk, what do you think? One could have asked the Kashag or the Dalai Lama. That's it, that's how they decided things. You had to decide lower down because there was just absolutely no way that you could consult higher up. Because if you did, the Chinese immediately came to know of it and then they made it difficult on the Kashag and the Dalai Lama. Do you understand this? Is it sort of clearer now?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  The commotion was taking place in Norbulinga. The people had surrounded Norbulinga. The Dalai Lama was there and the Kashag and the various offices were there. The people were making a lot of noise and they were told not to shout as well as, "As you have petitioned, the Dalai Lama is not going to the drama show. You have requested [this] and you have won [Tib. ཁེ་བཟང]. So now all of you go home." So Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Shasur, Liushar and [?] were sent there, what's it called [answer not finished]   

