# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0067.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** February 1984  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 69  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kündeling Dzasa was a monk official and an important official in Kündeling Labrang. In this interview, he talks about the separate meeting held by Tsarong and the military leaders to unite their strength and its effect on the Dalai Lama. He discusses Tashilhunpo and how they were required to pay one-fourth of the government’s military salary. He also discusses the Panchen Labrang’s soldiers, and how the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama was recognized. He explains how the Guomindang officials and other Chinese were expelled from Lhasa-Tibet and how Lhalu recruited militia in Kham and about the different viewpoints held by Ngabö and Lhalu. Then he talks about the arrival of the Chinese Communists in Chamdo, including the difficulties they had and how he dealt with them in Pagshö where he was located. Then he talks about going to Chamdo to meet with Ngabö and the situation there, including the detention of Ngabö and the other Tibetan government officials. And finally he talks about his return to Lhasa and appointment as Kündeling's new Dzasa.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0067_05/H_0067_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  At that time, it seemed to people that the Tibetan military was to be used against some internal commotion. Would you please explain this.   

**A:**  Each person has different thoughts. As for kind of suppressing the military strength, [it] was like you might have read [in] some books that at one time, when Tsarong and those military leaders united their strength together and caused difficulty [Tib. མཛད་དཀའ] for the Dalai Lama, there was a lot of trouble.   

**Q:**  Did they cause difficulties?   

**A:**  Yes, of course.   

**Q:**  It is not clear because the military leaders held a separate meeting [Tib. ཟུར་ཚོགས]. The purpose of the meeting was [not finished], At that time the Dalai Lama had demoted the military officers. But there wasn't any specific accusation and it was for all small matters, like being late to a ceremony and not asking for leave for the meeting, etc. For example, Tsarong was demoted from being the shape because 300 guns were missing and he didn't say anything about it; like the separate meeting was a serious matter. From this, I doubt that the separate meeting caused any harm and difficulty to the Dalai Lama. It was said that Drumba reported to the Dalai Lama that the military was becoming very powerful and there was a danger of overthrowing [the government]. So how did they hold the separate meeting?   

**A:**  It is possibly mentioned in Mrs. Taring's book, and also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> may have mentioned [it].   

**Q:**  No, it was not in detail and it was just said that the separate meeting was held. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> has mentioned that regarding the military salary, the meeting discussed [this]. It was said that they demanded representation from the military regiments, Shasur and Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད], who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, right?   

**A:**  No, he was not magji. He was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> .   

**Q:**  Not this Kheme, the former one.   

**A:**  He was not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and he just became the ex-Kalön.   

**Q:**  How did they hold the separate meeting?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  Thubden Sangye [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་སངས་རྒྱས] wrote some serious things which are not true, like saying the separate meeting planned to put down the Dalai Lama, and Drumba Dzasa was astonished and went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and reported to the Dalai Lama.   

**A:**  He would write something like this. He was influenced by the Guomindang and wrote something about when he was in China among the Khendrönlosum.   

**A:**  I heard that the Kashag stopped the book because he wrote about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> and he even wrote that their salary was also paid by China. The worst was that the Khendrönlosum didn't make many connections with the Tibetan government.   

**A:**  This they did because they were sent to do this.   

**Q:**  Yes, but they didn't do much. For example, before Huang Musong left for Tibet, it came out in the newspaper that they were going to set up an office, etc., but they didn't report to the government. What about the military organization?   

**A:**  I do not know. If I make up something and tell you, then there is no use. I really do not know.   

**Q:**  Why did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> plan to have its own military force? Right from the latter part of the 13th Dalai Lama's reign, and since then, the Tashilunpo has not given up hope in building up its own small unit of the army. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> imposed on Tashilhunpo a tax (babshi) to cover one-fourth of the military's salary. Can you say something about this?   

**A:**  During the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབབ་གཞི] The land investigation of manorial estates that was devised and conducted by Lungshar in order to raise new tax revenue from these estates for the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s program of modernization, especially the expansion of the army.">babshi</a> period, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> was paying one-fourth of all the military's salary.   

**Q:**  It was probably not fully one-fourth of all the salary of the whole Tibetan military?   

**A:**  Yes, it was written in the order clearly that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> had to pay one-fourth of all the government's military's salary, and they need not check the income of the Tashilhunpo estates.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> appealed to the 13th Dalai Lama, and the Panchen Rimpoche himself, went to see the Dalai Lama and explained, but no matter whatever he did, it was not approved by the 13th Dalai Lama. So unless Tashilhunpo kept some soldiers of its own, they would have to always obey the order from the government. So it seemed that Tashilhunpo had the idea of having a military organization.   

**A:**  The idea to do that came after he arrived in China. I am not sure about this, but at that time, it was said that one-fourth of the military's salary was too much and they made the appeal, but the Dalai Lama didn't listen. So he found no alternative [but] to go down there (flee) and seek help from there, and also seek pardon from the Dalai Lama and return. This was the idea <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> had.   

**Q:**  Was this information available from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>'s documents? Probably, before the Panchen Lama left, he definitely had the idea of military preparations. It was also written in the petition to the Dalai Lama, "Since one-fourth of the military's salary is too much, therefore, I am going to motivate the people who have faith, and beg from the rich people [Tib. དད་ལྡན་ལ་སྐུལ་མ་དང། འབྱོར་ལྡན་ལ་སློང་མོ].   

**A:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> write about the petition in his book?   

**Q:**  I think he did. But nothing came out from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>'s documents, right?   

**A:**  Nothing came out of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>'s documents because most of the important documents were all taken by the 13th Dalai Lama down to Lhasa, and nothing was left in Tashilhunpo in regards to important documents, correspondence or anything of this nature at all. Truly speaking, at that time, it seemed almost impossible for Tashilhunpo or the Panchen Lama to pay that amount. It was a bit impossible for them to be in peace.   

**Q:**  But was it too much for them to set up their own military.   

**A:**  After they arrived there [China], they trained about 500 young boys but it was not called military training.   

**Q:**  This must have been the 500 bodyguards of the Panchen Lama.   

**A:**  They recruited them from among the better off miser.   

**Q:**  Were these the so called "Favorite Students" [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་སློབ་གྲྭ་བ]?   

**A:**  They were later called that after the Panchen Lama came up and there were only about 50 of them. It was after the Panchen Lama went to China and he told them to send a large number of boys, and they were sent and given training in China. I am not sure about the result of the training. When the Panchen Lama came up, there were some soldiers who kind of mixed with the Chinese soldiers. They didn't have separate soldiers called the Panchen Labrang's soldiers.   

**Q:**  It was probably inconvenient for them to say that they were the Panchen Labrang's soldiers. They thought that if they said that they were the Panchen's soldiers, there would be problems. As far as we know, when Phabongkha went down to negotiate with the Panchen Lama, he said he had only seen about 20 odd Chinese with him.   

**A:**  The return of the Panchen Lama was very clearly written by one Chinese commander, Fan [Ming] [Ch. si ling].   

**Q:**  Which Panchen?   

**A:**  This Panchen. This Fan Siling was the Chinese officer who came with this Panchen, and he has written very clearly that a group came via Kham. And although they had come in small groups from different directions, they met and formed one group from Kham. Then another group came via Xinjiang to Tö, and from Kham, they came decisively at times when there was resistance. And they fought and came like that. But the group that came from the Xining area, they sent the Panchen Lama in front followed by a large military brigade. They were not to fight, but if they had met resistance, they would also have fought. But in order to avoid that, and also to deceive the people and to convince the people, they brought the Panchen Lama in the front, this was what Fan Siling wrote in great detail right from the time they started in China.   

**Q:**  Regarding this, the Panchen Lama, it appears that the Chinese forced the Tibetans through the 17-Point Agreement, and with other pressures, they forced Tibet's government to accept him as the proper reincarnation of the Panchen Lama. In the Tibetan tradition, it is customary to have the opinions of divinations of the eminent lamas and to have cofirmation from the prophecies of the protective deities, etc. How is it that in the case of the Panchen Lama, who was so eminent, that this was not done at all?   

**A:**  Regarding this, there would be connections with politics. In my understanding, this Panchen Lama was in China and is the authentic Panchen. The other two are what are called manifestations of the body, speech, and mind [Tib. སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས], [that] were also fixed [Tib. བཟོས]. And the Tibetan government was thinking that if they could get a hold of that Panchen down there, who happened to be the real reincarnation, that that was it. And in case of failure to do this, then they would recognize the manifestation of speech or body, one of them. I think that the manifestation of the body, speech, and mind would also have many miraculous signs. For example, the Pagshö candidate would also, so Tinkye [Tib. གཏིང་སྐྱེས] Rimpoche and others from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> went down and examined him very thoroughly and considered him great. So it was just like the Dalai Lama's reincarnation. Though the Tibetan government was 100 percent sure he was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Lama [who] was the real Dalai Lama, they did not announce that due to some political reasons. The same thing with the present Panchen Lama, but the present Panchen Lama is the true reincarnation of the previous Panchen Lama, and I also heard that he had a lot of signs.   

**Q:**  What happened to the other candidates?   

**A:**  One stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, and I wonder what happened to him? The other candidate who was chosen as the candidate was handed over to Kündeling Labrang.   

**Q:**  Why did they do that?   

**A:**  First, he was born in the territory of Kündeling and the government ordered us to look after him, provide for all of his needs and all the expenditures would be refunded by the government, but we never took any money. And then the teacher Tinkye Rimpoche was appointed and all the staff to serve him were also appointed. The expenses of the staff etc., were paid for by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Labrang, but we had to bear all the expenses of the young incarnate lama.   

**Q:**  In 1949, when the Guomindang representative, along with all the spies, were sent out of Tibet, how did that happen? Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> go?   

**A:**  He went later.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for expelling them and how did this start? <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was also probably in charge of that?   

**A:**  Probably not.   

**Q:**  Maybe it was an assignment among the drungtsi. And it was that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> delivered the message, though he put a turquoise Buddha statue on his head [taking an oath].   

**A:**  Where did he do that?   

**Q:**  This statue must have been in the Kashag. They took oaths by putting this on their heads, not to reveal the secret, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> revealed it.   

**A:**  This was just before I left for Kham. Was that when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>'s servant did something?   

**Q:**  No, this was later when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was demoted from being shape. Where were you then?   

**A:**  I was in Kham.   

**Q:**  Actually, it was not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>’s servant who dragged an empty skin used for packing butter [Tib. མར་སྐོགས], and he was sent by Surkhang and made to stay in Kapshöba’s house for a month with the cook or somebody because Surkhang and Kapshöba had an argument in the Kashag.   

**A:**  Oh, I see. Surkhang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> kind of had a grudge, right?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa when they expelled the Guomindang representative.   

**Q:**  You were not that attentive, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Many of them were expelled, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, how could they differentiate who was a spy?   

**A:**  The person who was working for the Guomindang office and all the staff, including the chief of the mission, were all sent back to China. Some were sent through India and some were sent through Kham. Along with them, people like Phünwang Buzhang and some Chinese from the Yunnan Province who used to play mahjong all the time and have a lot of parties, they were caught first and sent back. There were quite a number of them. I heard that the government was mainly planning to send some of the communist spies who were in the country then, back to China. Also, as the government of Tibet had realized that the Guomindang might not have been able to retain a government in China, they thought it was a good opportunity to send all the Guomindang members and the staff that were in Tibet, and along with them the communist agents were also sent away, as they would automatically not be able to make any claims or excuses or anything. This is what I heard of how they were sent away, and they were escorted by the soldiers via Kham.   

**Q:**  In 1950, when the Chinese came to Kham, a lot of the Khambas resisted the Chinese and a lot of them welcomed them. Some were saying that the Chinese were their benefactors and others said they were enemies of Buddhism, etc. Also, in Lhasa they were having a lot of rituals and things, but since you were in Pagshö at that time, can you tell us what happened there? You were there when the Doji fled?   

**A:**  Yes, we heard that the Chinese were approaching at various border posts and that they were fighting with the Tibetan soldiers, and that so and so had been killed. Rupön Bökhangwa [Tib. སྦུད་ཁང་བ] was killed, and daily we heard that the Chinese had reached this place and that. At the same time, the governor of Chamdo, the Doji, recruited a large number of militiamen from the local people and he built a very strong militia with a large number of people, and they began to make big arrangements to meet the expenditure of this military force. Also, the military salary requirements were being collected, borrowed and transported to the army, and they were making big arrangements. They had built a very big unit of the army. I do not know if it could have helped, for they had no military training whatsoever. So when we heard that Ngabö was coming, he would have had to stop the night before reaching Chamdo in our territory, in a place called Lagong Ngamdo [Tib. ལ་གོང་ལྔ་མདོ]. I went there to meet him. It was at this time that there had been a big earthquake in Tibet, which had damaged all the areas of Kongpo and all other Powo areas, and Ngabö told me that he had to face severe hardships when he was coming down. That on the roads there were big landslides and the roads were filled with mud all over, and that he had a lot of difficulty coming down after the big earthquake. So I told him to stay there a few days because he was very tired. But he insisted on consulting the other members of his party, his bodyguards and all of those who were accompanying him, and he sent one of the stable boys to talk to his Kadrung and consult his entourage. They agreed to stay, as Ngabö had told him, that if they preferred to rest, they could do so. They were happy with this and they stayed about three days. At that time, I had a few days to talk with him. He told me about the situation in Lhasa and other news, and I explained to him the situation in Kham.   

**Q:**  What news can you give about the situation then?   

**A:**  There was big news that the Chinese were reaching there, and the Chinese were somewhere else, etc.   

**Q:**  It must have been at the time that the Chinese were reaching the Ganzi area?   

**A:**  The Chinese had reached Ganzi months before that, and that is where they built up their forces to send to Central Tibet. When I was talking to Ngabö, he told me that it was very difficult to fight against the Chinese because they had modern [technology] and the latest weaponry, trained soldiers, and they had no shortage of money, a lot of discipline, and we had none of these things. To fight them, it would be very difficult. There would be no way to fight them. So he felt it better to negotiate a peaceful solution, and that he had already discussed with the regent and the colleagues in the Kashag, and he said the he had discussed even with the tsondu. Ngabö had apparently chosen the path of peaceful negotiations, but I heard that Lhalu wanted to offer resistance and fight the Chinese. I was wondering if they could pull it off together. Then Ngabö left and I heard that Ngabö and Lhalu were holding different opinions. Lhalu insisted on fighting, and he said that if we were to fight and lose, then we would lose. But instead of just having talks, we could surrender right from the beginning as well. This was how they did not agree. So they contacted Lhasa through wireless, and it appears that Lhasa supported Ngabö and advised Lhalu to go to Lho Dzong for a while, and he did not have to stay in Chamdo. Lhasa had decided because it was easier to send things to Lho Dzong instead of Chamdo, they asked that Lhalu go to Lho Dzong and Ngabö was given all the responsibility of Governor of Kham. Lhalu had planned to distribute the weapons to the militia, but Ngabö sent back the militia that Lhalu recruited and distributed the weapons to the regiments, and a large part of the weapons was sent back to Pagshö also, saying they may be needed there. We received 200 guns and about 3,000 boxes of bullets. I had received them through the tsendrön in charge of horse corvée, the Taji [Tib. རྟ་སྤྱི] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས], who delivered them to me. He said that if it were necessary, then he would send me a note. He also said that some more would also be sent. At this time, the Chinese became very powerful and they were advancing everywhere, so Ngabö sent Yeshe Thargye [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་དར་རྒྱས] and Manang Abo to start the negotiations up to Ganzi. Both of them spoke Chinese. [They went] with strong orders from the Central Government that they should go without any hesitation. At that time, the Chinese were saying that they would discuss, but on the other side, they started marching forward because the government had probably issued the order to march forward. There was nobody to talk or to listen. From every corner the Chinese were coming.   

**Q:**  If you had the militia, do you think that there was a chance to fight?   

**A:**  No way, [not] at all. They were marching toward Chamdo from every direction and within a few days, we lost Chamdo. There was no way to offer any resistance.   

**Q:**  Did you get news every day?   

**A:**  Yes I was getting news every day because I was in between Ngabö and Lhalu. This was the station in between. As they could not agree, the messages and letters were being exchanged through me. As he could not resist in Chamdo any longer, he left and he wanted to go to Pagshö. From Pagshö he had second thoughts, but he could not reach Chamdo and he went to Drugugön [Tib. གྲུ་གུ་དགོན]. That was inside the nomad's area, but that night the Chinese came from three different areas. One from the Chamdo side, one from the Riwoche side, and [one place not mentioned], so three different places, and he was surrounded by the Chinese soldiers. Ngabö was caught there and brought to Chamdo, and Lhalu, of course, left immediately to Kongpo Giamda or somewhere.   

**Q:**  Did you hear that Ngabö was captured?   

**A:**  I not only heard, but I went up to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  How did you go?   

**A:**  The Chinese had already reached Pagshö. When the Chinese came I went up there to meet them.   

**Q:**  Were you scared when the Chinese came?   

**A:**  I was not scared.   

**Q:**  So what did you do?   

**A:**  I approached [Tib. གཏུགས] the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did you go there to receive them?   

**A:**  No not to receive them, just to meet them with ten some riders.   

**Q:**  Were you not scared that they would shoot you?   

**A:**  No, they were not going to because I had already sent messengers saying that I was going to meet them. When they were there, I went up and gave them a gift of ten or so yaks, and some flour and tsamba.   

**Q:**  You didn't have any choice but to give those things, right?   

**A:**  Yes. And they told me that the Doji was arrested and there were several hundred Tibetan soldiers and militia going back. Then I thought it was finished. The man in charge came and took me in, and the Chinese told me that they had great difficulty with finding food and asked me to help them buy those things from the local people. I told them that they would not have any problems. And I told them that the soldiers should not roam about in the villages, but they should pitch tents and live on the outskirts, in the open fields. And the purchasing officials may come with their permit and we would supply [them with] whatever they needed. At the same time, I contacted the people and explained that they needed food and all other provisions, which they would buy. And [I] told them that they were not to deal directly with the Chinese and if they had anything to sell, they should bring it to us and we would, in turn, sell to the Chinese. I announced this and this worked very successfully.   

**Q:**  This arrangement was also very good for the Chinese because if the soldiers started to go to the villages, the village people would be scared and they would run away, which was one problem, right?   

**A:**  Yes, on the other hand, people would take advantage, and some may have created problems for us in dealing with the Chinese. So to handle both, I was more scared that some of the villagers might collaborate with the Chinese and rebel. This worked out very well and the Chinese came one by one, and then the leaders also started coming and we set up a store. The people would give to the store and we would sell to the Chinese whatever they needed, and we would collect money from them and then give it back to the people. This arrangement worked very well. One day I got news of what was happening through the Chinese, as they had wireless. They told me that the Doji had surrendered and was in prison. One day I told them I had something on my mind. They asked me what it was. I told them that I would like to go to Chamdo. They asked me why, what for? I told them that I wanted to go for two reasons. The most important being that the Chinese officer was in Chamdo and I needed to meet him. The second being that Doji and all of his staff members were facing great difficulties and being our leader in a way, there were also, most importantly, my friends. So as they were passing through a difficult time, I would like to give them some gifts etc. That very night they communicated to Chamdo, and their leader said it must definitely do. Most importantly because I had to meet and communicate with the people, and they would be the most important people and while meeting them, there would be no objection to meeting with Doji also. When they told me this, I was very happy and asked them if it was really true, and they said it was. I told them this was very nice, but that I would have to take a few people with me and I could not go just like a messenger. And I had to take some gifts to the people that I knew. I only had about 20 mules, and they said that this would be sufficient. And I suggested that I be allowed to take some yaks. They assured me that the Chinese would not rob me, but they could not assure me about the Tibetans. I told them that the Tibetans would not rob me easily because they knew that I was of the Pagshö Labrang, and the highway robbers would not very easily rob the Pagshö Labrang. I took fifty yaks loaded [with] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, flour, rice, tea, meat, butter, salt etc., and twenty mules with my own necessary things and gifts that I had to take, and I left for Chamdo. When I reached Chamdo I went to my usual place, and then the first thing I did was go to Wang Qimei, the Chinese leader. Wang Qimei, the short chap, when I met him he pretended to be very happy. I told them that I was the Pagshö Chandzö and as I had communicated through the wireless of the Chinese officers in Pagshö, I had two reasons [for coming]. One was to meet him, and the other to meet Ngabö and his staff members, and tell them there would be no harm. Secondly, because they were my friends and also some relations were also among them. He said, "Go ahead, go ahead." Besides that, I told him that I had no political affiliations or anything of this nature. Then I met Ngabö.   

**Q:**  Was Ngabö shut in [locked up]?   

**Q:**  How was he shut in?   

**A:**  I asked them where Ngabö was, and he told me Ngabö was in one of the offices under the Doji, which was normally the Customs Office [Tib. ཤོ་བཤེར་ལས་ཁུངས]. In that office itself, there were those big wooden planks. A few of those wooden planks were put down and Ngabö was sitting on one with a blanket, and on the other side sat Tsögo. Both of them were in one room. This office was below the palace of the Doji. Out of that room was the Chinese section leader, Mu Kezhang, who later became the Buzhang. Later he became a very important person in the intelligence agency. Others like Simpön Khembo [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ], Magji Lokela [Tib. བློ་སྐལ་ལགས], Mucha [Tib. མུ་བྱ] Depön, Tshatrütsang Nyimala [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་ཚང་ཉི་མ], quite a number of fourth rank officers, were kept on one separate side. Again, the Letsenpa group was also kept separate. The ordinary Kyüma [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ] officials were kept in the place called the Mathang village, which was within the Chamdo city, and they were kept in a house there. When my yaks came I distributed everything.   

**Q:**  What did Ngabö say?   

**A:**  I gave Ngabö my personal bedding because he had nothing.   

**Q:**  They didn't give him even their bedding, right?   

**A:**  Ngabö told me that the Chinese called Mister Li [Ch. xian sheng] gave him an old, raw silk quilt. That is all he had that was under him, the one on which he was sitting on. The soldiers themselves also didn't have anything to give.   

**Q:**  Even if the Chinese did not have [anything], what happened to the property of the Doji?   

**A:**  No property was left, it was destroyed by that time. It was gone into pieces. Nothing was left. Ngabö asked me how I had come and I explained to him how I had come. He then asked me, "Did anybody give you trouble on the way?" and I said, "No. The Chinese have sent ten soldiers on horseback with me as bodyguards." After meeting Wang Qimei, who was the main leader in that high office, when I returned to my Pagshö territory, the Chinese officers became much more respectful and [were] easily controllable by me. That is why I thought that it was better to meet the high officer right from the beginning, and it was better to avoid any problems. I thought it would be useless to get beaten by the people in between. For me, this turned out to become a very good business. Whatever they needed, I made arrangements to give them and I collected the money from them in a lump sum.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Chamdo?   

**A:**  I stayed about 20 days, and in those 20 days, they were locked up.   

**Q:**  Did you communicate with Lhasa about Ngabö and things like that?   

**A:**  No, no. I think Ngabö must have already done that, because he sent two people from among his staff members to Lhasa. One was Janglojen Logo [Tib. ལྕང་ཅན་བློ་ཁོག] Magji, and the other was Samdruling [Tib. བསམ་གྲུབ་གླིང] Kandrön. After that, I went back and I went once again to Chamdo. That was when Ngabö had sent the messenger to Lhasa to explain to the Tibetan authorities what had happened and to explain that there was not much fighting. And to insist that we should negotiate so that we may have a little more gain. When I went the second time, Ngabö had already received the order to make peaceful negotiations. Two days later, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and Thubden Lengmönla had arrived, and Ngabö, who did not like to stay in the Sithogthang, said he would like to go and stay in Mathang. The Chinese agreed and the restrictions of not going out, etc., were also lifted. Phünwangla had also come, and he was one of the important officers and he stayed upstairs. When he arrived he was wearing a chuba and he had fifty young Baba riders, and all of them were wearing chubas. They all arrived in Chamdo. So he went to Mathang and the next day he went to the Chamdo monastery for pilgrimage. Carrying butter lamps, he made a great show there. Then they asked Phüntso Wangyel [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ] to move into one of the two Doji's rooms, but he said, "No. Since Ngabö is down there, how could I go up. It is not right in my mind, and it certainly is not right from the policy of the government." He was very powerful and they used to move up and down.   

**Q:**  Whom did he tell?   

**A:**  Phünwang told this to Wang Qimei.   

**Q:**  Where was Wang Qimei staying?   

**A:**  He was on the top. In one of the Doji's rooms, and I met Phünwangla in one of those two rooms. After that, Ngabö also moved into one of the rooms. When Ngabö moved in, he did not like that and he wanted to move back with the Tibetan, so he moved as was his own wish. After moving we kept on playing mahjong. Then Nyendrala came up from Kham and I went down from Pagshö, and Ngabö came out of the jail and we were ready to play mahjong again.   

**Q:**  You were playing mahjong in such a tense situation. [laughter] But you had no work and also had a lot of sadness, so wasn't it really best to play Mahjong? Was that right? Right?   

**A:**  Yes. Then Ngabö went to Beijing and I returned to Pagshö.   

**Q:**  Soon after that, you returned to Lhasa, right? And you had heard that the Dalai Lama left and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were appointed, right? At that time, you were still Pagshö, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, the 17-Point Agreement was signed, the Dalai Lama returned and I think our old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> had resigned. I didn't know about that. One day I received an order from the government saying that I had been appointed as the dzasa [of Kündeling] and that I had to come up to Lhasa immediately. So one of the staff members, the senior staff, I asked the stewards to take care of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and left for Lhasa. When I reached Lhasa, then they sent the new Pagshö Dzasa appointed from Lhasa and sent him down.   

**A:**  When you were in Pagshö, you had the rights of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. I would wear the long, yellow satin gown [Ch. da gua zi] and when I went hither and thither, they would also beat the Dama [Tib. བརྡ་མ] drum.   

**Q:**  When you reached Lhasa, the Chinese had arrived, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

