# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0067.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** February 1984  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 69  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kündeling dzasa was a monk official and an important official (dzasa) in Kündeling Labrang. In this interview, he talks about the two Americans who came to Lhasa in 1943 and Tibet’s relationship with the British. He also discussed the visit to Lhasa of Huang Musung. And he describes Sharpa Gyalpo’s arrest and punishment and how Geshe Sherab Gyatso wasn’t allowed to enter Tibet, and how Heinrich Harrer and Peter Aufschnaiter came to Tibet, as well as about the Lhundrup Dzong incident. He describes, in detail, the new Indian government's request regarding Tibet’s treaties with the British, and the sealing of Reting Labrang, and the homes of Sandutsang and Phünkang. He also discusses the arrest of Reting Dzasa about how Khardo confessed that he shot at Lhalu. And he explains how Gyagpön Phu was sent to China to seek help from the Guomindang for Reting. And finally, he discusses the new soldiers set up by the 13th Dalai Lama.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0067_06/H_0067_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Can you please say something about those two Americans who came with a letter and gift from President Roosevelt for the Dalai Lama, and the Dalai Lama returned a letter and a gift, can you tell me some more details about that?   

**A:**  I remember that these people came and that they brought gifts, and that the gifts were replied to but were they talked about, I really don't know. What do you actually want to know about that?   

**Q:**  Wasn't it in the period of World War II in which they wanted to use the road? Wasn't that the period?   

**A:**  I remember that they discussed that matter at the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> (Assembly), but they decided not to give them use of the road. They were scared that when they let them use the road, this would be fully used as military transportation and Tibet would become a kind of military passage and that would create problems. Secondly, if you allowed them to use the road for military transportations, then you would be allied with someone and it wouldn't show that actually you were staying in neutral [Tib. བར་གནས]. Our non-allied status would be damaged. Therefore, it was decided to not give permission for military transportation to be sent through Tibet.   

**Q:**  Around this time, the government of Tibet must have been consulting the British government very much about their policies.   

**A:**  As far as foreign relations were concerned, they were consulting the British a little bit.   

**Q:**  Why were they were consulting the British?   

**A:**  It was a continuation of the idea of the 13th Dalai Lama to consult the British. Secondly, at that time, when you consulted the British, they could give you something more than what the Tibetans knew because they were much more informed about the world situation than the Tibetans. The Tibetan understanding of the world was very poor, so we knew very little.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any system like the Tibetans could listen to the radio, the news, to try to understand anything?   

**A:**  Not much. They didn't listen much to the news etc.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any broadcasting in the Tibetan language at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, Lhalung Lobsang Phüntso [Tib. ལྷ་ལུང་བློ་བཟང་ཕུན་ཚོགས] was there .   

**Q:**  It was 1941, was Lobsang Phüntso there?   

**A:**  He was probably not there, but they had a few radios in Tibet.   

**Q:**  At this time, either Ringgang [Tib. རིན་སྒང] or somebody suggested in the tsondu.   

**A:**  Do you mean the fatty fourth rank?   

**Q:**  The one who was educated in England.   

**A:**  This was Changöba [Tib. བྱ་དངོས་པ] and Ringang, and they were brothers from the same parents.   

**Q:**  If so, Changöba might have incited him to make the suggestion. Was Changöba’s rank higher?   

**A:**  They were the same rank.   

**Q:**  Anyway, the point suggested was that even if we had good relations with and took advice from the British, the British didn't help us that much, so why don't we built up a really good relationship with the Japanese. Later, they regarded this suggestion as a joke and made it basically disappear. Do you know anything about this and can you say something about it?   

**A:**  Usually, Ringgang was not that attentive to politics. He had no such interest. He enjoyed playing mahjong and to run the Agriculture Office, the Sonam Legung [Tib. སོ་ནམ་ལས་ཁུངས]. He was not the sort of person to be involved in any policy, especially not in foreign policy. Things like that he didn't do. But his brother was Changöba, who was one of the governments officials who was educated in the west. It could have been Changöba, but I have no idea.   

**Q:**  It was not the present Changöba, right? He also knew some English.   

**A:**  It was his father. This Changöba might know a little bit of English taught by his father, but he didn't go to the English school.   

**Q:**  About the time of the passing of the 13th Dalai Lama, the Chinese sent a delegation to offer religious rites.   

**A:**  He was called Huang Musung.   

**Q:**  How did he come? I heard that there was a lot talk regarding whether this should be allowed or not. Was such a thing discussed in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> Assembly? Can you tell me a bit more about that?   

**A:**  He came through Kham.   

**Q:**  Probably not. Oh! Yes, he came through Kham and he had many palanquins. Furthermore, in the meeting they discussed and many of the government lay officials did not want to allow them to come, but the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span> and the monasteries were keen to allow them? Can you remember something more about this?   

**A:**  It was said that since they came to make the religious offerings, they could not be stopped. They discussed this and when they said the Chinese were coming, they thought the British would also come and both should be permitted because they had come for religious purposes and for the late Dalai Lama's rites. They made a policy decision that there was no way they could stop that.   

**Q:**  Huang Musong left a man behind in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  The director, Kong Chuzhang was left.   

**Q:**  Why did he leave him?   

**A:**  When Huang Musong came, he made a lot of points of discussion to the Tibetan government. To some of them, although the Tibetan government could have replied, they did not, they sort of kept them hanging on. When they kept them hanging on, they said Kong must be there to continue the discussion, and while he said that Huang came, he had brought wireless equipment and he left it with Kong. Later they showed that he was sort of a Chinese representative.   

**Q:**  I heard that before Kong departed from China, he gave a press statement that he was going to Tibet to establish the office which controlled Tibet, etc. This was supposed to have been published in newspapers in China. Since we had three representatives there, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</span>, why didn't they report such a matter to the Tibetan government? What happened?   

**A:**  They probably should have reported it, but it was not discussed in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> or anywhere, so most of us didn't know anything about this.   

**Q:**  If the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</span> had reported this matter of what came into the newspapers, then how could the Tibetan government allow him to come in and moreover, leave one man behind. Also, when he got back he gave a further press statement stating that they had established an office and a representative was kept there, etc. Moreover, when the British also asked the Tibetans why this representative was there, it was told that they left him to conclude the talks. Didn't the British establish their office in Lhasa in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</span> too, about that time?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  As you said, Kong was left there and the Chinese might have announced that in the papers, so also the British officers showed interest to leave a British representative in Lhasa with the same status as was given to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  To whom did the British ask permission to establish an office and to grant the same status?   

**A:**  They might have asked the Kashag   

**Q:**  Are you really sure that they asked the Kashag?   

**A:**  They might have.   

**Q:**  Kong was left there and the British also did the same. They were just left without confirming their status or rights.   

**A:**  This is impossible.   

**Q:**  It was definitely like this, and then they started throwing parties for each other. They didn't have documents for setting up the representatives office. At that time, the British left Dzasa Rai Bhadur and it was said they served rice and meat in Dekyilinga.   

**A:**  They probably didn't sign a written document about this.   

**Q:**  Let alone a written one, they didn't even have a verbal agreement. At about that time, Kong was supposed to have had some problem. He was supposed to have knocked at the main gate of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> at night, etc. How did that happen?   

**A:**  I know about it, but at the moment I don't remember the details. When I remember later I will tell you.   

**Q:**  There is something about Sharpa Gyalpo?   

**A:**  Sharpa Gyalpo was during the 13th Dalai Lama's period. At that time, there was a lot of restrictions in Tibet to sell tobacco, cigarettes, etc. He had a shop in Dongtsesur [Tib. གདོང་རྩེ་ཟུར] in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</span>, and he did everything that was illegal, everything he was not allowed to, he sold. There was a joint Tibetans and Nepalese office called Gorshib Legung [Tib. གོར་ཞིབ་ལས་ཁུངས] in which they looked after the Nepalese. The Tibetan government made thorough inquiries. These inquiries revealed that his mother was purely Tibetan and his father happened to be a Nepalese. While he was selling this contraband and acting lawlessly, one day, since the 13th Dalai Lama was forceful, he was arrested. When the soldiers came to arrest him, he ran into the office of the Nepalese Consulate General. The soldiers entered the office and finally got him. I think it was during the Mönlam period that he was arrested. When he was arrested, the Nepalese said that he was Nepalese, so the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</span> could not handle it. It had to be discussed in the Gorshib Legung. Finally it was discussed in the Gorshib Legung. The Nepalese came to discuss this matter and from the Tibetan side, actually, the Shengo was told that he was Nepalese and that he could punish him or whatever he wanted to do. But the Tibetan government side made the Shengo say, "As far as Sharpa Gyalpo is concerned, his mother is Tibetan and his father is Nepalese. Therefore, his flesh belongs to Tibet and his bones belong to Nepal, so we will cut and take all the flesh out of him and give you the bones." Finally, they were scared and had to apologize and promise not to repeat those activities again.   

**Q:**  Didn't he die in jail?   

**A:**  Not at that time. Was he dead? I don't remember very clearly.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Nepalese king wrote a letter to the Dalai Lama and the Dalai Lama also wrote a letter and apologized. This didn't work out and the British intervened, and the Nepalese threatened to have a war with Tibet because of this?   

**A:**  The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</span> was blamed for everything done wrong.   

**Q:**  But finally, the Dalai Lama had to apologize, don't you know about this?   

**A:**  No, I don't know about sending the letters.   

**Q:**  I heard the liaison officer of the Tibetan government appointed for Kong Chuzhang was Samjola [Tib. བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས].   

**A:**  No, no, no, not this Samjo. This Samjo is another Samjo. He was a tall <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span> called Wöser [Tib. འོད་ཟེར] Samjo. He was the liaison officer, not Thubden Samjo.   

**Q:**  When Geshe Sherab Gyatso came, he came up to Nagchu. He came, but he was not allowed to come into Tibet. How did that happen?   

**A:**  At that time, the three great monasteries probably put a lot of effort into Geshe coming up. I was the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</span> and as far as I know about the situation, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> had no objection to Geshe Sherab coming into Tibet. Geshela had already come out of Nagchu and was willing to come in. The monasteries were supporting it very much for Geshe Sherab to come and the tsondu had no objection. This is my understanding of it. If I tell you the truth, it was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span> himself who didn't want Geshe Sherab to enter the country. It was he who objected. As far as my understanding and my judgement is concerned, his proposals could be passed. When they first came, there was no problem in the tsondu at all. But then gradually, day after day, it became more and more worse, more difficulties showed up. It was controlled [Tib. གཅུས་ཕུར་རྒྱག] from the top, that was very clear to me.   

**Q:**  I heard that at first it was said that the Geshe could come and that he also had a pupil with him.   

**A:**  He must have had a partner to talk because he was communist's [answer not finished]...   

**Q:**  He was not communist. At that time, there were no communists.   

**A:**  He was very close to the communists at that time.   

**Q:**  This was in 1944 when there were no communists in China. They had gone for the Long March. It was around the 2nd World War.   

**A:**  I know this very clearly because the late, older Kündeling Dzasa was a very close friend of Geshe Sherab and he was keen that Geshe Sherab should come in. That was why I kept my ears open and observed very carefully, so that is why I know that it was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span> who put the brake on it, he put a full stop on that point.   

**Q:**  How was that question raised in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span>? He could have just walked in and nobody would say anything?   

**A:**  That was not possible.   

**Q:**  Did he ask for permission to come?   

**A:**  Any person who came via the Nagchu route needed to have permission from the Central Tibetan Government in those days. And even businessmen who came from Xining, the Xining Garpön, would guarantee to Nagchu Dzong with a certificate saying, "This is a Chinese, or Huhu [Muslim], or not a Huhu. He has this many horses to sell, this many things to sell and he has nothing to do with politics." The Xining Garpön had to guarantee to the Nagchu Dzong. The Nagchu <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</span> would send this along with his recommendation to Lhasa and if Lhasa approved, they could come in. Otherwise, they could not just walk in at all, so Geshela had no way to walk through. If he just came in as Geshe Sherab alone, it might have been possible for him to go through, but that was also very difficult because he was a very well-known person. It was probably impossible. He was stopped by <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span> because these two never could get along well, so Taktra had a very strong objection against Geshe Sherab. That was the real cause.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Kashag found that this was not an easy thing and didn't approve and consult the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> because they found that it was not an easy work, right? Normally, they would not consult the Kashag, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I know further, though I have not read the letters and the official documents, but on the basis of what I heard, he, Geshela, said that he would like to discuss many things with the Tibetan government regarding the Chinese, etc. That he had definitely said.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, it was kind of quite loose [Tib. ལྷུག་ལྷུག] in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span>, how did it become like this?   

**A:**  After that, they reported up and down and then, day after day, the problems become harder and harder and people begin to say, "Now it is doubtful that he can come." Finally, they said no. It was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span> who stopped him. Otherwise, there was quite a hope and also high respect for Geshela, and his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</span> liked to send people to welcome him. Welcome groups were going to be something big.   

**Q:**  Why do you say that it was Taktra. You mean to say that both are learned and well-known scholars, so they don't like each other? Was that the reason?   

**A:**  That was definitely the reason. The excuse they used was that he was on a political mission. There were political implications, etc. They gave it a political coloring. In reality, the truth was that those two learned men didn't get along well. <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span> happened to be the regent, so he exercised his power.   

**Q:**  Did those talks occupy a number of days in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span>?   

**A:**  Not many, two or three days. Then they decided not to let him in. Then Geshela went back.   

**Q:**  Who was with Geshela at that time?   

**A:**  I don't remember. There were so many people there at that time. Geshela had not come as an individual. It looked as if he had came sort of on an official mission.   

**Q:**  This was the year when a plane had crashed in Tsetang.   

**A:**  Yes, it was during World War II.   

**Q:**  It was at this time that Heinrich Harrer and all consorts had come to Tibet, do you remember that?   

**A:**  I do remember that very clearly. In that time, either Changöba [Tib. བྱ་དངོས་པ] or Tangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད], one of them was looking after the electricity department in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Which Tangme are you talking about. Was it the present Tangme? Is this present Tangme the one who went to London?   

**A:**  Yes, he is the one who went to London and he did very good work. He was good in electronics. We heard that two foreigners had come and they were at the Electricity House. I went down there because it was very close to where I lived. I went down and saw the two of them with beards, wearing Tibetan woolen boots, somba [Tib. ཟོན་པ], and they looked very poor and tired. I heard that they didn't know any other language except English. They fled from Dehradun prison up to the Tö area and then they came to Lhasa. In those days we didn't know where Dehradun was. One month or so later, we heard that Heinrich had moved to Tsarong. Tsarong had rented him a house and he had moved into Tsarong's place. Aufschnaiter had been transferred from the Electricity House and he was kept in Dogde [Tib. དོག་བདེ], where they were growing trees and building canals. He was probably an engineer. For that he was transferred to the office in charge of planting trees [Tib. ལྕང་འཛུགས་དོ་དམ] and he was very, very helpful with planting trees and the making canals. Heinrich was not working on those lines. Heinrich didn't know anything about those things. But gradually he built up a circle of friends. He spoke Tibetan. Among his most important friends were Lobsang Samden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན] and Shölkang Jedrung. They went around everywhere and he became very popular. On the other hand, Aufschnaiter was a very quiet person. He did his work, what was given to him every month by the government. He took that money and kept quiet, and did his work and made the plan to build the Shangthab [Tib. གཞང་འདབས] Power Station. These were the different personalities these two had.   

**Q:**  The year after this is the Wood-Bird year, 1945. It was the time of the Lhundrup Dzong trouble. We have discussed this.   

**A:**  Yes, we have discussed this in detail, so there is no need to repeat it.   

**Q:**  But I have one more question. Though Repe Gyawu, etc. from Sera were not among the ringleaders in the Lhundrup Dzong incident, right? However, they had been given lashes, were sent into exile etc. All of this happened, why was that?   

**A:**  It was because they were the ones who said that they would not hand over the ringleaders.   

**Q:**  Don't you think that the punishment was more severe and rigorous in comparison to the crime they had committed.   

**A:**  It depends on how they explain it and that is it. Whether they interpreted it as something big, as a revolt against the government.   

**Q:**  At that time, the government did not send soldiers to Sera, did it?   

**A:**  I don't think so, I don't remember.   

**Q:**  At that time, they had some trouble. The monks had refused to come to attend the Mönlam (the Prayer Festival), but then they later attended it, how did that happen?   

**A:**  If I recall correctly, then they kind of mediated. The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</span> traders in Lhasa, especially headed by a man I remember named Kumpiling Chöndze, mainly negotiated, and because of that, there was some kind of settlement arranged. That was why the monks attended.   

**Q:**  How did they settle it? Tell me some details.   

**A:**  At first the monks might have said that they were not coming to the Mönlam. Later they were told that they should not do that and later, they accepted to come.   

**Q:**  I heard that <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span> was among the investigation committee. So I asked about this and he said, "In that year, the Dalai Lama was invited to the Mönlam Assembly [Tib. ཚོགས་ཕེབས] and after the Mönlam, the investigation took place in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</span>. Then they caught each person one by one and sent them to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</span> for interrogation because they thought if they sent them together, there might have been some kind of danger. Later, they were shut in Shöl Prison and they were lashed. And they made them ride oxen and banished them. Rebe Gyau was lashed so severely, that he had pieces of flesh kept in a cloth bag."   

**A:**  I don't know if this is true or not.   

**Q:**  Among the investigation committee, there was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</span> and he was aggressive.   

**A:**  He was probably a tsipön.   

**Q:**  He went through the motions of being angry and hit Rebe Gyau's head with the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སམ་ཁྲ] The traditional rectangular wooden writing/message board. The message was written on the polished, blackened surface of the wood that was covered with a white chalk. A stylus was used to clear away the chalk leaving the shape of the letters, which appeared black. It was usually about 12-14 inches long and 2 inches wide. There was a lower board on which the messages were written and a top board which served as the cover. In many cases there were several additional writing boards between these two.">samtra</span> message writing board [Tib. སམ་ཁྲ].   

**A:**  This could be because he was ,,,unclear.   

**Q:**  During World War II they came to borrow the road. How did that happen?   

**A:**  I don't know, about that part I have nothing to say because I don't know at all. As far as I remember, there was a meeting about whether they should allow them to use the road through Tibet to carry military equipment, arms and ammunition, but we didn't see whoever had come. Actually, somebody had come. He was the man who had requested to transport the arms and ammunition. No one like that ever came.   

**Q:**  At that time, an American captain called what? He came.   

**A:**  Wasn't that Tolstoy? Tolstoy was there during Reting's reign and he also took a photo with Reting wearing a monk's robe. At that time, I was Reting's neshen.   

**Q:**  The American captain whose <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</span> was Derge Sey and he went through Kham.   

**A:**  I don't know his name.   

**Q:**  Weren't two of them [the other was Dolan], the main ones who asked for the road? I heard that they went through the motions of asking, but internally they came to check whether the road was useful or not. If it was useful, they were to use it regardless of whether it was borrowed or not.   

**Q:**  What about the Victory Congratulation Delegation?   

**A:**  Regarding this, Derge Sey has written in the Chinese published book about being the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</span> of the Americans and going to Kham. It was written in the books where Lhalu wrote about being the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Eastern Tibet who was based in Chamdo. It is an abbreviation of dome jigyab [tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].">doji</span>, and Lhautara on the 17-Point Agreement wrote a lot.   

**Q:**  There were two volumes.   

**A:**  I think it is in the 1st volume.   

**Q:**  When did you see this book?   

**A:**  At the end of last year, 1983.   

**Q:**  Did you see this in Dharamsala?   

**A:**  I got the book here.   

**Q:**  About the Victory Congratulation Delegations [Tib. གཡུལ་རྒྱལ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས], why did they have to go and who gave the idea? And what was all of this about?   

**A:**  Since the war was over and the 4 powerful nations won the victory, and the Japanese and Germany lost, we needed to build foreign relations. In order to build foreign relations, we needed to build up contacts. Also, it was the time in which the Guomindang was having a national meeting [Ch. guo min da hui]. They insisted that for this meeting, the Tibetan government should have representatives. Secondly, they also made us understand that if Tibetans did not attend, then the Panchen Lama, Panchen Labrang and other people were going to represent Tibet. That was sort of bypassing the Tibetan government, going sideways, when they were going to represent Tibet. That was also a danger. For these two purposes, they sent, jointly, this Victory Congratulation Delegation. I thought Kheme had written about this clearly. As I said, in one direction they needed to build a good strong foreign relationship. On the other hand it was necessary to attend the meeting of the Guomindang, though we didn't know what was happening. We had no idea about what was happening and what it was all about. But they were insisting and also we thought it necessary to attend. They couldn't go as representatives, so as an excuse to cover that up, they say their congratulations of the victory. That was sent to China and along with that, they congratulated the British and America too. What is wrong with that?   

**Q:**  Did they attend the meeting of the Guomindang?   

**A:**  Yes, they did attend the Guomindang meeting, but not as full-fledged members, but as observers who went there. They said, "We have no orders from the government to attend this meeting. However, we would like to sit in on the meeting." This is how they went. I thought Kheme had written quite clearly about this.   

**Q:**    

**Q:**  Changöba wrote very well in the book as being under the Chinese control. The point he indicated was that they went to attend the meeting as observers they went to prove that Tibet was independent.   

**A:**  In the first book, Lhautara mentioned in detail how we contacted the British representative, taking their advice, etc. etc. I have written details about this.   

**Q:**  Do you have anymore specific details regarding the delegation which was sent to the Asian Conference in 1947? When the Tibetan government didn't want to be involved in the Guomindang meeting then why were they sending a delegation?   

**A:**  We wanted to know who was attending. We wanted to see it. Also, if we didn't send representatives, then the places in the meeting would be taken by the Panchen Lama and this other group of people. That is why there was a problem and why it became necessary for us to send a delegation. But not as real delegation members but as observers.   

**Q:**  There were the delegates of the Panchen and the Khambas, and they shouted and signed their names. I have heard that Khenjung Thubden Sangpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བཟང་པོ] was among the chairman [Ch. zhu xi], and the clerk of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</span> was also there raising hands. I believe that there were also photographers?   

**A:**  He was the member of the bureau down there. That might not have been this national meeting, several Guomindang meetings were held.   

**Q:**  This was the same meeting. The photos were in the British's India office library.   

**A:**  On the Guomindang National Congress, there was Thubden Sangye [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་སངས་རྒྱས] and Dzasa Ngawang Gyentsen [Tib. ངག་དབང་རྒྱལ་མཚན] who was then tsendrön.   

**Q:**  No, it was Thubden Sangpo because it was just after that Reting incident occurred.   

**A:**  It must be.   

**Q:**  During the Lhundrup Dzong trouble, did we have any talk or any problems regarding the Tawang border area?   

**A:**  What does that have to do with Lhundrup Dzong?   

**Q:**  I mean in the same period, was there any talk taking place in Lhasa because we understood that even the British may be willing to give up the Tawang area, to give the Tawang area back to Tibet.   

**A:**  I don't know about that period but when the British handed over the administration to India, India sent a request to put the treaties Tibet had signed with the British in the name of the Indian administration. That request came to Tibet and they were startled very much.   

**Q:**  Through whom did they request?   

**A:**  Through Richardson of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</span> to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Why were they startled?   

**A:**  They trusted the British treaty very much, regarding it as very effective. At that time, it was really stupid. Actually, it would have been very good if they had sent people to sign the treaty. But, there may have been some Guomindang policy involved in it.   

**Q:**  Please tell me in detail what was happening and where you were at that time.   

**A:**  I was a shöndrön.   

**Q:**  In that case, you should know everything. So what happened?   

**A:**  Finally, they decided not to [tansfer British rights to India]. They had even given a reply. I think that we were unable to do this. They even gave as a reply that they were basing the treaty off of the English, but that they were not going to sign with India for the time being.   

**Q:**  Because of that, India announced that the previous treaty was disregarded.   

**A:**  At that time, some people however, insisted, even among the Tibetan officers, to send a delegation to sign the treaty.   

**Q:**  Who were they?   

**A:**  I don't remember who they were but some objected.   

**Q:**  They must have been from the monasteries.   

**A:**  Probably, because if there was a Guomindang influence, then naturally it came through the monasteries. So it must have been from there. If that had been signed with India, this automatically would have upset the Chinese plans and ideas. So they probably influenced them not to do it.   

**Q:**  At that time, the regent was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, probably, and Reting's chapter was over.   

**Q:**  <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span> was among the ones who went to talk and he said that the Nehru told him that it would be good to send delegates to sign the [new] treaty and he reported to the higher ups, but they didn't respond.   

**A:**  When each person held a policy, if they signed a treaty, this would influence the Chinese because we signed it directly with India. But, actually, when we think about it now, it would have been very helpful.   

**Q:**  This would be strong evidence to prove Tibet's independence. Was it just after India got independence when they wanted to sign the treaty, in 1947 or 1948? Did they request that after Melon came to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] The name of the British Indian government&#x27;s Bureau Office in Lhasa. After Indian independence, the Indian government continued to operate the office using the same name until 1954 when it became an Indian government consulate.">Dekyilinga</span>?   

**A:**  It was at the time of Richardson. Melon came after the Chinese arrival.   

**Q:**  After Richardson, it was Sina, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was there any other important reason to visit and to go for the Victory Congratulation beside the invitation you received? I ask this question because I heard that some people carried a number of boxes of documents, dealing with the border area to discuss them with the new Indian authorities.   

**A:**  I don't know this clearly, but I don't think <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</span> carried any documents dealing with the border, at all. Because Sambo's colleague was Khenjung Lobsang Wangyal [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དབང་རྒྱལ] and he was my teacher in the service of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span>. This was like the guarantor teacher in the monasteries. This was considered as important among the tsidrung )monk officials) because we had to sign a pledge in the Yigtsang. At that time, for the staff members there was one lay official and one tsidrung. The lay appointed was Kabshösey [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་སྲས]. As for tsidrung, they gave me the first chance, as the number one candidate. The second candidate was a tsidrung called Kungala [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་ལགས], who was slightly related to the Sambo family. Everybody thought it normal that I should have been appointed. They approved my name, but later, the list of names came out of the regents' office. It was changed, and Kungala was given the chance to go and I had been turned down.   

**Q:**  <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</span> Tenzin Thöndrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་བསྟན་འཛིན] came to India to that meeting, how was that possible?   

**A:**  He might have gone on his own but not as a member of the official delegation. I think he went on his own but not as part of the official delegation. The official delegation was actually as follows: the lay official was Kabshösey and also the interpreter, and the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span> was Kungala. I was watching the situation and I remember this quite well because I was following carefully what was happening. But there was no talk or discussion about the subject of the border raised at all in Tibet. The meeting was regarded as important, saying the there were delegates from all the countries.   

**Q:**  If it was important, there should be a Shape.   

**A:**  <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</span> would not go.   

**Q:**  <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</span> told me after he was released that the Chinese told him that this was called the Nauseating Drama [Tib. སྐྱུག་བྲོ་བའི་ཟློས་གར], and they showed the photo of the [people] attending the meeting and asked him his opinion. He told the Chinese he couldn't remember, that it had been many years. Now we are almost touching on the Reting case. Wasn't there some point where the Lhalu was shot at in the sandy area?   

**A:**  Yes, it was said that Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ] Rimpoche was the shooter. This is among the Reting incident. He was shot near Kangnadong [Tib. འཁར་རྔ་གདོན], the east side of the Potala, and it was confessed by Khardo without asking him.   

**Q:**  How did Gyeyab, the Dalai Lama's father, die? It was about this year? Can you tell [me] something about it?   

**A:**  He got sick and he died suddenly. What people talked about later, I do not know. But at that time, there was not a single word that he got poisoned and all this, not a single word at that time. Not only that, but there was not many cases of poisoning at all in Tibet, not very much at all, very, very little. Even in the case of Reting, everybody suspected that Reting was killed, but no one mentioned a word about poisoning. They said that his testicles were squashed or things like that, but nothing about poison at all.   

**Q:**  This bomb explosion at Drunyichemmo's house, what is the true story? Because we all know that the bomb exploded there. Regarding this, Mr. <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span> mentioned it in detail in his book. Where were you then?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How did that happen? Were you tsendrön?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So you have heard about this, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was written in the verdict issued to Reting.   

**Q:**  In <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span>'s book, it says that because the leaflets were thrown in the Phodrang Sarpa [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསར་པ], therefore, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</span> Drunyichemmo's house was raided.   

**A:**  They did not raid his house. What I heard was that the bomb had definitely been delivered to Drunyichemmo's house, but I didn't see the box of the bomb at all, but the people say that the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> opened the box and the bomb exploded. My understanding is that the bomb was delivered and also the letter was thrown into the house almost simultaneously.   

**Q:**  All at once?   

**A:**  Simultaneously.   

**Q:**  The box was sent by the Doji Dzasa Yuthok to the Regent, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If that is so, then why did <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</span> Drunyichemmo's <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> open this parcel which was addressed to the Regent? What <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span> said that because the leaflets were thrown in Phodrang Sarpa, they suspected and opened the box. I heard that when the bomb exploded, it made holes in the walls and it made the cupboards like the pockmarked person's face.   

**A:**  This must be true. What I have heard is that this parcel was received at the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</span>'s house and the letter [leaflets] was [were] thrown in Phodrang Sarpa at almost the same time. Drunyichemmo had told his brother, who was known as Nyerpala, that he had to be careful, so he opened it. Because of [that] the Reting trouble started. At that time I was a tsendrön. Early morning I was there in the Trungja tea meeting, and when the Trungja was about to be over, Chemmo (Phala) told me not to go and to to stay for a while. Chemmo was called by the Kashag, he went there and after that he came up. I don't know what matter he had to report to the Dalai Lama or what, but he went to the Dalai Lama's place. After that, the Chemmo came out and told the other tsendrön that most of them could go home, but that a few of them may have to stay for a while. He told me that I had to stay for a while.   

**Q:**  What was happening at this time? Was there something that had to do with Reting happening? Do you know about it?   

**A:**  Yes, we had already heard that two shape had left last night. All of this I heard, so I knew that something was happening. Then Chemmo told me, "You go and get the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</span>, the Dalai Lama's seal." When you have to confiscate the property of anyone, for what we called, gothel [Tib. སྒོ་ཐེལ] [sealing the property], no other seals could be used except the bugdam. The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</span> was not allowed to carry the bugdam. It had to be carried by the tsendrön representatives, which meant one of the tsendrön who represented the Dalai Lama, he carried it. The normal system was that the moment you get the bugdam, the seal, you had to wrap it in a yellow brocade ball and carry it on your back. After that Chemmo told me, "Now, let's go".   

**Q:**  At that time, the Chemmo didn't tell you anything internally, right?   

**A:**  He didn't say anything. By that time, Chemmo should have known it because without the knowledge of the Chemmo, they could not get the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</span>. So in order to get the bugdam, Chemmo needed to know what was happening. The bugdam was in the Dalai Lama's room. It could only be taken out by the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མཁན་པོ] The highest monk official in the traditional Tibetan government. He was the head of the monk official segment, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s household and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s private storeroom [tib. dzübug].">Jigyab khembo</span> or either of the Dalai Lama's three personal attendants [Tib. གསོལ་གཟིམ].   

**Q:**  Who brought the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</span> on that day?   

**A:**  That day when I took it, I didn't see the Jigyab Khembo.   

**Q:**  At that time, who was the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་མཁན་པོ] The highest monk official in the traditional Tibetan government. He was the head of the monk official segment, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s household and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s private storeroom [tib. dzübug].">Jigyab khembo</span>?   

**A:**  It was Jayangkyil Khyenrabla [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ་མཁྱེན་རབ་ལགས]. I was probably given it by the personal attendant in charge of clothes, the Pönpo Kudrepa [Tib. སྐུ་བགྲེས་པ]. When we went down near the Kashag gate, all the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</span> were waiting for us. Normally to seal the property, Chemmo did not have to go in person, he just a sent a representative. But in this case, it looked to be the Kashag order that the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆེན་མོ] 1. Abbr. of the name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain (Drönyerchemmo). 2. Title for the highest status craftsmen in traditional Tibet.">chemmo</span> had to go. After that, amongst the junior staff we started talking. "What is it, where are we going? We don't know where and what is happening. We don't know but it must be some trouble," we were talking something like that. Then we left. When we were reaching Reting's Labrang near Demo Trokhang, the summer cottage, when we reached there, there were some <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</span>, the assistant of disciplinary officer, gekö [Tib. དགེ་བསྐོས] and some kitchen helpers [Tib. ཐབ་གཡོག].   

**Q:**  Had they already reached there?   

**A:**  Not only had they already reached there, but at the right and the left side, there were also already soldiers. At the outer gate of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</span>, everyone got down from their horses.   

**Q:**  I heard that <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span> dismounted his house and took a few steps ahead from the side.   

**A:**  Everyone got down from their horses at the outer gate of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</span> and they walked along the alley near the labrang. Then I thought that they were definitely going to Reting Labrang. At the gate, Drunyichemmo Chömpel Thubden called me and said, "Look, tsendrön. You go up from here through Shide and go up to Reting Labrang and see who is there." I went up and the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</span> was not there, but the ex-dzasa was there and all the other staff was functioning as normal everyday life. I came out and told them, "The dzasa is not in but all the other staff is there as usual." I told them that and then they talked among themselves and they said, "Wouldn't it be better that we go in now?" They went in from the area outside the main gate [Tib. སྒོ་མཆོར] of Shide faced towards Reting Labrang. They went up and asked, "Where is the dzasa?" They said that he was not in, he had gone to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</span>, but the ex-dzasa was there and they saluted to him. Only later I came to know that they suspected that the Reting people would shoot them and that they were on alert when they went in along the stone floor.   

**Q:**  Did they really have doubts [suspicions]?   

**A:**  They were really suspicious. That was why they sent me. That is what I came to know later. Also, when they walked through the courtyard they were quite careful. At this time, the ex-<span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</span> came out. When he came out they saluted to him. Then ex-dzasa said, "Please come in." They went with the ex-dzasa but they didn't enter the room. The ex-dzasa invited them into the room. They didn't go and they sat on the outskirts of the room, like a veranda, above the staircase. Normally the young people of Reting sat there in the sun and talked. On that day they all sat there. Then they asked where dzasa was? the ex-dzasa replied saying that he had just then gone to Yabshi. Then they said that they should send someone to call him. Immediately they sent someone.   

**Q:**  I understand that <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</span> [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] and Tsarong were sent?   

**A:**  No, no. First someone was sent from Reting Labrang and that took some time. Then I think they sent <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</span> and Tsarong later. I remember this, but first was definitely Reting Labrang's man. At about that time, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</span> came with horses and they invited him in. Dzasa invited all of them inside his room. When they entered into the room they, of course, had to salute him and that is what they did. Then, I think it was the senior <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</span>, Ta lama, who said, "By the order of the Kashag, there have been some problems and two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</span> have gone to invite the regent. And both of you, you and the ex-dzasa, have to go to the Kashag for a while." They all said, "Yes." They had nothing else to say but "Yes." The moment it was told to the two dzasa, they put a saddle on their horses and they left. The moment they left they told us to seal it. We started sealing and we sealed all the houses. We sealed everything except the stores downstairs and the treasury downstairs. Otherwise, all the rooms, including the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</span> office, all were sealed. It took a long time to seal every house, the rooms, etc. After sometime they told Ngabö, "Isn't it better that you go now? Why don't you go?" When Reting's property was sealed, they came out and they were told to go to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</span>. I was told to go to Phünkang and I was quite close to Phünkang's house. I went up and I saw that <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</span> was there. His son was there and all of their daughters and in-laws were there. About that time, when Reting Labrang was sealed, they saw that from the top of the roof. When we were facing toward them, [Princess] Kukula of Sikkim came out and called me, "ögyenla, what did we do wrong? What did we do wrong and why do they have to come here?" I said, "How do I know? They are coming behind me." That is what I said, and I went back and told this to the drungtsi. They were all there, so they went up. They went up and met Phünkang Sawangchemmo. Again they saluted him, and they sent Phünkang Sawangchemmo and his sons up to the Potala <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</span>, and after that they sealed their house. They had to send the dzasa first because they had to issue the order from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤོད་འགག] The Secretariat of the regent.">shö ga</span> and take off the dzasa's dress. Phünkang's sealing was much less, because there had been no trouble in Reting, there wouldn't be trouble in Phünkang. So there was no worry, a sort of relaxed atmosphere. So naturally they didn't seal that right away. Many of it was also left unsealed. After that we went to Sandutsang and when we came there, Ngabö had already reached there. Then Gyurmela [Tib. འགྱུར་མེད་ལགས] was sent up to the Potala and then we sealed Sandutsang. It was very late. The second rule was, the seal I was carrying, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</span>, could never be allowed to be kept in your own place overnight. No matter how late it was, you had to return it. So after that we returned to the Potala to return the seal.   

**Q:**  Was Chemmo with you?   

**A:**  Yes. This is the chapter of how this sealing was done. That was this day, and beside that, nothing happened.   

**Q:**  What happened to Nyungne [Tib. སྙུང་གནས] Lama?   

**A:**  At that time, nothing happened to him. He was staying in Nyungne Temple and nothing happened to Khardo also. Then one or two days later, even Reting Rimpoche had already [been] put in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</span>, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</span> were jailed. Then the talk came, "Nyungne Lama has to be caught, or his property has to be sealed. Then Khardo has to be caught and his property has to be sealed." All of this talk came two days later. And quite a number of the small seals were done. When they were sealed, I was not there because I went that day, so the day after I didn't have to go.   

**Q:**  When it was a sealing, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</span> had to be used, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The Kashag seal, Kadam [Tib. བཀའ་དམ], or the regent's seal, Sidam [Tib. སྲིད་དམ], were not allowed, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the next day, Reting Rimpoche came.   

**Q:**  Where were you then?   

**A:**  I was at Tse.   

**Q:**  So you saw Reting coming?   

**A:**  I saw he was on the red mule. I knew that mule. He got down from the mule at the inner stone pillar in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</span> Doring Nangma [Tib. རྡོ་རིང་ནང་མ] and then walked up, and the mule was held by Gyagpön Kelsang and the fourth <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</span>, Kelsang. Probably, the Fourth Rupön might have been the one who volunteered and was actually holding Reting's hand, in the outlook it seemed that he was helping him step up. His servant, the Söpön, the son of the Jangra Sharpa [Tib. ལྕང་ར་ཤར་པ], and also one <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</span> monk bodyguard or <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</span> from Sang Ngag Chödzong [Tib. གསང་སྣགས་ཆོས་རྫོང], who was known as a hero, the two of them were there. Then Reting Rimpoche was shut in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</span> in one of the apartments of a Dalai Lama's <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span> cooks [Tib. གསོལ་ཐབ་པ]. Two servants were also kept in one house and then the investigation was started.   

**Q:**  There is an article written by the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span> nicknamed, "Nepalese" or Bepola [Tib. བལ་པོ་ལགས]. Reting told him that there were gun shots and the soldiers were also shooting toward that direction. "Then the Fourth Rupön caught my mule, and he took out a gun and stared at me. In case the monks came near me, it is definite that the Fourth Rupön was going to kill me."   

**A:**  Yes, if he killed Reting, he himself would have been killed right there by the monks, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, I heard that that day they tricked the monks. They gave two different routes of the arrival of Reting Rimpoche. Is that true?   

**A:**  I have heard that also. They have said that he could not come by Dogde. They probably made the monks to know that Reting Rimpoche would be brought by Bongtö [Tib. འབྲོམ་སྟོད].   

**Q:**  So the monks went to Bongtö.   

**A:**  It must be.   

**Q:**  Since you saw that Reting Rimpoche was coming back, did you see both shape, Surkhang as well as Lhalu coming back?   

**A:**  I definitely saw Surkhang but I didn't notice Lhalu. I don't remember.   

**Q:**  I have heard that Lhalu stayed behind Surkhang to seal the properties of Reting Rimpoche and Reting Labrang in Reting. They had their sealing done in Reting, but there was no <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</span> seal. How was that possible?   

**A:**  This was because it was on a long distance journey and they didn't need the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྦུག་དམ] The seal of the Dalai Lama and thus also the name for edicts promulgated directly by the Dalai Lama (over his seal).">bugdam</span>. Otherwise, the bugdam must return within the night itself and was not allowed to be kept overnight. While they were waiting for the arrival of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</span>, there was one boy who was the servant of the dzasa. Who was the younger brother of Söshönla of Jangrashar. He was going up and down, and up and down, and finally he went down the staircases. I did not realize it until the next day, he went down from the place where we were, took a horse and left for Reting. There was another one called Khamtru [Tib. ཁམས་ཕྲུག] who was from Kham, may be he was an official, Shabdöba. The two of them went. They met Reting Rimpoche on the way. They hid themselves and they talked about shooting, but since there were only two of them they didn't. Then they went to Reting and found the everything was sealed, and they found that there were about 50-60 soldiers headed by a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</span> who was related to Jangrashar. After that, they told the Reting Dechang, who was in Reting and all the others, "We cannot stay like this, we have to break those seals and take out arms and also the properties." But Dechang did not allow this, and he and the two boys who went from Lhasa and also the young servants of Reting Rimpoche and the young monks of the Reting monastery got together. They killed all the soldiers overnight. They broke the seals and took out all the arms, ammunition and whatever there was. There were only one or two soldiers left, I don't know, otherwise all of them had been killed. Then they left and reached China, via Kham.   

**Q:**  They didn't plan to fight toward here [Lhasa], right?   

**A:**  There was nothing to fight here because Reting Rimpoche was also taken. The boys couldn't enter Sera. If they could, the situation might have been a little bit better than this. Everything was destroyed there and later, many soldiers were sent. Also, over at Reting there was another <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</span> who was very strong and fought. He fought and later he even went to China and fought with the Communists, and I heard that he landed in Burma.   

**Q:**  Is he still alive?   

**A:**  Who knows. A group of Tibetans landed in Burma and at that time, they wandered into the hills I think, and even from Dharamsala, the government tried to send people to find out. We sent some agents to see what was happening but we couldn't catch up with them. So what I have told you so far is the truth as I have seen it and as I have experienced it.   

**Q:**  When Reting Rimpoche was brought to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> to be interrogated were you there?   

**A:**  I was not there, in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> there were only representatives, I was not there.   

**Q:**  According to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span>'s book, and also according to normal talk, it was said that Reting Rimpoche confessed to all the charges that the Tibetan government raised against him. However, the articles from Lhasa, written by Tsidrung Bepo were saying that Reting Rimpoche did not confess to the charges. He had simply said that he would like to meet <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span> personally and he would not talk to the tsondu. At that time, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</span> and Lhalu were not in the tsondu. This was a problem. What can you say about this? Shakabpa was in the tsondu. Shakabpa said that Reting confessed and said, "We might have made a mistake, but I am going to report to the regent." Regarding whether he had confessed or not, there was some difference.   

**A:**  The books written in Tibet and written here are different, right?   

**Q:**  Now, who are still here who used to be the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> members?   

**A:**  There isn't a single abbot here except some government officials. Tarala was not there, Thubden Sangye was not there and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</span> and both the Taring were probably not there. Liushar was there, but he died.   

**Q:**  Chemmo probably knows?   

**A:**  He was at the meeting. I wonder who was the true representative of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲས་རྣམ་པ] A rank just below the 4th rank (rimshi) held by young officials from the upper level of the aristocracy [the Yabshi and Depön Midrag families] when they first joined the government.">senampa</span> at that time. May be it was Taring George or may be it was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</span>, but most probably not. Among the representatives of Ganden Jangtsa was Lodrö Wöser [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་འོད་ཟེར], and the from Shartse it was one nicknamed "Field Mouse", Abra [Tib. ཨ་བྲ].   

**Q:**  Regarding the Sera War. During the trouble there were some discussions that took some time to mediate, including the Ganden Tri Rimpoche [Tib. ཁྲི་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] and the others. There had been negotiations, and the Ganden Tri Rimpoche and some of the business community in Lhasa tried to negotiate, and some monks from Sera, including Geshe Phu Lama, came and talked. Geshe Phu Lama got angry and put his hand on his shoe and said that whatever might happen, they would fight etc.   

**A:**  This was true.   

**Q:**  I also heard that <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> of Drepung planned to rise behind <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</span>? I heard that <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</span> didn't move. If Sera Mey moved, it was decided that Loseling would rise up.   

**A:**  I never heard that. Though <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span>'s own <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</span> and was supposed to be very important and close to Taktra, later they developed a lot of friction.   

**Q:**  Ngagpa and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] One of the colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Deyang</span> both didn't get along well [with] Taktra.   

**A:**  I see.   

**Q:**  <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</span> and Ngagpa were supposed to be close [Tib. ཉེ་ལོག]. <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</span> and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] One of the colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Deyang</span> were supposed to be close. However, due to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</span>, during the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</span> period, he made Ngagpa become close to Deyang. Because of that, during the Dalai Lama's visit to Drepung, the trumpets were blown from the roof of Loseling by Deyang, rather than the traditional partition system of Ngagpa. Do you remember anything about this or did you ever notice anything?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  During that time, our <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</span> in Nanjing were Thubden Sangpo, etc. I heard that they sent a telegram or something like that to the Tibetan government.   

**A:**  We didn't hear those things because they went to the Kashag and unless they passed it on to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span>, etc., we didn't hear from them. So officially we didn't hear about this.   

**Q:**  I have heard that Reting Rimpoche had sent Gyagpön Phu and Lakatsang to China to request to gain support from Chiang Kai Shek's side, did you know them or do you know anything about this?   

**A:**  Gyagpön Phu I knew, his son is in India. I don't know whether you remember it or not, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ས་འདུལ་ཚང] A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandutsang</span>'s relation, a man named Gonje, he speaks both English and Tibetan and he used to be in Dalhousie working for the Indian intelligence. His father is Gyagpön Phu.   

**Q:**  The Lakatsang, is not the Lakatsang Chandzö, right?   

**A:**  No, it is the other one called Adu Lakatsang, I think his name is Nyendra.   

**Q:**  I heard that these two are the people that went on behalf of Reting Rimpoche, at his request?   

**A:**  Must be. Gyagpön Phu spoke very good Chinese, good Tibetan and was a very good person to be able to converse. During the Guomindang he enjoyed and also a certain rank from the Chinese. He had quite a close link with the Chinese, down there.   

**Q:**  In the early times, the Tibetan government didn't have the modern type of soldiers. [Not] until the 13th Dalai Lama came from India, except [for] 3,000 traditional soldiers, like Simchugngwa. Were the riders during Mönlam called Simpa [Tib. གཟིམ་པ]?   

**A:**  The word 'Simba' is the Simchugnga. They came from the places near Lhasa and they were called Simpa Dingkhag [Tib. གཟིམ་པ་ལྡིང་ཁག], and they got special kind of estates on which they had to produce soldiers. During the Mönlam, the Mönlam was supposed to be very important. In order to get peace by means of a settlement, they had those Simchugnga who are called Simba for the security. In addition to that, the high ranking officials were imposed as the riders [Tib. རྟ་པ] during the Mönlam as the reinforcements.   

**Q:**  Why were they called Simchungwa?   

**A:**  Probably, it was a kind of bodyguard.   

**Q:**  Was this spelled as [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང] which means the room.   

**A:**  Yes, this room was the Dalai Lama's room and that time, the Dalai Lama was called with the several names like Kündün Drung [Tib. སྐུ་མདུན་དྲུང], Bug [Tib. སྦུག] and Simchung bug [Tib. གཟིམ་ཆུང་སྦུག]. These were old terms.   

**Q:**  Simpa means the households who were obliged to send soldiers, and the soldiers were called Simchungwa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  There was not a separate kind soldiers called Simpa other then the Simchungwa, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Since 1912, when the Dalai Lama came back to Tibet, the new soldiers came, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Since the soldiers came, the first military operation was done against the Drepung monks, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, the people had this kind of viewpoint in the beginning, that it was the idea of the Dalai Lama to have the soldiers and it was important because we had to counter attack foreign forces like the British. If we didn't have soldiers, we would be able to cope with using sling shots. After that, when the Drepung monks made the commotion in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> and broke the flowers saying that they came to make a direct appeal to the Dalai Lama [Tib. ཕྱག་འཚལ་རྒྱག], the Tsogchen <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</span> was made to kneel down for a day. Is that true?   

**A:**  I don't remember this. I was just a child.   

**Q:**  The government told the monks to go back and they would talk the day after, and the day after that the government was indeed to talk. If they didn't, the monks would make the commotion. But, after that, Tsarong led the soldiers in formation. So this was the first military operation against the Drepung monks. At that time, there were the people like the bearded <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</span> Abso, the elderly <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span> who were on important posts and who were thoughtful, and also conservatives thought that this was a military operation.[end of the tape].   

