# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0067.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** ????  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 77  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kündeling Dzasa was a monk official and one of the top officials in Kündeling Labrang. In this interview he discusses the Tibetan government's Reform Office and its reform of interest rates and loans, of the horse/ carrying animal corvée taxes, and of unfair rules regarding irrigation and harvesting. The Reform Office also made a major reform that nationalized all the income from the dzongs and government estates. Kündeling also comments on how he became the Dzasa of Kündeling Labrang. And he describes how the Tibetan government's officials and soldiers gave the Khambas [in Eastern Tibet and Sichuan] a difficult time, prompting Panda Tobgye and Bapa Phüntso Wangyel to rise up and form an association called the Friends' Association. Through this organization, they attempted to drive out both the Chinese and the doji (Tibetan Governor-General), but they were unsuccessful.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0067_03/H_0067_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  How did you become the Kündeling Dzasa? Didn't you have to go to work for the government?   

**A:**  In Tibet, there were some big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> of the regents, like Reting, Tsomönling, Tengyeling [Tib. བསྟན་རྒྱས་གླིང] and Kündeling. These are regarded as big labrangs. Normally, the lamas of these labrangs would be recognized as reincarnations, and [they would] enthrone them at the time of their childhood. They were also approved by the Dalai Lama. Nobody was allowed to say that justice is on my side and this is my candidate.   

**Q:**  Did they have to make the report through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, the relevant <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> had to make the report through the Yigtsang. Under the lama, as for the main official in charge of the secular matters of the labrang, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> was appointed. The candidates of the dzasa were chosen from among the best officials of the labrang, like the Dechungwa [Tib. ལྡེ་ཆུང་བ] and Shabdöba. The plan of the candidates was submitted to the Dalai Lama through the Yigtsang. When the appointment order came down from the Dalai Lama, the dzasa also became the [third rank] official of the Tibetan government, as well as the in charge of the labrang. And he had to do whatever position was appointed by the government. It was not like a person from Kündeling going to the government like a representative. Similarly, all of the big labrang had their dzasa. Some other smaller monasteries, like Shelkar Chöde [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་ཆོས་སྡེ], had [fourth rank officials] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུ་མ] The Madhyamaka text (&quot;the Middle Way&quot;).">Uma</a> Khenjung [Tib. དབུ་མ་མཁན་ཆུང]. This was appointed from among the monks and he was the in charge of the monastery.   

**Q:**  After you became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>, you belonged to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> (monk official's) rank, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Normally, we would sit at the head of the lay officials of the rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>, like Tsarong. This was like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama sitting at the head of the kalön. Since then, I had to go to attend the government meetings and do whatever work was assigned.   

**Q:**  What kind of work did you do after you became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>?   

**A:**  In the 17-Point Agreement, it was written that reform should be implemented by the Tibetans through the agreement of the Tibetan government, and the people and the Zhongyang would not force us to do it. This was the cause of starting [the Reform Office]. Before that, since the Dalai Lama took the responsibility of the religious and political power, he put forward the idea of reforming the system of taxes, like the horse corvée, pack animal and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འུལ་ལག] A generic term for corvée labor that had to be performed for one&#x27;s manorial estate/lord without pay. One kind of ula required people to go and work and another kind required the provision of transportation animals.">ula</a>, as well as the old loans that had become impossible to repay, and the worst, selling people [Tib. ཉོ་ཚོང] to each other and exchanging people [Tib. མི་བརྗེས]. This was not like buying horses and mules [where one physically took the animal with you], it was just changing the person's serf owner status. As soon as he [the Dalai Lama] took political power, he said that and he was planning to put reforms into action, but soon after that, the Chinese arrived. Therefore, the government set up the Legjö Tsondu, the Reform Conference, and I was a representative to the Reform Conference. I worked there from the time it was started until 1959.   

**Q:**  This was the Legjö Legung, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What kind of reforms did you put into action?   

**A:**  The first and urgent was that there were a lot of grain loans to be paid to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a>, rich people, the traders and the monasteries. In the past, there weren't any banks, so lending grain loans was widespread in the towns and the countryside. There were many different kinds of loans and some of them charged a very high interest rate. People had to take the loans because they were in desperate situations and they got charged a very high interest [rate]. The highest interest rate was 25 percent and it was called shingadro [Tib. བཞི་ལྔ་འགྲོ]. It involved 1 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of interest for 4 khe of principal. There was also drugdündro [Tib. དྲུག་བདུན་འགྲོ], which involved 1 khe of interest for 6 khe of principal [17%]. There was also gyegudro [Tib. བརྒྱད་དགུ་འགྲོ], which was 1 khe of interest for 8 khe of principal [12.5%],and kamcha jusur [Tib. སྐམ་ཆ་བཅུ་ཟུར]. This was the lowest interest and was 10 percent, or 1 khe of interest for 10 khe of principal. This was regarded as no interest because the grain was wet at the beginning and would become less after drying for a year. Most of the debtors had to take a lot of loans and they were unable to repay them in autumn. For example, someone had to pay 10 khe of principal with 2 khe interest, and when they told the lenders that they couldn't repay it, they just erased the 10 khe in the pledge and wrote 12 khe. Then they had to pay the same high interest for 12 khe. So the loan became very big and even if the household didn't have the means to pay even 20-30 khe, and they didn't have enough grain for their family members' food, they would have had about 500-600-1000 khe of grain as the principal in the pledge. As for the lenders, it just became a number in the pledge. This made the debtors have a very hard time. At first, we dealt with the loans.   

**Q:**  Was that exclusively for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་རྒྱུགས་པ] A type of bound peasant/miser/serf whose lord was the government rather than an aristocrat or monastery/lama. They usually had sizable land holdings and were primarily responsible for providing the corvée transport and riding animal tax for the Tibetan government&#x27;s transportation system. Often translated as, &quot;Government taxpayer serfs.&quot;">shungyupa</a>?   

**A:**  No, we did an investigation for all the subjects under the Tibetan government, including the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> who belonged to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a> and the monasteries and government.   

**Q:**  At that time, didn't the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a> [aristocracy] and monasteries say anything like they had jurisdiction over their own estates?   

**A:**  No, they didn't say anything because the Legjö [Reform Office] was being held and it was kind of powerful. The second great reform was done on the horse corvée and pack animals. We made the decision to pay a transportation fee and reduce a few of the horse corvée and pack animal obligations as the first step. Gradually it was planned to abolish the system of horse corvée and pack animal taxes. And we made the decision that no one was allowed to get the horse corvée and pack animal service unless they had a travel document [Tib. ལམ་ཡིག] with the seal of the Dalai Lama and the Kashag. The third reform concerned irrigation. Before that, the owner of the irrigation didn't let other farmers irrigate their lands on their own will, and they have to pay an irrigation fee to the owner. Sometimes, they blocked the irrigation saying that other people were not allowed to irrigate their lands. Also, when the crops were about to be harvested, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a> [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] made some kind of rules and didn't let people harvest at their own wish, saying that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> were not allowed to harvest their field before the lord's fields were harvested. There used to be many strange rules. All of these rules were eliminated. There were over 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates that belonged to the government. In the past, officials were appointed as the dzongpön, and some of these leased the dzongpön position [to another], and some of them didn't go there in person and just sent their servants. Therefore, they caused a severe hardship to the miser. Some of them also did wool trade and they made the rule that the other people were not allowed to buy wool from that place, except the county. They also did some bad things regarding the barley . All of these were eliminated and the government nationalized all the dzong and estates, and people were allowed to do trade according to their own will. The government also just collected the previous taxes and didn't impose any new taxes. Altogether, reforms were implemented on 20 items. The documents probably still exist. This was the most beneficial thing done at that time.   

**Q:**  Do you think the private office of the Dalai Lama has those documents?   

**A:**  It is possible. At that time, we set up the Reform Conference and we investigated and put them into action, so the government could get good income and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> also didn't have to face hardships. In the past, for example, if I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of Shigatse, I collected all the taxes and things from the miser. But I didn't deliver the government the income that should have been delivered to the various treasuries like the Tsikhang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་ཕྱག] 1. The abbreviation of bla brang phyag mdzod, a major treasury/supply office that was located on the second floor of the Tsuglagang Temple and collected taxes annually from various parts of Tibet. 2. A monastic official/manager who worked for the Labrang of the abbots or incarnate lamas. For example, in Loseling College in Drepung, the Laja worked for the abbot who appointed him.">Laja</a> or Tseja. After the government nationalized the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, the government got all of the incomes and there were a lot of surpluses. In the Reform Conference, Ngabö was the representative of the Kashag and there were all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> and the tsipön present. There were also representatives from each rank of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and lay officials, as well as the representatives from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> of the military regiments, the abbots of the Sera, Drepung and Ganden monasteries, and the representatives from each tratsang. Altogether there were around 60-70 people.   

**Q:**  When did the Legjö start?   

**A:**  It was started in 1954. It was in very good shape and people also liked it, and the government also got good income, so the Chinese were very jealous. The Chinese had the ambition to implement the reforms and get the benefits. When our reforms improved things, the Chinese kind of blocked the way. At the beginning, it was very good, but the Chinese caused some kind of hindrances. Therefore, later it kind of slightly declined. But, it didn't have much problem and we were able to do those changes.   

**Q:**  There were two different taxes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་ཁྲལ] The taxes and corvée labor services one provided to one&#x27;s own lord (as opposed to chitre which were paid to the government).">nangtre</a> and chitre. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> also had to send horse corvée for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>, which was the nangtre, and in some places they also had to send the horse corvée for the government as the chitre. Did you also reform the system of the inner horse corvée [for their own lord]?   

**A:**  When the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱི་ཁྲལ] The taxes that peasants paid to the government as opposed to their own lords (the inner tax).">chitre</a> were reformed, automatically, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་ཁྲལ] The taxes and corvée labor services one provided to one&#x27;s own lord (as opposed to chitre which were paid to the government).">nangtre</a> would get reformed. As soon as the Dalai Lama took religious and political power, he had the idea of the reforms, and he also released all the prisoners from all over Tibet.   

**Q:**  What else did you do other than working in the Legjö? You also told me that you went to Kham, right?   

**A:**  When I was young, I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and I worked as staff officer [Tib. ལས་བྱ] in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Office. Then I was appointed as a Shöndrön and also the liaison officer [Tib. སྣེ་ཤན] of the regent. After that, I became a tsendrön. At the time, my parents had faith towards Reting and when Reting became the regent, I was appointed as the liaison officer for Reting. My duty was to make connections between the government and Reting Labrang, and I also had to accompany the regent wherever he went and do all the preparations that should be done from the government side. After that, I was appointed as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and I had to take care of the daily work, like granting audiences, for the regent. At that time, since the regent was holding the political power, all the work regarding politics was done through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་འགག] The Secretariat of the regent.">shö ga</a> (Regen's Secretariat). Later, I was appointed as the tsendrön. At one time, when the two regents, Reting and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, had quarrels, I was among the pro-Reting group. After the Reting group lost that quarrel, the people who were pro-Reting had to face crises according to the customs then, and I was demoted from the post of the government official for a minor kind of matter. This was the time when I was working as a tsendrön. At that time, we had made up our mind that since our group lost, we would face crises. I was no longer a government official, but I was still an official of the Kündeling Labrang when I was younger. There was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> in Kham that belonged to Kündeling in Pagshö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད]. This labrang was even bigger than the Kündeling Labrang in Lhasa. So then I was appointed as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> of Pagshö and I went there before the Chinese arrived in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Where was this located?   

**A:**  It was near to Chamdo.   

**Q:**  It was on the upper side of the Yangtse River, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we were adjacent to Chamdo. In Tsawagang [Tib. ཚ་བ་སྒང] there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> from both Pagshö and Chamdo. Similarly, in other places in that area, the other side of the mountain belonged to Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ], and this belonged to Pagshö. The other side was Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] and this side also belonged to Pagshö. At the beginning, the Doji of Kham was Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] and the new one was Ngabö. Soon after that, the Chinese entered Tibet. One of the Chinese regiments also came through Pagshö. Some of them came from down there through Tsawagang and some of them came through the upper part from Xining. At that time, Ngabö was arrested at our border in the Drugugön [Tib. གྲུ་གུ་དགོན] Monastery and a large number of Chinese came through that place.   

**Q:**  When you were in Pagshö, the Chinese had already arrived at the other side of the Yangtse River, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So they implemented a different policy in that place [Pagshö], right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was absolutely different. Chamdo was under the jurisdiction of the doji. The other side of the river was under Chinese jurisdiction before that. But, after that, they crossed the river and occupied Chamdo.   

**Q:**  There had probably been some kind of trouble between the Khambas and the Tibetan government in the past. Was it because the soldiers of the governor of Kham imposed a lot of taxes or what?   

**A:**  Yes, the Tibetan soldiers and the government officials who took about 10-15-20 servants with them made the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> face hardships. And the Khambas who were under Chinese control were also kind of different. They didn't like the Chinese and they also had a hard time when those areas were under the Tibetan government. They planned to rise up by themselves. People like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] and Bapa Phüntso Wangyel [Tib. འབའ་པ་ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ] had set up a kind of [organization]. Do you know about that?   

**Q:**  No, I don't. Did they plan not to belong to both the Chinese and the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  Yes, they planned to rise up and drive out the Chinese and drive back the doji. They had some kind of association called the "Friends' Association [Tib. གྲོགས་པོའི་སྐྱིད་སྡུག]" or something like that. At that time, the Tibetan government was suspicious of them, that they might rise up. The Chinese were also suspicious of them. Actually, they would not have been able to rise up. This was just their kind of opinion.  

**Q:**  In those early times, was the Tibetan border far down on the other side of the Yangtse River?   

**A:**  Yes, it was far down there. Have you been to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a>?  

**Q:**  No, I was just 6 years old when I was in Lhasa.  

**A:**  The areas beyond the Yangtse River were called Gyade [Tib. རྒྱ་སྡེ], the Chinese area, The areas on this side were called Böde [Tib. བོད་སྡེ], the Tibetan area. The areas across the river were under the Derge King [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་རྒྱལ་པོ]. The Yangtse River flows in the middle of Derge. Some places like Derge Jomda [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ] are in the Tibetan area. Actually, three-fourths of Derge are inn the Chinese area and one-fourth is in the Tibetan area. After passing Derge, you will reach the Ganzi Monastery [Tib. དཀར་མཛེས] and the Targye [Tib. དར་རྒྱས] Monastery. Those areas were called Trehor [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར] Khambas. When you go down from that place, you will reach Tau [Tib. རྟའུ]. Then you will reach Nyarong [Tib. ཉག་རོང] and then Dartsedo. In the past, the Tibetan government soldiers controlled even Nyarong. This was not that early. It was the time of the Künsangtse Dzasa when he went to that place as the depön. He stayed in Nyarong for many years. Later, the Chinese gradually came up (reattacked) and finally, the Yangtse River became the border.  

**Q:**  At the time of the 5th Dalai Lama, the border was far down there, right?  

**A:**  Even <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> was under Tibet.  

**Q:**  They might have sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> there, right?  

**A:**  Yes, they did.  

**Q:**  There were many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates, right?  

**A:**  Yes, you can find those in the Simla Agreement signed in the Wood-Tiger Year [Tib. ཤིང་སྟག་སིམ་ལའི་ཆིངས་ཡིག] [1914]. During our generation, Nyarong was under the Tibetan government. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> was even under the Chinese at that time. The Tibetan government was not that attentive to the borders and the Tibetan regiments who went to Kham made the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> face hardships. The miser kind of liked the Chinese, and they kind of collaborated and came up, and the territory was lost gradually. And in some places, some people stood on the Chinese side and some of them stood on the Tibetan side, and they made war. Actually, the present Ngabö, who was a son of Horkhang, came to Ngabö as a bridegroom. During the previous Ngabö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, the territory beyond the Yangtse River was lost.  

**Q:**  How long did you stay in Pagshö?  

**A:**  I stayed for 4 years.  

**Q:**  At the beginning, when the Chinese came there, did they implement kind of a benign policy?  

**A:**  Yes, they implemented a benign [Tib. འཇམ་པོ] policy and they acted so well that people might have thought they were not human beings, that they were kind of Buddhas. The Chinese said, "The old Chinese like the Guomindang and the Manchu Emperor treated the Tibetans brutally and they made the people suffer. And we, the Communist Party, are like repaying the loans that they owed to the Tibetans. We came to serve the people, and they went to help the farmers to plow and harvest the fields." They went through the motions of not daring to put their tents up on the fields and they put their tents on the sides of the roads. They also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> the song with the words, "The Three Main Rules of Discipline and Eight Points of Attention [Tib. སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ་དང་དོ་ནང་བྱེད་དགོས་པ་བརྒྱད]." According to this, they were not allowed to take even a needle from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>. The miser were also telling us, "Aren't they so good?" But, Kündeling used to treat the miser kindly and when somebody bullied our miser, we would back our miser and handle them. So the miser were kind of glad.  

**Q:**  In 1956, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up and the Dalai Lama also went to China and attended the People's Congress, right?  

**A:**  Yes, he went there as a representative to the People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན].   

**Q:**  When people in foreign countries look from outside, it seemed that Tibet completely became under the Chinese control. At that time, why did the Dalai Lama go there? Couldn't he say that he was not going? At that time, he had the bodyguard regiment and all of those things in Lhasa.   

**A:**  There was a very good reason for him to go there because if you look in the 17-Point Agreement, it was written that they would set up a Military Administrative Committee in Tibet. Regarding this, Ngabö and the representatives talked a lot and they asked what this Military Administrative Committee was for. The Chinese said, "This is the committee in charge of the Tibet's military and politics." Then the Tibetan representatives said, "If this is so, on one hand it was said the titles and the authorities of the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government would not be changed. But on the other hand, it was said that you are going to set up an office in charge of Tibet's military and politics. Would these two things become alike [Tib. འདྲ་པོ་ཅིག་ཡོང་གི་རེད་པས]? We think that you are going to set it up though it is unnecessary. It probably would be the same [Tib. གཅིག་པ་མིན་འགྲོ] if we eliminate one of the two, not changing the titles and the authorities of the Dalai Lama or setting up the Military Administrative Committee." This was said by the representative <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> Lhautara. Regarding this matter, we also talked a lot in Tibet. Actually, it was an office for the military to control the politics. If the Chinese set up the Military Administrative Committee, this would contradict the saying that they would not change the politics of the Tibetan government. Therefore, people were very suspicious about this and the Chinese showed brutality on this matter and said that they were going to set it up. Regarding this matter, Lhautara <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> also wrote about this in the life story of Lhautara. At that time, the Tibetans refused to set up the Military Administrative Committee. When the Dalai Lama went to China, they [the Chinese] said that the Dalai Lama was the leader of the representatives of Tibet attending the People's Congress. There were many other representatives like the Panchen Lama, Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche, Che Jigme [Tib. ཅེ་འཇིགས་མེད], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Tsering Drolma [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye and Bapa Phüntso Wangyel. There were many disputes at the meeting [in Lhasa] saying that the Dalai Lama shouldn't go to China. Do you know about that?   

**Q:**  No, I don't.   

**A:**  The meeting said a lot to the Dalai Lama, that he shouldn't go. Later, some people said that he should go and some people said, "He shouldn't go at all because the Chinese probably won't let him come back. They will just do something pleasantly and stop him from coming back. Even if they didn't do that, they will deceive him anyway and strangle him."   

**Q:**  Was that meeting held in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, then we were talking about the Tibet Autonomous Region. What we didn't want was for many Chinese and soldiers to come to Tibet, which would cause hardships to the Tibetan people's lives, as well as to the Tibetan government. If the Military Administrative Committee would be set up, they would control both the military and the politics. When we talked about that to the Chinese officials in Lhasa, they were just saying that they would report it to the Zhongyang. So the Dalai Lama said, "I will go to China and meet Chairman Mao, and tell him that the things that the Tibetan people didn't agree to. Something will probably work out. Until now, we were talking with Zhang Jingwu and it was like sending messages through them, and the leaders of the Chinese and the leaders of Tibet haven't met. This time, if I go there and talk with the leaders, it is impossible that there will not be any positive result. I think there would be a positive result." This was the opinion of the Dalai Lama. That's how it was decided for the Dalai Lama to go to China. He went there and the People's Congress was held. After that, Chairman Mao put forward several points.   

