# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0067.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** February 1984  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 69  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kündeling Dzasa was a monk official and one of the top officials in Kündeling Labrang. In this interview, he discusses Trimön's role after the 13th Dalai Lama's death, and the power struggle between Trimön, Lungshar and Kumbela, as well as the demotion of Magji Drumba. He also discusses his various jobs, including as a liaison officer (neshen) of Reting and as a tsendrön. He also describes in detail the situation surrounding Reting’s resignation, and Reting's wool trade and the bribes taken by Taktra and other officials. He talks about the Panchen Lama, including his return to Tashilhunpo Monastery, the problems he faced, and his death. Finally, he discusses Reting’s trip to Lhasa to ask Taktra to return the regency and the Lhundrup Dzong incident.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0067_04/H_0067_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Tell me about how <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> requested <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> and tried to become a kalön again.   

**A:**  Regarding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> trying to get back as a kalön, it was all because of his 2nd wife who was the Derge Queen. I think Trimön was thinking of just reciting some prayers, but she pestered Trimön a lot and tried to get Trimön to get back to the Kashag. He offered <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> the estate called Kashi Norling [Tib. བཀའ་གཞིས་ནོར་གླིང]. Trimön was in a difficult position economically and had taken so many loans from so many places, including from Kündeling Labrang. Then, finally, he hoped if he got the [position of] kalön again, he might gain economic benefits. The estate was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐབ་རྟེན] A manorial estate that is given to an official as his salary.">thabden</a> (salary estate) for a kalön, it was a very large and good estate. They offered it to Taktra and requested him to be put him back into the Kashag. I know this because we are quite close and he borrowed a lot of money from us. Trimön was known to be unstable in the mind. It was a well-known fact. So there was no way that Taktra could take him back, whatever he may offer him. So he didn't get the kalön but had a lot of debt. Finally, the estate was given to Kündeling and all of Trimön's debts were paid by Kündeling. This estate was owned by us until 1959 and it was an excellent estate. Every year you get about 20,000-30,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley from there. To us this was an exemplary. So all of Trimön's expenditures were paid by Kündeling, even after his death. It was as if had Trimön joined/merged with Kündeling. All of his expenses and those of his 2nd wife were paid by Kündeling, and they got to keep the estate. The wife was very funny. She was very extravagant and had to wear very good clothes and makeup, and she also had to live very extravagantly with the Best food. So when Trimön died, the wife's expenses were paid by Kündeling and all of Trimön's property went to the Kündeling Labrang. /u> And what happened to the children? He had a lot of children, but they were all separated from the main family from early times. He was living alone with his wife. Were they separated when he was the kalön? When he was the kalön, many of the children were made to separate. After he resigned from the kalön, he had separated his children with property, including the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> in the monastery and the monk in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Tratsang, and the ones on the estates. All separated. So finally, he and his wife lived separately. And they had all of these debts. She had no financial understanding and just spent money, even giving very lavishly offerings to the monastery. After he left the kalön, they had all of these debts, right? When he was the kalön, they were very rich. After his second wife, it became like she destroyed Trimon. When his wife came, wasn't he the shape? No, he wasn't. He probably got together with her after he resigned from the Kashag. When did he meet his 2nd wife? She was known as the Derge Queen. The Derge families when they divided into 2, one came to Tibet and one went to the China side and surrendered. The one who came to Tibet and surrendered to the Tibetan government, she was the wife of those princes. When did the Derge Sey [Tib. སྲས] split take place? I don't know Maybe when Kheme Dzasa was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and lost a large amount of territory in Derge, or was it before that? It is written in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s book about Kheme, but I don't have anything clear to tell you. Did Trimön really go mad? Yes, he definitely went mad. Why did he go mad? He had a lot of troubles with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>. But he won the battle with Lungshar? Yet he won only by great difficulty. Lungshar was a very tough person and he couldn't be defeated easily. I heard a story from Urgyenla [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས] [he must have been the shengo then] that just after Trimön resigned, he arrested and whipped a petty shopkeeper who hadn't pay their taxes, and later found out it was Trimön's trader. He [Urgyenla] went to Trimön to apologize, but he couldn't meet Trimön and met Shügüpa [Tib. ཤུད་ཁུད་པ] sitting above the gate of Trimön's house. He went into Shügüpa's house and told Shügüpa he would like to apologize to Trimön. So Shügüpa went inside to Trimön and asked him, staying a long time. Urgyenla couldn't stay any longer so he left Shügüpa's room, and when he came out, he saw Trimön coming from the main house. When Trimön saw him he saluted to him and said, "The Lord [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] Tsogchen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> has come. I'm very sorry, I can't take this responsibility." And he saluted 3-4 times. Shügüpa was giving a signal not to bother him. So Urgyenla didn't have anything to do because he was supposed to apologize to him, but Trimön saluted him and Trimön also left for Reting Labrang. Later, Reting told my late father, Demo Rimpoche, that Trimön told him, "21 Tsogchen Shengo have come to see me." This means that he actually was already mad. But we don't know why he went mad. Some say <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> had tricked him and told him, "If you resign, since Reting likes you very much, you will probably be appointed as the prime minister [Tib. སྲིད་བློན]." And he trusted him and resigned, and when he was not appointed as the prime minister, he was shocked and got mad? Kapshöba [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] tricked him. The reason was more that Kapshöba was hoping to get the kalön position if Trimön resigned. This is what people commonly saying behind them. But did he go mad before resigning or after resigning? He went mad during his shape time. He was in charge of building the Dalai Lama's golden tomb. And he went for pilgrimage to Lake Lhamo Yumtso [Tib. ལྷ་མོ་གཡུ་མཚོ] in Lhoka with Reting? Yes, at that time, he was not mad. I heard that from that time there was talk of resigning. Later, when he was in charge of the golden tomb, sometimes it was said that he came to office in the Potala in a white lower garment or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤམ་ཐབས] The lower part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">shamtab</a> and a raw silk shawl [Tib. ལེམ་ཐང]. People have talked about this, although I didn't myself see it. Basically, this person was regarded as a very deceitful person and he didn't get along well with Lungshar, probably because of some kind of karmic relation. And both of them were capable and they were jealous of each other, and the 13th Dalai Lama was very fond of him. So Lungshar was always complaining to the Dalai Lama that Trimön was not doing this or that, he was not working well and not taking responsibility, etc. This was constantly going on and the Dalai Lama also kind of had a [negative] viewpoint [Tib. གཟིགས་ཕྱོགས] toward Trimön because of his wrong doing in Kham. Trimön knew about this. So he was very careful not to give any excuses for firing him. He used the strategy that the minute he came into the Kashag, he would doze off and dozed off throughout the day so that he would never have to say anything at the meetings. He did that for about 2-3 years. When they almost reached the final decision, then they would call him saying, "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a>, Sawangchemmo," and he would sort of wake up and ask what happened, and when they said such and such was discussed, he would say, "Yes, yes, I agree." So they were unable to get rid of Trimön. It is a well-known fact that Trimön dozed off in the Kashag. But the day the Dalai Lama died, he woke up in one day and instantly became very active. Before that, Lungshar was very glorious and powerful and the Dalai Lama was fond of him, and he was among the people who discussed things with the Dalai Lama. Even Kumbela, who was also very powerful, even he couldn't cope with Lungshar. I swear by The Three Jewels it was like this. Later, Lungshar also became the colleague of Kujar in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, didn't he? He did it before that. When Lungshar was the Magji Tsondzin, the things in Trapchi were still there. Later, Tsarong came to Trapchi as the assistant of Lungshar. Lungshar also worked in the Investigation Office levying new taxes on newly opened fields [Tib. འབབ་ཞིབ]. The Dalai Lama regarded him as the topmost among the lay officials. When Lungshar was the Magji Tsondzin, was there a separate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>? After the fall of Tsarong, Drumpa [Tib. bhrum pa] was also demoted and Garjang Tempa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ] was also punished. There was probably not a magji then. Wasn't Drumpa still there as s <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>? Drumpa was demoted from the position of magji. Later, he was demoted and who was his replacement? It seems that when Lungshar was the Magji Tsondzin, there was no magji. Do you think so? Who was the magji after Tsarong? It was Drumpa who was the junior magji. Wasn't it that Drumpa remained as the magji and Lungshar was appointed as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>? Drumpa was demoted and Lungshar was still there. In Trapchi, there was a book of the Military Headquarters for handing over the magji position and the Dalai Lama had written in that book, "In the beginning, I trusted Drumpa very much since he was related to me, but later, he was absorbed with opium and couldn't fulfill my wishes. It is not the case that Lungshar couldn't accomplish his duty with his knowledge, but in the end, he became useless. [However] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་བཅར] 1. A favorite. Someone who works/stays in the close presence of another important figure. 2. The name commonly used for Kumbela (tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས), the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">kujar</a>, Thubden Kumbel has accomplished his duty and the position is handed over to him. As for his assistant in Trapchi, Tsarong Dzasa is appointed." It seems that the Trapchi Legung was very important and the Dalai Lama himself made it clear that the Trapchi Legung had all the military power and also the economic power. In the beginning, Tsarong was there and after Tsarong was demoted, Drumba was there. When Drumba became useless, Lungshar was brought there. Finally, when Lungshar didn't work out, Kumbela came. At that time, the Military Headquarters, Magjigang, had to yield under the Trapchi Legung. They needed a magji and there was Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར], right? Jangra came later. When Lungshar was the Magji Tsondzin, Jangra was probably not magji. He was the Gusung Depön. Yes, he was promoted to magji from Gusung Depön, this I remember. Before the former Dalai Lama passed away, Jangra probably was Gusung Depön. If Chapa Rusur [Tib. ཆ་པ་རུ་ཟུར] was not the Gusung Depön, then it was Jangra. Were there 2 Gusung Depön? There was only one. Then it must be Chapa Rusur. Drumpa probably came to the Military Headquarters after Jangra. When Jangra died, it had come to the Reting regency. When Lungshar was there, Jangra was the magji, right? He probably was, but the tsondzin was Lungshar. Lungshar had more power, right? Oh yes, he would have to ask the tsondzin. When we put it into kind of a line, since the Dalai Lama knew that Drumba couldn't take responsibility, Lungshar was appointed as the tsondzin and then Jangra was appointed, who was a nice person in character. He would abide by whatever Lungshar said and he would never misbehave. When Reting took over, what were you doing? I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a>. You mean to say when Reting became the regent you were neshen? No, at that time, Drunyichemmo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང] and Metok jangse Lotenla [Tib. མེ་ཏོག་ལྕང་གསེབ་བློ་བསྟན་ལགས] were the two neshen (liaisons). Later I became one. What work did the neshen do? The neshen was like the liaison office between the regent and the government dealing with whatever kinds of connections the regent had to make with the government personally. Was he there permanently? Yes. Do you mean the matters related to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>? The matters related with the labrang would be dealt with by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a>. I mean matters like the government having to pay a monthly salary to the regent. How much salary did he get? There was no such thing as a limit in terms of money, but he got <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, tea, butter, dried fruit etc., etc. Also, the expenditures regarding the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་འགག] The Secretariat of the regent.">shö ga</a> (Regent's Secretariat) and those had to pass through the liaison officer. Any official work that the regent had to do was arranged by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> and all expenditures had to be collected from the different offices and was done by the neshen. And any time Reting needed something, the labrang told the neshen, and they did it and got it from the government. Would they say bring this and that? They would not say that. They would say that they needed such and such things and the neshen would report to whatever offices were relevant, like the Kashag, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> etc. This was not only a financial matter, you had to deal with political matters too, right? Yes. Usually, the matters related to the government would be approved through the Kashag and also through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</a>, right? Yes. What else did you have to do? . The responsibilities of governmental matters were taken by the nendrön and the responsibility of the matters of the regent's labrang were taken by the neshen. e.g., if tomorrow the regent is going somewhere, where is he going, how long will it take, how many in the entourage, etc. All of this had to be done by the neshen. All the arrangements regarding modes of horse corvée and pack animal transportation, and from whom it was to be collected, e.g., from the government, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> or the monasteries, all of this was the responsibility of the neshen, totally. In Dharamsala in India, the neshen or the liaison officers, had to do a similar job. The neshen were generally had the rank of a very ordinary <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> (monk officials), and when Reting became the regent and Gyambumgang Ngawang Namgyal [Tib. ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] and Metok Jangse Lobsang Tenzin were the two neshen, Gyambumgang was promoted to be shöndrön. The rank of neshen was low, right? They were just ordinary tsidrung. If the neshen were only tsidrung, then they didn't have much power, right? Yes, although they didn't have that much power, they treated it as a very important post. Even in the Kashag, if a neshen were to go there, they would ask what his needs were and why he had come. It was an important post, but very low in rank. The neshen's office was the shö ga. They had to sit below the shöndrön who enjoyed the 5th rank or Letsenpa, and the neshen were ordinary rank. When Gyambumgang became the neshen, I was a staff member in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Yigtsang Office, and from the Yigtsang I was transferred to be e shöndrön. What do you mean by Tse Yigtsang? Was it because it dealt with the tsidrung? It could be and it was also because the Yigtsang was situated at the Tse Potala, so it was know as the Tse Yigtsang. It was also held in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, right? That was a branch office. When the Dalai Lama would stay in Norbulinga, all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> would stay there, right? One drunyichemmo who was on duty [Tib. བཞུགས་བྱ] would stay there. Did even the drunyichemmo have to stay on duty? Yes. Even the drunyichemmo and tsendrön had to stay on duty when their turn came. Not only did the drunyichemmo have to stay on duty turn by turn, but also the shape. And when the regent stayed there, there was also an on duty shöndrön. When the Dalai Lama went to the Norbulinga, then the regent also had to stay in Norbulinga. The main office of the Yigtsang was in Tse, right? The main office was held in Tse and all the drunyichemmo had to go for the Trungja to Norbulinga. After that, they would go to their branch office and only those on duty had to remain until the turn of the others came. But they would keep those who were out of turn informed of important events. Those who were out of turn would go to the Potala. Only the actual secretary, the Yigtsang Nyerpa [Tib. ཡིག་ཚང་གཉེར་པ], would have to stay in the Potala all the time, while the acting Yigtsang Nyerpa [Tib. ཡིག་ཚང་གཉེར་ཚབ] would go to Norbulinga and manage things there. If the Yigtsang's office was in the Potala, where would the abbots of the monasteries have to go if they had a problem, to the Potala of Norbulinga? Actually they would have to go to the Potala, but they would talk to the people in Norbulinga, and the next day when they came to the Trungja, they would have the discussions. So it was generally preferred to talk in Nobulinga. Normally, the on duty drunyichemmo had to stay by turns for a year, but when the 13th Dalai Lama took over, he decided not to have any turns. When the 13th Dalai Lama came, he appointed Gendun Chödar [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་དར] of the Kündeling, who was the teacher of Gendun Gelek la [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ལགས], permanently, and he had to stay all the time in Norbulinga. Also, the Tseja office was based in the Potala, and one on duty officer would stay by turn in Norbulinga. But the 13th Dalai Lama decided not to have this done by turns either and he kept Jangma Khangsar [Tib. ལྕང་མ་ཁང་གསར] as the Tseja all the time in the Norbulinga. It appears that Trekhang Tseja was quite close to Kumbela and he went to Norbulinga very often, how did that happen? He was there, but not as Tseja, he was given some other work, and he had to deal with the Trapchi, and it was in connection with the Trapchi work that he was always in Norbulinga. This Gendün Chödar who died as kalön lama was one of the main persons whom Lungshar did not like, was he not? Yes, when Chödarla was the drunyichemmo, then the Dalai Lama trusted him and gave him strong backing and regarded him as the best one, but before the death of the Dalai Lama, Chödarla was appointed as the replacement of Tenkyongla [Tib. བསྟན་སྐྱོང་ལགས]. When he became the kalön lama and joined the Kashag, then he was not really so powerful or effective. Maybe it was because of the glory of Trimön. I heard that if he had not died, Reting would have withdrawn him from the Kashag? Did you hear about that? I never heard [of that]. They never talked of Chödarla being withdrawn, I never heard [of that]. Maybe people were suspicious and talking about that. But Chödarla had some kind of a stroke after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama, and he was kind of insane [Tib. ཆ་ལེ་ཆོ་ལེ]. Thereafter, he was not keeping well and didn't last long. After the death of the Dalai Lama, and when Kumbela was having trouble, one of the drunyichemmo's known as Kokola died. Do you know why? Or what was the cause of this death? Was he poisoned? Talk of poison was not very common in Tibet at that time. Only if they wanted to get rid of some agent or something. Otherwise, poisoning was not very common. I never heard of that. In Tibet, these events, like poisoning, were rare. If it was done by a secret agent, it would not be known openly. Kokola was the sponsor of Wöser [Tib. འོད་ཟེར] in Switzerland, who finally came to be known as Zatrul [Tib. རྫ་སྤྲུལ] Lama's father. I also had quite a close relationship with Koko, but I never heard that he was poisoned or anything of that sort. How did he die? I do not know. When the Dalai Lama died, people used to get worried and sometimes there used to be incidents like that. On that night, one of the Drepung abbots also died. Did you hear about it? I do not know about that. It was commonly known that because Kokola did a lot to Kujar, so the Gombo Deity was agitated. Anyway, he just coughed at night and died immediately, right there. When Reting resigned, where were you? I was in Lhasa, I was a shöndrön at that time. And who went to see Reting Rimpoche off? They sent three shöndrön and one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a>, and I was one of the shöndrön who went to accompany Reting Rimpoche until the Reting monastery. Besides me, there was Shöndrön Lokela [Tib. བློ་སྐལ་ལགས], who later became the magji, and the shöndrön Drugyel Lobsang Thegshogla [Tib. འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་བློ་བཟང་ཐེག་མཆོག་ལགས]. How did you first come to know that Reting resigned? I heard that the next day there was going to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</a> (Large Abbreviated Assembly). Normally, the tsondu gyendzom (Full Assembly)was held for all of the representatives of the monk and lay people [Tib. ལྷ་སྡེ] [and they] were [all] included. But in the hragdu gyepa, there were all the representatives of all the ranks of the government officials and the abbots of the three great monasteries. I heard that there was a meeting the next day. Also, the regent was going to Tse the next day, and if he had to go, then the shöndrön would have to go too. And we went. The regent sent a message asking the Kashag to come over, and he said, "Because of my own divination and from various astrological omens, it is sure there will be a lot of problems for my health. So it will not be okay if I don't stay in retreat for the time being to avoid the hindrance, and it will be good to decide on a successor. So I am going to resign from the regency. According to my consideration of religion and politics, as for the new regent, I feel that Taktra Rimpoche would be most suited. The Kashag must discuss and consult the tsondu, and request him about this. And if he does not accept or something like that, tell him that I will personally request him to do that if necessary." Then the kalön went to the Kashag. Then they consulted the tsondu and the tsondu members went to see Reting Rimpoche and told him, "Please do not resign at all. You have worked hard and we have the indisputable reincarnation of the Dalai Lama and he has also been inconceivably well-educated. We cannot see any bigger enemy against the politics from outside. So until the Dalai Lama becomes mature, please keep on working." They very strongly requested Reting not to resign. They strongly requested him to stay, but Reting ignored their request completely and said no. So they told the tsondu and the Kashag. At that meeting, who were the main persons? In the past, when they held the meeting regarding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> [Tib. གླང་མདུན], it was said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> [Tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] said something great. Who was the special speaker at that meeting? The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས་བརྒྱད] The four drunyichemmo (trunyichemmo) and the four tsipön. These eight officials were often called to meet with the Kashag to discuss important issues. They also presided over the Tibetan government&#x27;s various assemblies.">drungtsigye</a> would take responsibility of the tsondu and there were many talking, like the abbots of the three great monasteries. All of them requested very nicely. Finally, that same day, Reting called Taktra to his labrang and he himself asked him, and he accepted. Did you say that Reting Rimpoche personally called Taktra and talked to him? Yes, Reting Rimpoche called Taktra and talked to him in his room. Taktra's residence and the shö ga were not very distant. So that same day, Taktra came to see Reting Rimpoche and they talked things over, personally requesting him to take over, and it was decided in one day. People were talking behind his back that Reting Rimpoche lost his celibacy, and since he had to ordain the Dalai Lama in the next year, therefore, he was scared and he resigned. Did you not hear before that, that Reting was going to resign etc.? No, not at all. I heard that the he told Taring that he was going to resign. But we had heard that the next year would be a very bad year for the regent's life, and all the astrological omens, the divination and even the deity in Ganden Chöngor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] called Tsörujenpa [Tib. གཙོད་རུ་ཅན་པ] gave the prophecy indicating that it was going to be a very bad time for Reting Rimpoche's life. After that, Reting Labrang himself, and also the government, had a lot of rituals performed for the life of the regent. I also thought that it would take a few days, and people would prevail upon Reting Rimpoche not to resign, but that did not happen. And everything was finished in one day and Reting resigned. Do you think that they [the 2 lamas] had internally decided among themselves? It must have been. Reting called Tatkra Rimpoche to his room that day and they talked for a while without any tsendrön present. At that time, Reting would regard Taktra very highly. The regent was the senior tutor to the Dalai Lama and Taktra was the junior tutor, and Reting regarded him very highly. So when Reting resigned, Taktra became the senior tutor and Ling [Tib. གླིང] Rimpoche became the junior tutor. Before that, he was the dialectics debate assistant [Tib. མཚན་ཞབས]. As I told you earlier, the beginning of Taktra's administration was very good. We all thought that he had good knowledge and Reting did well, and it would be a good example to everybody, but at the end, his [true nature was] revealed [Tib. སྦོ་ལུག]. Was there any talk that Taktra had refused to accept the regency? Why I ask this is because I have heard that Taktra refused saying I am old, and later agreed to take it only for a period of three years, three years being the absolute limit. I have also heard that the chandzö chemmo [Tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ] of Tatkra had wanted to offer some tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མ་འབྲས་སིལ] A special dish consisting of sweetened rice, melted butter and wild sweet potatoes (gro ma).">droma dresi</a> and said that he would borrow tea with a tea pot from the shö ga. What do you think about it? That must be [true]. Do you think that Reting was looking for a substitute for quite some time? Yes it must be. Do you not have any comments to make on this? No, but Taktra was very suitable. At that time, Reting is believed to have asked Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] to succeed him, and it has even been mentioned in Phabongkha's biography? Is that so? But at that time, Phabongkha was not as suitable as Taktra, for Taktra had been connected with the government since he was the dialectics debate assistant to the 13th Dalai Lama, and he was also a member on the editorial board of the new edition of the Kangyur, which was promoted by the 13th Dalai Lama under the supervision of the Geshe Sherab. Thereafter, he was the assistant tutor, and then he was to become the tutor of the 14th Dalai Lama. It was, therefore, more suitable for a person with government experience to be appointed than an inexperienced and new person assuming the duty of regent all of a sudden. Therefore, I say that it was much more suitable for a person with experience to come and take over rather than Phabongkha. There was also some talk about Janglojen Gung [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] sending a letter to Tharchin Babu about Reting asking Demo Rimpoche to be the regent? To whom the letter was sent? To Tharchin Babu. Yes, from here to there. It was said that Demo would be substituting for Reting and it was written, "Since Reting's horns have become sharper than ever, it appears that it is a lie that Demo will succeed Reting [Tib. རྭ་སྒྲེང་རྭ་རྩེ་ཇེ་རྣོར་འགྲོ་བ་ལ། དེ་ཚབ་དེ་མོས་བྱེད་ཅེས་རྫུན་དུ་སྣང]." It may have been possible that Tharchin might have heard about this and asked Janglojen whether it was true, and Janglojen had written a letter from Tibet. I had some long verses in memory earlier, but now I have forgotten. I heard about this and I searched for this in the documents of Tharchin Babu, but I couldn't find [it]. I don't think he left those documents. One should have left it there. Did you find any other interesting things among them? No, because the Dharamsala Library had already differentiated quite a lot of them. Now, would they give all of the things to the people? No, I got it in a difficult way. Who has the documents? His step-son has them. Is that the monk called Rinzin Wangpo [Tib. རིག་འཛིན་དབང་པོ]? No, he doesn't have [them]. His step-son, who is a Christian, had those. He was not attentive of Tibetan culture, and he didn't take possession of them and just threw them in the garbage. Was Surkhang Sawamgchemmo's book lost? Yes. What was the first action or change that Taktra took when he assumed the regency? What do you mean by first action? Taktra was supposed to have issued an order saying that the regent's labrang [Tib. སྐུ་སྒེར་བླ་བྲང] should not have any traders. Was this his first action or was there anything else? Yes. Earlier, due to misconduct of some persons in authority, losses and suffering had been caused, and to avoid this in the future, Taktra is believed to have passed this order. This was clearly mentioned in the announcement, that no business for personal gain should be done in the name of the regent, and this would [be] illegal, and should such people be found, they should be handed over by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> to the Central Government. This was because, at the time of Reting, an extremely large amount of transactions in wool were being done in the name of the regent, so it was because of this that he had made this announcement. After Taktra became the regent, did Reting continue to do this business in wool? Yes, he continued this business in wool, etc. for quite a number of years. Reting Simpönla [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་ལགས] was in Kalimpong, but it was in the normal way, which was that he bought whatever wool he could and would then sell it. During the Reting regency, trade was done in a different way, right? Earlier, take for example, in Nagchu, when they would say that they were Reting's traders, they [dzongpön] would issue an order saying that all the wool under the jurisdiction of any particular dzong should be sold only to the representatives of the regent, and the local price would be paid. This used to have two results. The first was that as there was such an order, there was just a small amount of people buying wool. The second was that if any person were to buy even a little wool it would have been almost like they were stealing. At that time, the people were not allowed to complain, saying it was not fair? How could they? The dzongpön would mainly issue the order and the labrang told the dzongpön, and the labrang was not allowed to issue the order. If another trader would buy wool, this would become illegal, right? Not really like something illegal. If they [other traders] buy, they might say something, but it was not convenient for them to say much. So they would not punish them for doing the trade, right? Yes. So the other traders could buy wool even if they [said] it was not allowed, right? Yes, this was the way all the dzong did trade, by telling the dzongpön and doing the trade. Was Reting Labrang alone? Who did the trade in that way? No. Who else could do that? And [they would] tell the dzongpön to sell all the wool in that dzong to him and he would pay some commission to the dzongpön, and then the dzongpön would help him gather the wool and the dzongpön would get the profit or the commission in whatever way. Who was the first <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> that Taktra appointed? I think his first appointment was Surkhang, to replace Langchungwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ]. Why was Langchungwa removed from the Kashag? Langchungwa was not demoted. He probably got sick and died or resigned. No, he was demoted after he came back from Chamdo, by saying that he came back before his three-year term was over or something like that. Anyway, at that time, who were the Shape? One was Phünkhang, right? Yes, he was appointed at that time. Wasn't the kalön lama Trekhang or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ] A Tibetan aristocratic family.">Changkyim</a> Thubden Shakya [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཤ་ཀྱ], right? Regarding the seating in the Kashag, I heard that it was not necessary that the kalön lama would be seated at the head. For example, Trekhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama was sitting at the third or the fourth slot. Actually, the kalön lama should be seated at the head as the senior [Tib. ཁྲི་པ] according to the traditional system. What do you mean the senior? One who sits at the head was called Senior Kalön. Later, when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Rampa</a> sat at the head, the senior was Surkhang. No, one who sits at the head was called the senior, but many of the kalön lamas, like Chödarla and the Tenkyongla kind of got strokes. So they had a kind of taboo, and later when Trekhang was the kalön lama, he sat according to seniority. At that time, Trimön was the senior kalön. It is true that Surkhang was the successor of Langchungwa because the song said, "The horn of the ox was broken and the prayer flag was hoisted at the corner [Tib. གླང་གི་རྭ་ཅོ་བཅག་ནས་། ཟུར་ལ་དར་ལྕོག་བཙུག་སོང]," which proves that Surkhang followed Langchungba. How did Surkhang ask for the shape? When Surkhang became the shape, there was a lot of gossip that Surkhang's sister, Yuthok Lhajam, was supposed to have presented a basketful of gold to the regent, although it may be possible that he presented the gold to the dzasa of the regent, because unlike the previous regent, Tatkra was very reserved and did not give any audiences unless through very special arrangements, which were not made known. How did Surkhang find the opportunity? At that time, Surkhang was the head of the Palanquin Carrier, Phebchang Gopa [Tib. ཕེབས་བྱམས་འགོ་པ], of the Dalai Lama, which belonged to the tsidrung segment, Tsekor [Tib. རྩེ་སྐོར]. There were only two lay officials [who] would become the Tsekor, the Phebchang Gopa and the lay official Tseja, and they would sit below the Tsekor and the at the head of the fourth rank lay official. And also the Payroll Officer, Phogpön [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན], and the Trapchi Depön [Tib. དབུས་མདའ] would go to the head of the lay officials. The man who pulled him up or his backer was probably Kalön Lama Tempa Jamyang [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས], who was very powerful in the Kashag and also in front of the higher ups, so we all felt that not only Surkhang, [but] there were some others who were also trying like Kapshöba. Wasn't Lhalu striving for this? It was too early for Lhalu since he was probably yet to take the tsipön's post. So it may have been a bit too early. Wasn't Trimön also trying? Not at all. He was the first shape since Taktra came to power. Yes, but he was trying get the shape post in a special way as soon as Taktra got power and [was] not substituting somebody. He took the method that they would say that an elderly shape was needed. Although he didn't have much hope, but it was his wife's desire that made him ask for the post. Did Kündeling go hither and thither to help him get the shape? No, they themselves did that. At that time, we didn't have any connections. [He repeats the how Trimön gave his estate to Kündeling]. At that time, Khyungram had already fallen. This was the time when people bribed very seriously, like the proverb, "letting go the thread [of the kite] [Tib. སྐུད་པ་གློད]." It was Taktra's time, when people started bribing very much. Yes, a basketful of gold was not a joke. It seems that they would not be able to lift a basketful of gold. Even if we had to give a gift of a basketful of cookies it cost quite a lot of money. Actually, they tried to be clever by carrying the basketful on the pretense that they were carrying cookies to the regent. At that time, did you know that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] A famous monk official in the Tibetan government who served as Trunyichemmo and then Kalön.">Tempa Jayang</a> was backing Surkhang? Yes, we knew and people were also talking outside. The father of Surkhang Sawangchemmo, Sursur [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར], was also a contender to the appointment. I heard that Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> himself went to ask for the favor for his father. It must be. They might have thought that if the Surkhang did not get it, the father may and it would remain in the family, though they were not the same family. As for the father, he was not a person who spent money like this and kept his money very carefully. Wasn't that a big leap from Phebchang Gopa to shape? If there were no candidates among the dzasa and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེ་ཇི] A third rank position in the Tibetan government.">theiji</a>, then people had to go from the 4th ranking <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> officers. I, however, feel that the Surkhang was young, so the Lhasa people nicknamed Surkhang as Lhalu Dakpo [Tib. ལྷའུ་དག་པོ], the boy acting in the opera who would wear the costume similar to the shape's yellow satin uniform. Which meant he was too young to be a shape. Unless one spent quite a lot, it was impossible to become shape. After that, he [Taktra] got mad. It seems that Taktra made his selections and appointment only on the basis of corruption, and money played a very important role in the appointment of key posts. If you think carefully, you will see that he had been appointing only the people who had some kind of trouble or grudges against Reting. So I don't think he only looked at money. What happened between Surkhang and Reting? Surkhang's estate was taken by Reting. Yes, you are right. It was the Nyemo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་བཀྲས་མཐོང] Estate. Although Shakabpa used to seek help from Reting, during Reting's regency. he didn't get much and later he became like this. I am not sure about Kapshöba. So I don't think that money was the main reason. The main thing was money. I think the main thing was politics and all the people were trying to get as much money as they could get. Yes.   

**Q:**  And what happened to the children?   

**A:**  He had a lot of children, but they were all separated from the main family from early times. He was living alone with his wife.   

**Q:**  Were they separated when he was the kalön?   

**A:**  When he was the kalön, many of the children were made to separate. After he resigned from the kalön, he had separated his children with property, including the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> in the monastery and the monk in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Tratsang, and the ones on the estates. All separated. So finally, he and his wife lived separately. And they had all of these debts. She had no financial understanding and just spent money, even giving very lavishly offerings to the monastery.   

**Q:**  After he left the kalön, they had all of these debts, right?   

**Q:**  When he was the kalön, they were very rich. After his second wife, it became like she destroyed Trimon.   

**Q:**  When his wife came, wasn't he the shape?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. He probably got together with her after he resigned from the Kashag.   

**Q:**  When did he meet his 2nd wife?   

**A:**  She was known as the Derge Queen. The Derge families when they divided into 2, one came to Tibet and one went to the China side and surrendered. The one who came to Tibet and surrendered to the Tibetan government, she was the wife of those princes.   

**Q:**  When did the Derge Sey [Tib. སྲས] split take place?   

**A:**  I don't know   

**Q:**  Maybe when Kheme Dzasa was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> and lost a large amount of territory in Derge, or was it before that?   

**A:**  It is written in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s book about Kheme, but I don't have anything clear to tell you.   

**Q:**  Did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> really go mad?   

**A:**  Yes, he definitely went mad.   

**Q:**  Why did he go mad?   

**A:**  He had a lot of troubles with Lungshar.   

**Q:**  But he won the battle with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>?   

**A:**  Yet he won only by great difficulty. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was a very tough person and he couldn't be defeated easily.   

**Q:**  I heard a story from Urgyenla [Tib. ཨོ་རྒྱན་ལགས] [he must have been the shengo then] that just after <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> resigned, he arrested and whipped a petty shopkeeper who hadn't pay their taxes, and later found out it was Trimön's trader. He [Urgyenla] went to Trimön to apologize, but he couldn't meet Trimön and met Shügüpa [Tib. ཤུད་ཁུད་པ] sitting above the gate of Trimön's house. He went into Shügüpa's house and told Shügüpa he would like to apologize to Trimön. So Shügüpa went inside to Trimön and asked him, staying a long time. Urgyenla couldn't stay any longer so he left Shügüpa's room, and when he came out, he saw Trimön coming from the main house. When Trimön saw him he saluted to him and said, "The Lord [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] Tsogchen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> has come. I'm very sorry, I can't take this responsibility." And he saluted 3-4 times. Shügüpa was giving a signal not to bother him. So Urgyenla didn't have anything to do because he was supposed to apologize to him, but Trimön saluted him and Trimön also left for Reting Labrang. Later, Reting told my late father, Demo Rimpoche, that Trimön told him, "21 Tsogchen Shengo have come to see me." This means that he actually was already mad. But we don't know why he went mad. Some say <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> had tricked him and told him, "If you resign, since Reting likes you very much, you will probably be appointed as the prime minister [Tib. སྲིད་བློན]." And he trusted him and resigned, and when he was not appointed as the prime minister, he was shocked and got mad?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> [Tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] tricked him. The reason was more that Kapshöba was hoping to get the kalön position if <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> resigned. This is what people commonly saying behind them.   

**Q:**  But did he go mad before resigning or after resigning?   

**A:**  He went mad during his shape time. He was in charge of building the Dalai Lama's golden tomb.   

**Q:**  And he went for pilgrimage to Lake Lhamo Yumtso [Tib. ལྷ་མོ་གཡུ་མཚོ] in Lhoka with Reting?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, he was not mad.   

**Q:**  I heard that from that time there was talk of resigning.   

**A:**  Later, when he was in charge of the golden tomb, sometimes it was said that he came to office in the Potala in a white lower garment or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤམ་ཐབས] The lower part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">shamtab</a> and a raw silk shawl [Tib. ལེམ་ཐང]. People have talked about this, although I didn't myself see it. Basically, this person was regarded as a very deceitful person and he didn't get along well with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>, probably because of some kind of karmic relation. And both of them were capable and they were jealous of each other, and the 13th Dalai Lama was very fond of him. So Lungshar was always complaining to the Dalai Lama that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was not doing this or that, he was not working well and not taking responsibility, etc. This was constantly going on and the Dalai Lama also kind of had a [negative] viewpoint [Tib. གཟིགས་ཕྱོགས] toward Trimön because of his wrong doing in Kham. Trimön knew about this. So he was very careful not to give any excuses for firing him. He used the strategy that the minute he came into the Kashag, he would doze off and dozed off throughout the day so that he would never have to say anything at the meetings. He did that for about 2-3 years. When they almost reached the final decision, then they would call him saying, "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a>, Sawangchemmo," and he would sort of wake up and ask what happened, and when they said such and such was discussed, he would say, "Yes, yes, I agree." So they were unable to get rid of Trimön. It is a well-known fact that Trimön dozed off in the Kashag. But the day the Dalai Lama died, he woke up in one day and instantly became very active. Before that, Lungshar was very glorious and powerful and the Dalai Lama was fond of him, and he was among the people who discussed things with the Dalai Lama. Even Kumbela, who was also very powerful, even he couldn't cope with Lungshar. I swear by The Three Jewels it was like this. Later, Lungshar also became the colleague of Kujar in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, didn't he?   

**Q:**  He did it before that. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the Magji Tsondzin, the things in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> were still there. Later, Tsarong came to Trapchi as the assistant of Lungshar.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> also worked in the Investigation Office levying new taxes on newly opened fields [Tib. འབབ་ཞིབ]. The Dalai Lama regarded him as the topmost among the lay officials.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the Magji Tsondzin, was there a separate <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>? After the fall of Tsarong, Drumpa [Tib. bhrum pa] was also demoted and Garjang Tempa [Tib. མགར་བྱང་བསྟན་པ] was also punished. There was probably not a magji then.   

**A:**  Wasn't Drumpa still there as s <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a>?   

**Q:**  Drumpa was demoted from the position of magji.   

**A:**  Later, he was demoted and who was his replacement?   

**Q:**  It seems that when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the Magji Tsondzin, there was no magji. Do you think so?   

**A:**  Who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> after Tsarong?   

**Q:**  It was Drumpa who was the junior magji.   

**A:**  Wasn't it that Drumpa remained as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was appointed as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>?   

**Q:**  Drumpa was demoted and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was still there. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, there was a book of the Military Headquarters for handing over the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> position and the Dalai Lama had written in that book, "In the beginning, I trusted Drumpa very much since he was related to me, but later, he was absorbed with opium and couldn't fulfill my wishes. It is not the case that Lungshar couldn't accomplish his duty with his knowledge, but in the end, he became useless. [However] the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་བཅར] 1. A favorite. Someone who works/stays in the close presence of another important figure. 2. The name commonly used for Kumbela (tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས), the favorite of the 13th Dalai Lama who became politically powerful during the later period of the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign.">kujar</a>, Thubden Kumbel has accomplished his duty and the position is handed over to him. As for his assistant in Trapchi, Tsarong Dzasa is appointed." It seems that the Trapchi Legung was very important and the Dalai Lama himself made it clear that the Trapchi Legung had all the military power and also the economic power. In the beginning, Tsarong was there and after Tsarong was demoted, Drumba was there. When Drumba became useless, Lungshar was brought there. Finally, when Lungshar didn't work out, Kumbela came. At that time, the Military Headquarters, Magjigang, had to yield under the Trapchi Legung.   

**A:**  They needed a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> and there was Jangra [Tib. ལྕང་ར], right?   

**Q:**  Jangra came later. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was the Magji Tsondzin, Jangra was probably not magji. He was the Gusung Depön.   

**A:**  Yes, he was promoted to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a> from Gusung Depön, this I remember.   

**Q:**  Before the former Dalai Lama passed away, Jangra probably was Gusung Depön. If Chapa Rusur [Tib. ཆ་པ་རུ་ཟུར] was not the Gusung Depön, then it was Jangra.   

**Q:**  Were there 2 Gusung Depön?   

**A:**  There was only one.   

**Q:**  Then it must be Chapa Rusur.   

**A:**  Drumpa probably came to the Military Headquarters after Jangra. When Jangra died, it had come to the Reting regency.   

**Q:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was there, Jangra was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, right?   

**A:**  He probably was, but the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a> was Lungshar.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> had more power, right?   

**A:**  Oh yes, he would have to ask the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] 1. A kind of &quot;trustee&quot; for a family or labrang who oversaw economics and gave advice. For example, when the father of the 14th Dalai Lama died, the government appointed two officials to act as tsondzin for his family. 2. An administrative leader in Chushigandru. They were in charge of non-military things like supplies and the dealings with the local population.">tsondzin</a>. When we put it into kind of a line, since the Dalai Lama knew that Drumba couldn't take responsibility, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> was appointed as the tsondzin and then Jangra was appointed, who was a nice person in character. He would abide by whatever Lungshar said and he would never misbehave.   

**Q:**  When Reting took over, what were you doing?   

**A:**  I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and a neshen.   

**Q:**  You mean to say when Reting became the regent you were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a>?   

**A:**  No, at that time, Drunyichemmo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང] and Metok jangse Lotenla [Tib. མེ་ཏོག་ལྕང་གསེབ་བློ་བསྟན་ལགས] were the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a> (liaisons). Later I became one.   

**Q:**  What work did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a> do?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a> was like the liaison office between the regent and the government dealing with whatever kinds of connections the regent had to make with the government personally.   

**Q:**  Was he there permanently?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you mean the matters related to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a>?   

**A:**  The matters related with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> would be dealt with by the chandzö. I mean matters like the government having to pay a monthly salary to the regent.   

**Q:**  How much salary did he get?   

**A:**  There was no such thing as a limit in terms of money, but he got <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, tea, butter, dried fruit etc., etc. Also, the expenditures regarding the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་འགག] The Secretariat of the regent.">shö ga</a> (Regent's Secretariat) and those had to pass through the liaison officer. Any official work that the regent had to do was arranged by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> and all expenditures had to be collected from the different offices and was done by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a>. And any time Reting needed something, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> told the neshen, and they did it and got it from the government.   

**Q:**  Would they say bring this and that?   

**A:**  They would not say that. They would say that they needed such and such things and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a> would report to whatever offices were relevant, like the Kashag, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> etc.   

**Q:**  This was not only a financial matter, you had to deal with political matters too, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Usually, the matters related to the government would be approved through the Kashag and also through the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What else did you have to do?   

**A:** . The responsibilities of governmental matters were taken by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> and the responsibility of the matters of the regent's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> were taken by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a>. e.g., if tomorrow the regent is going somewhere, where is he going, how long will it take, how many in the entourage, etc. All of this had to be done by the neshen. All the arrangements regarding modes of horse corvée and pack animal transportation, and from whom it was to be collected, e.g., from the government, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> or the monasteries, all of this was the responsibility of the neshen, totally. In Dharamsala in India, the neshen or the liaison officers, had to do a similar job. The neshen were generally had the rank of a very ordinary <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> (monk officials), and when Reting became the regent and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> Ngawang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ] and Metok Jangse Lobsang Tenzin were the two neshen, Gyambumgang was promoted to be shöndrön.   

**Q:**  The rank of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a> was low, right?   

**A:**  They were just ordinary tsidrung.   

**Q:**  If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a> were only <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, then they didn't have much power, right?   

**A:**  Yes, although they didn't have that much power, they treated it as a very important post. Even in the Kashag, if a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a> were to go there, they would ask what his needs were and why he had come. It was an important post, but very low in rank. The neshen's office was the shö ga. They had to sit below the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> who enjoyed the 5th rank or Letsenpa, and the neshen were ordinary rank. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> became the neshen, I was a staff member in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Office, and from the Yigtsang I was transferred to be e shöndrön.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Yigtsang? Was it because it dealt with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>?   

**A:**  It could be and it was also because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> was situated at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Potala, so it was know as the Tse Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  It was also held in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, right?   

**A:**  That was a branch office.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama would stay in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> would stay there, right?   

**A:**  One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> who was on duty [Tib. བཞུགས་བྱ] would stay there.   

**Q:**  Did even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> have to stay on duty?   

**A:**  Yes. Even the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> and tsendrön had to stay on duty when their turn came. Not only did the drunyichemmo have to stay on duty turn by turn, but also the shape. And when the regent stayed there, there was also an on duty shöndrön. When the Dalai Lama went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, then the regent also had to stay in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  The main office of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a>, right?   

**A:**  The main office was held in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> and all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> had to go for the Trungja to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>. After that, they would go to their branch office and only those on duty had to remain until the turn of the others came. But they would keep those who were out of turn informed of important events. Those who were out of turn would go to the Potala. Only the actual secretary, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> Nyerpa [Tib. ཡིག་ཚང་གཉེར་པ], would have to stay in the Potala all the time, while the acting Yigtsang Nyerpa [Tib. ཡིག་ཚང་གཉེར་ཚབ] would go to Norbulinga and manage things there.   

**Q:**  If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a>'s office was in the Potala, where would the abbots of the monasteries have to go if they had a problem, to the Potala of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>?   

**A:**  Actually they would have to go to the Potala, but they would talk to the people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and the next day when they came to the Trungja, they would have the discussions. So it was generally preferred to talk in Nobulinga. Normally, the on duty <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> had to stay by turns for a year, but when the 13th Dalai Lama took over, he decided not to have any turns. When the 13th Dalai Lama came, he appointed Gendun Chödar [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་དར] of the Kündeling, who was the teacher of Gendun Gelek la [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ལགས], permanently, and he had to stay all the time in Norbulinga. Also, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> office was based in the Potala, and one on duty officer would stay by turn in Norbulinga. But the 13th Dalai Lama decided not to have this done by turns either and he kept Jangma Khangsar [Tib. ལྕང་མ་ཁང་གསར] as the Tseja all the time in the Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  It appears that Trekhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> was quite close to Kumbela and he went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> very often, how did that happen?   

**A:**  He was there, but not as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a>, he was given some other work, and he had to deal with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a>, and it was in connection with the Trapchi work that he was always in Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  This Gendün Chödar who died as kalön lama was one of the main persons whom <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> did not like, was he not?   

**A:**  Yes, when Chödarla was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, then the Dalai Lama trusted him and gave him strong backing and regarded him as the best one, but before the death of the Dalai Lama, Chödarla was appointed as the replacement of Tenkyongla [Tib. བསྟན་སྐྱོང་ལགས]. When he became the kalön lama and joined the Kashag, then he was not really so powerful or effective.   

**Q:**  Maybe it was because of the glory of Trimön. I heard that if he had not died, Reting would have withdrawn him from the Kashag? Did you hear about that?   

**A:**  I never heard [of that]. They never talked of Chödarla being withdrawn, I never heard [of that]. Maybe people were suspicious and talking about that. But Chödarla had some kind of a stroke after the death of the 13th Dalai Lama, and he was kind of insane [Tib. ཆ་ལེ་ཆོ་ལེ]. Thereafter, he was not keeping well and didn't last long.   

**Q:**  After the death of the Dalai Lama, and when Kumbela was having trouble, one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>'s known as Kokola died. Do you know why? Or what was the cause of this death? Was he poisoned?   

**A:**  Talk of poison was not very common in Tibet at that time. Only if they wanted to get rid of some agent or something. Otherwise, poisoning was not very common. I never heard of that. In Tibet, these events, like poisoning, were rare. If it was done by a secret agent, it would not be known openly. Kokola was the sponsor of Wöser [Tib. འོད་ཟེར] in Switzerland, who finally came to be known as Zatrul [Tib. རྫ་སྤྲུལ] Lama's father. I also had quite a close relationship with Koko, but I never heard that he was poisoned or anything of that sort.   

**Q:**  How did he die?   

**A:**  I do not know. When the Dalai Lama died, people used to get worried and sometimes there used to be incidents like that.   

**Q:**  On that night, one of the Drepung abbots also died. Did you hear about it?   

**A:**  I do not know about that.   

**Q:**  It was commonly known that because Kokola did a lot to Kujar, so the Gombo Deity was agitated. Anyway, he just coughed at night and died immediately, right there. When Reting resigned, where were you?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa, I was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> at that time.   

**Q:**  And who went to see Reting Rimpoche off?   

**A:**  They sent three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a>, and I was one of the shöndrön who went to accompany Reting Rimpoche until the Reting monastery. Besides me, there was Shöndrön Lokela [Tib. བློ་སྐལ་ལགས], who later became the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, and the shöndrön Drugyel Lobsang Thegshogla [Tib. འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་བློ་བཟང་ཐེག་མཆོག་ལགས].   

**Q:**  How did you first come to know that Reting resigned?   

**A:**  I heard that the next day there was going to be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</a> (Large Abbreviated Assembly). Normally, the tsondu gyendzom (Full Assembly)was held for all of the representatives of the monk and lay people [Tib. ལྷ་སྡེ] [and they] were [all] included. But in the hragdu gyepa, there were all the representatives of all the ranks of the government officials and the abbots of the three great monasteries. I heard that there was a meeting the next day. Also, the regent was going to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> the next day, and if he had to go, then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> would have to go too. And we went. The regent sent a message asking the Kashag to come over, and he said, "Because of my own divination and from various astrological omens, it is sure there will be a lot of problems for my health. So it will not be okay if I don't stay in retreat for the time being to avoid the hindrance, and it will be good to decide on a successor. So I am going to resign from the regency. According to my consideration of religion and politics, as for the new regent, I feel that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> Rimpoche would be most suited. The Kashag must discuss and consult the tsondu, and request him about this. And if he does not accept or something like that, tell him that I will personally request him to do that if necessary." Then the kalön went to the Kashag. Then they consulted the tsondu and the tsondu members went to see Reting Rimpoche and told him, "Please do not resign at all. You have worked hard and we have the indisputable reincarnation of the Dalai Lama and he has also been inconceivably well-educated. We cannot see any bigger enemy against the politics from outside. So until the Dalai Lama becomes mature, please keep on working." They very strongly requested Reting not to resign. They strongly requested him to stay, but Reting ignored their request completely and said no. So they told the tsondu and the Kashag.   

**Q:**  At that meeting, who were the main persons? In the past, when they held the meeting regarding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> [Tib. གླང་མདུན], it was said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> [Tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] said something great. Who was the special speaker at that meeting?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས་བརྒྱད] The four drunyichemmo (trunyichemmo) and the four tsipön. These eight officials were often called to meet with the Kashag to discuss important issues. They also presided over the Tibetan government&#x27;s various assemblies.">drungtsigye</a> would take responsibility of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> and there were many talking, like the abbots of the three great monasteries. All of them requested very nicely. Finally, that same day, Reting called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> to his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and he himself asked him, and he accepted.   

**Q:**  Did you say that Reting Rimpoche personally called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> and talked to him?   

**A:**  Yes, Reting Rimpoche called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> and talked to him in his room. Taktra's residence and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་འགག] The Secretariat of the regent.">shö ga</a> were not very distant. So that same day, Taktra came to see Reting Rimpoche and they talked things over, personally requesting him to take over, and it was decided in one day. People were talking behind his back that Reting Rimpoche lost his celibacy, and since he had to ordain the Dalai Lama in the next year, therefore, he was scared and he resigned.   

**Q:**  Did you not hear before that, that Reting was going to resign etc.?   

**A:**  No, not at all.   

**Q:**  I heard that the he told Taring that he was going to resign.   

**A:**  But we had heard that the next year would be a very bad year for the regent's life, and all the astrological omens, the divination and even the deity in Ganden Chöngor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] called Tsörujenpa [Tib. གཙོད་རུ་ཅན་པ] gave the prophecy indicating that it was going to be a very bad time for Reting Rimpoche's life. After that, Reting Labrang himself, and also the government, had a lot of rituals performed for the life of the regent. I also thought that it would take a few days, and people would prevail upon Reting Rimpoche not to resign, but that did not happen. And everything was finished in one day and Reting resigned.   

**Q:**  Do you think that they [the 2 lamas] had internally decided among themselves?   

**A:**  It must have been. Reting called Tatkra Rimpoche to his room that day and they talked for a while without any tsendrön present. At that time, Reting would regard <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> very highly. The regent was the senior tutor to the Dalai Lama and Taktra was the junior tutor, and Reting regarded him very highly. So when Reting resigned, Taktra became the senior tutor and Ling [Tib. གླིང] Rimpoche became the junior tutor. Before that, he was the dialectics debate assistant [Tib. མཚན་ཞབས]. As I told you earlier, the beginning of Taktra's administration was very good. We all thought that he had good knowledge and Reting did well, and it would be a good example to everybody, but at the end, his [true nature was] revealed [Tib. སྦོ་ལུག].   

**Q:**  Was there any talk that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> had refused to accept the regency? Why I ask this is because I have heard that Taktra refused saying I am old, and later agreed to take it only for a period of three years, three years being the absolute limit. I have also heard that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> chemmo [Tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ] of Tatkra had wanted to offer some tea and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མ་འབྲས་སིལ] A special dish consisting of sweetened rice, melted butter and wild sweet potatoes (gro ma).">droma dresi</a> and said that he would borrow tea with a tea pot from the shö ga. What do you think about it?   

**A:**  That must be [true].   

**Q:**  Do you think that Reting was looking for a substitute for quite some time?   

**A:**  Yes it must be.   

**Q:**  Do you not have any comments to make on this?   

**A:**  No, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was very suitable.   

**Q:**  At that time, Reting is believed to have asked Phabongkha [Tib. ཕ་བོང་ཁ] to succeed him, and it has even been mentioned in Phabongkha's biography?   

**A:**  Is that so? But at that time, Phabongkha was not as suitable as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, for Taktra had been connected with the government since he was the dialectics debate assistant to the 13th Dalai Lama, and he was also a member on the editorial board of the new edition of the Kangyur, which was promoted by the 13th Dalai Lama under the supervision of the Geshe Sherab. Thereafter, he was the assistant tutor, and then he was to become the tutor of the 14th Dalai Lama. It was, therefore, more suitable for a person with government experience to be appointed than an inexperienced and new person assuming the duty of regent all of a sudden. Therefore, I say that it was much more suitable for a person with experience to come and take over rather than Phabongkha.   

**Q:**  There was also some talk about Janglojen Gung [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] sending a letter to Tharchin Babu about Reting asking Demo Rimpoche to be the regent?   

**A:**  To whom the letter was sent?   

**Q:**  To Tharchin Babu.   

**A:**  Yes, from here to there. It was said that Demo would be substituting for Reting and it was written, "Since Reting's horns have become sharper than ever, it appears that it is a lie that Demo will succeed Reting [Tib. རྭ་སྒྲེང་རྭ་རྩེ་ཇེ་རྣོར་འགྲོ་བ་ལ། དེ་ཚབ་དེ་མོས་བྱེད་ཅེས་རྫུན་དུ་སྣང]." It may have been possible that Tharchin might have heard about this and asked Janglojen whether it was true, and Janglojen had written a letter from Tibet. I had some long verses in memory earlier, but now I have forgotten.   

**Q:**  I heard about this and I searched for this in the documents of Tharchin Babu, but I couldn't find [it].   

**A:**  I don't think he left those documents.   

**Q:**  One should have left it there.   

**A:**  Did you find any other interesting things among them?   

**Q:**  No, because the Dharamsala Library had already differentiated quite a lot of them.   

**A:**  Now, would they give all of the things to the people?   

**Q:**  No, I got it in a difficult way.   

**A:**  Who has the documents?   

**Q:**  His step-son has them.   

**A:**  Is that the monk called Rinzin Wangpo [Tib. རིག་འཛིན་དབང་པོ]?   

**Q:**  No, he doesn't have [them]. His step-son, who is a Christian, had those. He was not attentive of Tibetan culture, and he didn't take possession of them and just threw them in the garbage.   

**A:**  Was Surkhang Sawamgchemmo's book lost?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the first action or change that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> took when he assumed the regency?   

**A:**  What do you mean by first action?   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was supposed to have issued an order saying that the regent's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> [Tib. སྐུ་སྒེར་བླ་བྲང] should not have any traders. Was this his first action or was there anything else?   

**A:**  Yes. Earlier, due to misconduct of some persons in authority, losses and suffering had been caused, and to avoid this in the future, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> is believed to have passed this order. This was clearly mentioned in the announcement, that no business for personal gain should be done in the name of the regent, and this would [be] illegal, and should such people be found, they should be handed over by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> to the Central Government. This was because, at the time of Reting, an extremely large amount of transactions in wool were being done in the name of the regent, so it was because of this that he had made this announcement.   

**Q:**  After <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> became the regent, did Reting continue to do this business in wool?   

**A:**  Yes, he continued this business in wool, etc. for quite a number of years. Reting Simpönla [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་ལགས] was in Kalimpong, but it was in the normal way, which was that he bought whatever wool he could and would then sell it.   

**Q:**  During the Reting regency, trade was done in a different way, right?   

**A:**  Earlier, take for example, in Nagchu, when they would say that they were Reting's traders, they [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>pön] would issue an order saying that all the wool under the jurisdiction of any particular dzong should be sold only to the representatives of the regent, and the local price would be paid. This used to have two results. The first was that as there was such an order, there was just a small amount of people buying wool. The second was that if any person were to buy even a little wool it would have been almost like they were stealing.   

**Q:**  At that time, the people were not allowed to complain, saying it was not fair?   

**A:**  How could they? The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> would mainly issue the order and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> told the dzongpön, and the labrang was not allowed to issue the order.   

**Q:**  If another trader would buy wool, this would become illegal, right?   

**A:**  Not really like something illegal. If they [other traders] buy, they might say something, but it was not convenient for them to say much.   

**Q:**  So they would not punish them for doing the trade, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the other traders could buy wool even if they [said] it was not allowed, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was the way all the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> did trade, by telling the dzongpön and doing the trade.   

**Q:**  Was Reting Labrang alone? Who did the trade in that way?   

**A:**  No. Who else could do that? And [they would] tell the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> to sell all the wool in that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> to him and he would pay some commission to the dzongpön, and then the dzongpön would help him gather the wool and the dzongpön would get the profit or the commission in whatever way.   

**Q:**  Who was the first <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> appointed?   

**A:**  I think his first appointment was Surkhang, to replace Langchungwa [Tib. གནང་བྱུང་བ].   

**Q:**  Why was Langchungwa removed from the Kashag?   

**A:**  Langchungwa was not demoted. He probably got sick and died or resigned.   

**Q:**  No, he was demoted after he came back from Chamdo, by saying that he came back before his three-year term was over or something like that. Anyway, at that time, who were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a>? One was Phünkhang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was appointed at that time. Wasn't the kalön lama Trekhang or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆང་ཁྱིམ] A Tibetan aristocratic family.">Changkyim</a> Thubden Shakya [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཤ་ཀྱ], right?   

**Q:**  Regarding the seating in the Kashag, I heard that it was not necessary that the kalön lama would be seated at the head. For example, Trekhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama was sitting at the third or the fourth slot.   

**A:**  Actually, the kalön lama should be seated at the head as the senior [Tib. ཁྲི་པ] according to the traditional system.   

**Q:**  What do you mean the senior?   

**A:**  One who sits at the head was called Senior Kalön.   

**Q:**  Later, when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Rampa</a> sat at the head, the senior was Surkhang.   

**A:**  No, one who sits at the head was called the senior, but many of the kalön lamas, like Chödarla and the Tenkyongla kind of got strokes. So they had a kind of taboo, and later when Trekhang was the kalön lama, he sat according to seniority.   

**Q:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> was the senior kalön.   

**A:**  It is true that Surkhang was the successor of Langchungwa because the song said, "The horn of the ox was broken and the prayer flag was hoisted at the corner [Tib. གླང་གི་རྭ་ཅོ་བཅག་ནས་། ཟུར་ལ་དར་ལྕོག་བཙུག་སོང]," which proves that Surkhang followed Langchungba.   

**Q:**  How did Surkhang ask for the shape?   

**A:**  When Surkhang became the shape, there was a lot of gossip that Surkhang's sister, Yuthok Lhajam, was supposed to have presented a basketful of gold to the regent, although it may be possible that he presented the gold to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> of the regent, because unlike the previous regent, Tatkra was very reserved and did not give any audiences unless through very special arrangements, which were not made known.   

**Q:**  How did Surkhang find the opportunity?   

**A:**  At that time, Surkhang was the head of the Palanquin Carrier, Phebchang Gopa [Tib. ཕེབས་བྱམས་འགོ་པ], of the Dalai Lama, which belonged to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> segment, Tsekor [Tib. རྩེ་སྐོར]. There were only two lay officials [who] would become the Tsekor, the Phebchang Gopa and the lay official <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a>, and they would sit below the Tsekor and the at the head of the fourth rank lay official. And also the Payroll Officer, Phogpön [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན], and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Depön [Tib. དབུས་མདའ] would go to the head of the lay officials. The man who pulled him up or his backer was probably <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Tempa Jamyang [Tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས], who was very powerful in the Kashag and also in front of the higher ups, so we all felt that not only Surkhang, [but] there were some others who were also trying like Kapshöba. Wasn't Lhalu striving for this?   

**Q:**  It was too early for Lhalu since he was probably yet to take the tsipön's post. So it may have been a bit too early.   

**Q:**  Wasn't <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> also trying?   

**A:**  Not at all.   

**Q:**  He was the first shape since <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> came to power.   

**A:**  Yes, but he was trying get the shape post in a special way as soon as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> got power and [was] not substituting somebody. He took the method that they would say that an elderly shape was needed. Although he didn't have much hope, but it was his wife's desire that made him ask for the post.   

**Q:**  Did Kündeling go hither and thither to help him get the shape?   

**A:**  No, they themselves did that. At that time, we didn't have any connections. [He repeats the how Trimön gave his estate to Kündeling].   

**Q:**  At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] A famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Khyungram</a> had already fallen.   

**A:**  This was the time when people bribed very seriously, like the proverb, "letting go the thread [of the kite] [Tib. སྐུད་པ་གློད]."   

**Q:**  It was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>'s time, when people started bribing very much.   

**A:**  Yes, a basketful of gold was not a joke. It seems that they would not be able to lift a basketful of gold. Even if we had to give a gift of a basketful of cookies it cost quite a lot of money. Actually, they tried to be clever by carrying the basketful on the pretense that they were carrying cookies to the regent.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསྟན་པ་འཇམ་དབྱངས] A famous monk official in the Tibetan government who served as Trunyichemmo and then Kalön.">Tempa Jayang</a> was backing Surkhang?   

**A:**  Yes, we knew and people were also talking outside.   

**Q:**  The father of Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a>, Sursur [Tib. ཟུར་ཟུར], was also a contender to the appointment. I heard that Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> himself went to ask for the favor for his father.   

**A:**  It must be. They might have thought that if the Surkhang did not get it, the father may and it would remain in the family, though they were not the same family. As for the father, he was not a person who spent money like this and kept his money very carefully.   

**Q:**  Wasn't that a big leap from Phebchang Gopa to shape?   

**A:**  If there were no candidates among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེ་ཇི] A third rank position in the Tibetan government.">theiji</a>, then people had to go from the 4th ranking <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> officers. I, however, feel that the Surkhang was young, so the Lhasa people nicknamed Surkhang as Lhalu Dakpo [Tib. ལྷའུ་དག་པོ], the boy acting in the opera who would wear the costume similar to the shape's yellow satin uniform. Which meant he was too young to be a shape. Unless one spent quite a lot, it was impossible to become shape. After that, he [Taktra] got mad.   

**Q:**  It seems that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> made his selections and appointment only on the basis of corruption, and money played a very important role in the appointment of key posts. If you think carefully, you will see that he had been appointing only the people who had some kind of trouble or grudges against Reting. So I don't think he only looked at money.   

**A:**  What happened between Surkhang and Reting?   

**Q:**  Surkhang's estate was taken by Reting.   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. It was the Nyemo <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲས་མཐོང] The name of the aristocratic family of an important official.">Trendong</a> [Tib. སྙེ་མོ་བཀྲས་མཐོང] Estate.   

**Q:**  Although <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> used to seek help from Reting, during Reting's regency. he didn't get much and later he became like this. I am not sure about Kapshöba. So I don't think that money was the main reason.   

**A:**  The main thing was money.   

**Q:**  I think the main thing was politics and all the people were trying to get as much money as they could get.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Under these circumstances, it appears that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> had no plans to hand the regency back over to Reting after three years?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you have anything to tell me about handing over the regency in three years?   

**A:**  It was then a well-known fact that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> had agreed only to stay three years, and also that Reting had told him that if he had any difficulty after three years, then Reting would take over again and then Taktra said that he would not do it more than three years. This talk had definitely taken place. And almost everyone talked about it and this was quite common knowledge.   

**Q:**  Did Reting Rimpoche do the three year long retreat?   

**A:**  No, he did not actually stay in retreat, but he might have said strong prayers and such, but not much.   

**Q:**  Who was the next kalön appointed by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> after Surkhang?   

**A:**  It was probably Kapshöba.   

**Q:**  He was probably the replacement of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> after Bönshö died.   

**A:**  Phünkhang's replacement was Lhalu, and then probably <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> and then Kapshöba.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Rampa</a>, Surkhang, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> and Lhalu. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Eastern Tibet who was based in Chamdo. It is an abbreviation of dome jigyab [tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].">doji</a> dzasa was Yuthok. It was said that Kapshöba bribed a lot by giving the bribe offer [Tib. སྐྱབས་འཛིན], but I heard that he was unable to manage to come up with the money.   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> bribed using his estate called Gyantse Serjog [Tib. གསེར་ལྕོག]. Probably not the bribe offer [unclear]. Kapshöba had two estates in Gyantse, Serjog and Phüntse [Tib. ཕུན་རྩེ]. Both were very large and probably they were the biggest sponsors of the Gyantse Pegaw Chöde [Tib. དཔལ་འཁོར་ཆོས་སྡེ] monastery.   

**Q:**  This would be of equal value with the basket of gold, right?   

**A:**  Surkhang probably gave solid gold and probably did not give an estate.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> might have also given a bribe offer of about 10,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> I heard. Wasn't that a large amount?   

**A:**  At that time, it was a very large amount.   

**Q:**  Later, he may not have paid the for the bribe offer or an I.O.U., or I am not sure whether he even tried to pay that or not?   

**A:**  It was a strange situation where it was inconvenient to send reminders for the bribe offer. Unless they paid it thinking that it would be shameful if it was not paid [it was hard to collect].   

**Q:**  Actually, since they accepted the bribe offer, they would have to send to get it.   

**A:**  This depended on whether the person from both sides were shy persons or not. Later, the old man [Taktra], became horrible [Tib. ཞེད་པོ་ཅིག].   

**Q:**  What about the Lhundrup Dzong incident? How did that happen?   

**A:**  Regarding the Lhundrup Dzong of Phembo, the (monk)loan pursuer [Tib. འཛུགས་རྒྱབ་པ] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> got into fight.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for the fight?   

**A:**  This was a fight regarding persuing grain loans. Basically, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> college had a very wide area in Phembo where they lent loans. Take the example of Kündeling Labrang. [They] were considered to be the biggest lender of grain. In those days, grain used to be given on loan during days of scarcity. Sera Je was a much bigger lender and they used to collect very ruthlessly, and enormous amounts also. Later, the monks became more show-offish. What had happened at that time was that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> was the relative of the Drunyichemmo, Chömpel Thubden [Tib. ཤོས་འཕེལ་ཐུབ་བསྟན]. So the dzongpön would be a little bit proud and acted forcefully against the monks who collected the grains very vigorously from the people, so the monks fought against him.   

**Q:**  What <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> said was that the reason why the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> was so strict was because before that, they had a hard time with collecting the loans from the Kyarpo [Tib. སྐྱར་པོ] area, and they received many petitions and the government had gavin some loan exemptions on a fixed amount of years. This was to be taken care of by the dzongpön. Therefore, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> monks pursued the loans by force, the dzongpön told them that they didn't need to pay them, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> also said that the dzongpön told them that they didn't need to pay them, and this was the case. Was that true?   

**A:**  This must be true.   

**Q:**  Then what happened? Some people from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> side say that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of Lhundrup Dzong was not killed at that time, that he died later. What do you have to say about this?   

**A:**  He was definitely killed!   

**Q:**  My father told me that the monks hit him with dried meat with bones in it, which they offered to him, and not with knives. But when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> still talked strongly, they hit him on his head with a clay tea pot with tea in it, along with the attached fire pan [Tib. ཁོག་ལྟིར་མེ་ཁོག]. Actually, he wouldn't die from this, right? The monks were also saying that. I heard that he pretended to be dead.   

**A:**  Yes, this must be true. He must be the elder brother of Chömpel Thubdenla. Then he submitted a petition and an investigation was done after that.   

**Q:**  This was headed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས་བརྒྱད] The four drunyichemmo (trunyichemmo) and the four tsipön. These eight officials were often called to meet with the Kashag to discuss important issues. They also presided over the Tibetan government&#x27;s various assemblies.">drungtsigye</a> plus one <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐའི་ཇི] A third rank official in the Tibetan government.">Teiji</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and a Khenchen. During the Reting period, there was one kalön appointed. Wasn't he Sambo?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. One was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> and there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>. Wasn't Ragashag appointed during Reting?   

**Q:**  Wasn't he?   

**A:**  Yes, it was during Reting.   

**Q:**  Then there must have been one shape before Surkhang. Surkhang would sit above Ragashag.   

**A:**  Then the third was probably Kapshöba.   

**A:**  Wasn't <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> appointed by the Dalai Lama? And then Ngabö was the last kalön.   

**Q:**  He didn't ask for it, but was appointed in a desperate situation.   

**A:**  When Ngabö was appointed, the situation was very tense. Many people had told him to try for the post of kalön, but Ngabö would say, "Please leave it [Tib. ད་སྐུ་མཁྱེན་འདི]."   

**Q:**  It was said that at this time no one asked for the shape position because the had Chinese come and Ngabö was the only kalön who didn't bribe <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, and he didn't get to eat [accept] the bribe because of the situation [of no one wanting to be kalön and have to go to Chamdo as the Doji].   

**A:**  Not only for the shape, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> ate bribes incomparably on appointing other positions.   

**Q:**  What were you doing at that time?   

**A:**  I was a tsendrön.   

**Q:**  During the Dalai Lama's period?   

**A:**  No, before that during Taktra.   

**Q:**  Did one's transfer from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> to tsendrön mean that one was slightly pushed aside, like being transferring to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆེ] A high monk official of the third rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">khenche</a> rank?   

**A:**  Yes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> was at the doorstep of the regent and knew all about the contradictions taht were going on there, and you were quite close. But when you were transferred from there to the tsendrön, then you were more far away, and you did not know so much of what was going on.   

**Q:**  Were you close to Reting?   

**A:**  Yes, I totally became pro-Reting.   

**Q:**  How did this happen?   

**A:**  I agreed more to the Reting side because I worked as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and also as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་ཤན] A liaison officer (usually of the Tibetan government) who was assigned to foreign visitors and high lamas.">neshen</a> for a long time. So at that time, there was a political faction among the government officials.   

**Q:**  You mean one was pro-Reting and one was pro-Taktra, right?   

**A:**  Yes, some didn't meddle into both factions, but the majority were in the factions.   

**Q:**  Were the shape also in the factions?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The officials from the shape to the ordinary were in the factions, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I fell strongly on Reting's side.   

**Q:**  How did you fall like this?   

**A:**  I didn't do anything, but because of one's ideology, I was considered pro-Reting.   

**Q:**  When you were transferred to tsendrön, the Dalai Lama was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> there was a position for checking documents called Yigshib Thotham [Tib. ཡིཨི་ཞིབ་དོ་དམ]. Doji Dzasa Lobsang Panden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དཔལ་ལྡན] was taking this post and he was transferred to another bigger post, like in charge of the Foreign Office. I was appointed as his replacement with the rank of tsendrön. I stayed for about 2 years and at that time, they [the Taktra faction] were looking for my faults. Even my friends used to warn me that if I was not careful, I would be paying a very heavy price. Persons like Liushar and Phala were also pro-Reting.   

**Q:**  What was the reason to to have this allegience?   

**A:**  There was no reason. It was because of our ideology. When I was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Nyendra [Tib. ས་འདུ་སྙན་གྲགས] had a fight with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>'s monk bodyguard, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a>, and he hit his head with the sword.   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟིམ་འགག] 1. A bodyguard. 2. The guards of high officials such as the Dalai Lama, the Regent, the Silön and the Kalön. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Simgag were called Tse Simgag (tib. རྩེ་གཟིམ་འགག) and the Regent&#x27;s Simgag were called Shöl Simgag (tib. ཞོལ་གཟིམ་འགག). They were not real bodyguards, but functioned more as disciplinarians at meetings and ceremonies. They carried only leather whips. The Silön and Kashag&#x27;s Simgag were all lower-level lay officials. They were called either Simgag or Gagpa (tib. འགག་པ).">simgag</a> die?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. I and my colleague, Göshampa [Tib. རྒོད་གཤམ་པ], who was married to Nyendra's elder sister, I was also very closely associated with their family. I and Nyendra were very close friends and had even gone to school together. This case was investigated by the joint Shigatse Dzong and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> [Tib. ཛ་རྫོང་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ]. An order was issued for the arrest of Nyendra, saying that they were going to send soldiers. Simgag was backed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and Nyendra was backed by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> business community in Shigatse. So the government authorities decided to arrest Nyendra, and the Khamba business men said that if any soldiers came round, they said they would shoot and fight. In the meantime, the two of us went to the investigating committee to apologize and request them not to take such drastic action. And the arrest was delayed by a night. Nyendra, however, escaped that night together with some people. Some said that he had gone to India with some of his young men (sidekicks) [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག], and others said that he had gone somewhere else. And it was said that two of us let him flee. So it was no longer in the hands of the local authorities, and the matter was reported to Lhasa. Lhasa issued an edict to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> saying that the two of us should be sent to Lhasa. My friends were all saying, "Now they shall catch two fish with one hook," and they added that they fixed the two of us because both of us were pro-Reting and it happened exactly like that. When we reached Lhasa, they said it was illegal to seek relaxation of the judgement and that it was a crime. They dismissed us from the service and the post [Tib. ལས་ཞབས་ཆབས་ཅིག] and they took off my <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>'s satin garment [Tib. གོས་སྟོད]. While I was in Lhasa idle without any work, Kündeling Labrang asked me to work for them as Pagshö Chandzö, as the problems with the Chinese had arisen, and as he needed a good man down there. As I had no work, he asked me to go. I said, "Whatever, I work honestly. I am not kind of lucky, so do a divination and if it would be in favor, I'll have to consider about this." So Kündeling Labrang consulted <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> through the oracle, and Nechung said that it was a wise decision. And as my Karma was there to serve in the Pagshö and Phala, the Labrang also told me that it would be better to go. Otherwise, you don't know what trouble you would face. So I went and then the Chinese came and the disturbance started. While I was in Pagshö, Kündeling's old dzasa retired and I was appointed as the new dzasa of Kündeling. My appointment was made by the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama had already assumed power at that time.   

**Q:**  Was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> of Kündeling not appointed by Kündeling Tatsag [Tib. རྟ་ཚགས] Rimpoche, rather than the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  The appointment of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> of Kündeling was a very interesting procedure. They would first notify the monks and all the people in the service of the Kündeling Labrang, and a meeting would be called for the next day. Then the monks and the officials who were in the Labrang's service, would all meet at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> on the top, and the monks would sit in the monastery. Above the Labrang, four monastic officials from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> Tratsang from Drepung would come and sit. One bo of wheat would be kept in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a>'s office and everyone would write the names of anyone who they thought was fit to be the dzasa and put it in this bo with wheat. Then 4-5 officials [Tib. ལས་སྣེ] of the Kündeling Dzasa and the Gomang officials would come up and take out all the names, reading them out while someone would count all of the number of votes against each name using <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡེའུ] The traditional method of Tibetan arithmetic that uses a board and a variety of items like beans, sticks and stones.">diu</a>, and this list would then be submitted to Tatshag Rimpoche who would then select three people. And these three names would then be submitted to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> and then they would be sent to the Dalai Lama or regent for the approval and selection of one. The choice would then be made by the Dalai Lama or regent and the order would then be issued from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] The Secretariat Office of either the Dalai Lama (tib. ཙེ་གག [རྩེ་འགག]) or the Regent (tib. shö gag [ཞོལ་འགག]).">gag</a> of the Dalai Lama. This was a very old system, which appeared very democratic.   

**Q:**  I have heard that you had been introduced to go to Pagshö or come out of Pagshö by Lhatsun [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུན] Rimpoche?   

**A:**  I was not here and I have never asked him for this.   

**Q:**  Maybe they had asked for the divination.   

**A:**  They may have asked for the divination, but I was not there.   

**Q:**  So you got the approval, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I received an edict.   

**Q:**  You didn't know about this, right?   

**A:**  I didn't even know that the old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> resigned because it was a long distance, and since there were Chinese in Kham, travelers were also very rare.   

**Q:**  You have said that you were checking the documents of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>? Were those the documents regarding the Panchen Lama?   

**A:**  They were the documents of Labrang.   

**Q:**  Why did they check them, were they suspicious?   

**A:**  Since the previous Panchen Lama fled and the governor Gyabing [Tib. སྐྱབས་དབྱིངས] Dzasa Lama was set up, then the Dalai Lama sent a group of people to check the documents before the Panchen Lama left.   

**Q:**  Why did they do that?   

**A:**  It had been many years and even the former Dalai Lama did this, regarding it as very important that the papers be sent to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  What came out?   

**A:**  In the past, many documents might have come out. They had already checked the documents in the Panchen Lama's room and some of them were transferred down [to Lhasa]. And there were many documents relating to loans of money and grain given by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> that had been collected by the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  When did they do that?   

**A:**  This was done at that time, during the reign of the 13th Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Was this a kind of punishment for him going to Beijing?   

**A:**  Yes. As for the income of Labrang, Gyabing was set up there and took care of the monks and so on.   

**Q:**  Did they set up the Gyabing and did he continue until the Panchen Lama came?   

**A:**  This was sent by the government after the Panchen Lama left.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> didn't do any additional things with that, like adding more controls?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. At that time, it was roughly confirmed that the Panchen Lama would come up.   

**Q:**  I mean at that time, the Panchen Lama had passed away, right?   

**A:**  When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> took power he didn't have anything to do with the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  When Reting Rimpoche was planning to invite the Panchen Rimpoche to Lhasa, you were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> and you knew about this in detail, right? So how did they hold the meetings?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there.   

**Q:**  Reting was very keen to bring the Panchen Lama up [back to Tibet from China], right?   

**A:**  He one hundred percent wanted to bring the Panchen Lama to Lhasa and put a lot of effort into this, because if the Panchen Rimpoche stayed in China, it would be politically unfavorable for Tibet from the report of the Bureau of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> in China. So it was definite that it would be beneficial if the Panchen Lama didn't stay there. Reting was very much concerned about this, but later nothing came out   

**Q:**  How did this happen? Was it controlled by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> (Assembly) at that time?   

**A:**  It was something like that. The matter was that when the Panchen Lama said that he was going to bring the soldiers, this was not allowed.   

**Q:**  At that time, the government practiced leniency [Tib. ཆག་ཡང], and the three great monasteries and the regent were also putting effort into that. And also the Kashag. But why didn't it work out?   

**A:**  The point was whether to let the soldiers come or not. If we let the Chinese soldiers in, then it was a hundred percent harmful.   

**Q:**  For example, at that time, the government was talking with the British. The government told the British to talk [with the Panchen] and Sir Alex Scolf went to China, and there were many things going on between China [and the British]. Later, the British themselves had a lot of problems on whether to take care of the Panchen Lama or not when there was the matter of reincarnation. So the British kind of hesitated and later in July, August, the British said that they would stay in between [Tib. བར་སྡོད] and talk. The Tibetan government had a kind of confidence, thinking that they could talk with the Panchen and told them that they didn't need to talk (mediate). Later, the Tibetan government again told the British to talk. How did that happen?   

**A:**  The moment the British were allowed to negotiate in between, the Chinese and the Panchen Lama's side offered resistance [Tib. མཁྲེགས་བཟུང] to their presence.   

**Q:**  It appears that the Panchen Labrang had requested the British to negotiate, and even Ngagchen [Tib. སྔགས་ཆེན] Rimpoche was talking with the British at the same time the Tibetan government was talking with the Chinese.   

**A:**  Ngagchen was the one who talked with the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  He was also making relations with the British.   

**A:**  This must be.   

**Q:**  At that time, both the Tibetan government and the Panchen were requesting the British to talk, but at first, the British had no authority from London to involve themselves in the negotiations. After they obtained this authority, the Tibetan government did not want them to be involved. How did this change take place?   

**A:**  Who knows! I do not remember that the government told the British they don't need them to talk.   

**Q:**  It appeared that the talk was going to work out.   

**A:**  If this was the case, then it would be considered to be the best not have the British involved.   

**Q:**  Later, again they requested the British to talk.   

**A:**  Then the talk seemed [like it was] not going to work out.   

**Q:**  At that time, there was again some trouble in London and it was not approved. They held many meetings and it was decided that the three great monasteries would be the guarantor, and even if he would bring the soldiers, and even if the British did not stay between, the Panchen Lama would come and the three great monasteries would send the soldiers back. Don't you have anything to tell about this?   

**A:**  No, there was not such a decision. This was not commonly known.   

**Q:**  This meeting probably was definitely held and I even heard the dates of the meetings. The regent and the Kashag gave orders to hold the meeting.   

**A:**  Ngagchen Rimpoche, the tutor Nguchu [Tib. རྔུལ་ཆུ] Rimpoche and the fourth rank, Rimshi Dayun, mainly came to talk and apologize to the government, and they were in Lhasa and they were doing their best to find a method to make the talks work out. They were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> officials who didn't flee to China. I also heard that they were having problems with the officials, like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> Che Jigme of the Panchen Rimpoche, who were in China. [There were] quite serious problems between them.   

**Q:**  I understand that Nagchen Rimpoche took the trouble to go all the way to China via India to see the Panchen Lama, and yet when he reached there, his services were terminated by the Panchen Lama.   

**A:**  It must have been.   

**Q:**  It appears that after Reting agreed to let the Panchen Lama return with the Chinese soldiers to Tibet, after the three monasteries had agreed to see to it that these soldiers would go back, the Panchen Lama started going back to China. And the Lhasan government even telegraphed or sent a wireless message asking why the journey was canceled. But there does not seem to have been a satisfactory reply from the Chinese side. Do you know anything about this?   

**A:**  No, I don't.   

**Q:**  What was the cause of the Panchen Lama's death?   

**A:**  After returning to China, the Panchen Lama fell ill, and not much later, he passed away. When <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> came to power, the Panchen Lama's problem was already over, except that when everything was over, they brought the body back to Tibet.   

**Q:**  When they brought the body back, there was some other trouble with Khangsar Pönmo [Tib. ཁང་གསར་དཔོན་མོ] wanting to get married et cetera, et cetera. Do you know something about that?   

**A:**  Immediately after the death of the Panchen Lama, the government of Tibet, with the collaboration of the newly appointed Dzasa Lama of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>, the government started the construction of the stupa for the Panchen Lama's body in the Tashilhunpo. At the same time however, the Panchen Lama's staff in China were having some problems. Whether they had any internal agreement among themselves I cannot say, but I heard what they told the Tibetan government was that some of them almost had to escape with the body without telling the others, and they brought the body from China in this way.   

**Q:**  The others fled back to China, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the others went back.   

**Q:**  They sent the body up, right?   

**A:**  I am not sure if they sent it or brought it. The people like Ngagchen who were in Lhasa mainly put their effort in and brought the body back. It was at that time that the Communists were building up their strength and it was said that they [Labrang] were trying to keep good relations with the Chinese Communists.   

**Q:**  Were you in Central Tibet at the time of the incidents at Lhundrup Dzong?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you in the government service?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you the tsendrön at that time? How did you hear that?   

**A:**  No, I was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a> at that time.   

**Q:**  So in that case, when the trouble started, you must have known, as the petition to the government must have come through your office?   

**A:**  No, the petition went to the Kashag. But we mostly came to know from an official diary in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་འགག] The Secretariat of the regent.">shö ga</a> (Regent's Secretariat) that was maintained, listing the purpose of the visit of every member of the Kashag to the regent, which was being regularly maintained.   

**Q:**  Who would know about the shape's visit?   

**A:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> knew.   

**Q:**  Who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> at that time? Did the lame nendrön [Thubden Lengmön] come to the post?   

**A:**  Not yet. I think, it was Ngagpala [Tib. སྣགས་པ་ལགས] who had not yet become the Drunyichemmo. And after Ngagpala, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a>, who had a strong and close relationship with the regent. Even before he was the Drunyichemmo he was very close to the regent, and he was strong and powerful also. It was he who got Thubden Lengmön appointed as the nendrön to Taktra.   

**Q:**  Are you sure that it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a>, or was it the Ta lama?   

**A:**  Ta lama was very close, but the pull was from Gyambumgang.   

**Q:**  I heard that it was Ta lama. At that time, the lame was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> in Dowa Dzong or something.   

**A:**  He was at Samye [Tib. བསམ་ཡས] Dzong.   

**Q:**  He was pulled up from that long distance, right?   

**A:**  Not really, he was probably a fifth rank letsenpa. Normally, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣེ་མགྲོན] The monk official in charge of the Regent&#x27;s Secretariat Office (shöga). He was the equivalent of the Lord Chamberlain in the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat.">nendrön</a> were not selected from below the rank of tsendrön or shöndrön. This meant that a good pull was used. Or it would be transferred [Tib. གནས་འཕོས] from the Khenjung rank.   

**Q:**  How did the Lhundrup Dzong incident take place? After the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, his brother, had made an appeal to the government. What really happened then?   

**A:**  They set up an investigation committee.   

**Q:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> monks were reluctant to come and that they didn't come to attend the Mönlam seating arrangement, and all the main people [Tib. གྲལ་འཛིན] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་འགག] The Secretariat of the regent.">shö ga</a> enquired about this.   

**A:**  Yes, the involved were called, and they were told to hand in the ringleaders to the investigation committee. And they refused to come.   

**Q:**  I have heard that the monks, like Rebe Gyawu [Tib. རེ་བེ་རྒྱའུ], came as the substitutes and came to apologize on behalf of the main people involved. Is that true?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Why did the government have to give such a severe punishment to those monastic officials involved?   

**A:**  Well, well it is obvious. First the Drunyichemmo himself was involved, and basically, they were already holding kind of a negative viewpoint [Tib. མཐོང་ཕྱོགས] toward <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> because of Reting, so what other reason could there be?   

**Q:**  As you have said earlier there were two factions, one pro-Reting and the other pro-Taktra, when did this division come about?   

**A:**  What do you mean when did this division come?   

**Q:**  I mean at what time, in what year? When Reting was in power then there was no division, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after Reting resigned and when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> took over, then gradually these factions started forming.   

**Q:**  There wasn't anything for 2-3 years, right?   

**A:**  Yes, as I told you, the situation was very good and even if one was close to Reting, we thought that what Reting did was wrong and that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was good. But, later when his [nature] kind of became revealed [Tib. སྦོ་ལུག], it became very clear what he [Taktra] was doing and thinking.   

**Q:**  When Reting returned from Reting Monastery, were you still in Lhasa as the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོད་མགྲོན] Monk officials working in the Secretariat of the Regent. They were something like an aide-de-camp.">shöndrön</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, I was still in Lhasa and I was still the shöndrön.   

**Q:**  Since you were working for the regent then, do you know if Reting Rimpoche met the regent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, yes, they did met. They met at the new palace [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང་གསར་པ]. Since we were sitting near the door, we would have known that. But on the outside, it was said that Reting had a big fight with Taktra.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  Although he stayed for a long time and [they] ate food together, it was mainly said that Reting told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, "I have trusted you very much. As for repaying this, you held a kind of negative viewpoint toward <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Je College in Sera Monastery.">Sera Je</a> and made them have a very hard time. Furthermore, you also criticized the works done by Reting instead of supporting them. Taktra Labrang also held a negative viewpoint toward the government officials who have been friendly and on good terms with Reting. So I feel much regret with this. Now, if you have a problem [Tib. མཛད་དཀའ], I will take over the regency." This was disseminated the next day.   

**Q:**  Do you really think that Reting said that?   

**A:**  Yes, I think he may have said that.   

**Q:**  What did Tatkra reply to all of that?   

**A:**  He might have said that he was not going to resign, that is all. Outside, it was said that they fought quite a lot.   

**Q:**  How could they fight? It is very hard. Did he say that he would not hand over the regency?   

**A:**  Yes, by that time, he would not dare to sacrifice it because <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> was already beginning to get intoxicated with power, and he could have given some reasons not to resign.   

**Q:**  What reasons could he have given for not resigning?   

**A:**  There must have been some reason.   

**Q:**  Reting met <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> only once at that time, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  On that day, he stayed for a long time, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard that Reting said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> didn't talk to him. This must be a lie?   

**A:**  This must be a lie.   

**Q:**  He must have said something, right. This is really stupid. So at that time, the Dalai Lama must have had a strong feeling of disliking <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, right?  

**A:**  Later, he probably disliked <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> very much.   

**Q:**  But, he didn't behave like not talking with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, right?   

**A:**  Probably not because he was the tutor, but in the lower level [Tib. གཤམ་ནས], there was a severe contradiction.   

**Q:**  Incidentally I heard that the father of the Dalai Lama had been poisoned. Is that true?   

**A:**  Well, I do not know.   

