# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0067.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Dehradun, India  
**Date of Interview:** 16 December 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Kündeling Wöser Gyentsen [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང་འོད་ཟེར་རྒྱལ་མཚན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 77  
**Date of Birth:** 1915  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Kündeling Dzasa was a monk official and one of the top officials in Kündeling Labrang. In this interview, he discusses in detail, how the Legjö (Reform) Office was formed and how reforms such as the nationalization of the income of the dzongs and the estates, the reduction of the horse and pack animal corvée taxes, and the elimination of old loans were implemented. He also talks about the March 10th incident, his role in the revolt, and the negotiations which followed.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0067_02/H_0067_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Kungö, as we have already spoken, I wanted to ask you to tell me something about the Legjö (reform) office. You have said that your book is coming out in a few months and so there's no point in asking you to tell me all [about some things] in detail. So tell [me] about what you have written in your book.   

**A:**  Yes, as you have asked, regarding the Legjö, whatever took place, I think I have quite clearly stated in my book. The reason being that today, I seem to be about the only one (in India) who was in the Legjö, and that is why I specially wrote [about it] as much as possible. If you look in my book, you will see clearly how the Legjö was formed, why and what was achieved, what was being done then and what was to be done in the future. As you may know, the reason for the Legjö was [because] between the death of the 13th Dalai Lama and the formal acceptance of the religious and political reigns by the 14th, whether it was during the reign of the regents Reting, Langdün and Taktra, the government was kind of unsteady [Tib. ཡམ་མེ་ཡོམ་མེ] and not very efficient [Tib. ཚགས་ཚུད་པོ]. It was not efficient economically, politically, or in other [ways]. starthere Likewise, regarding the officials, since there wasn't a head to pursue matters, things were done unsteadily [Tib. ཡ་རེ་ཡོ་རེ]. From the miser side, they had a lot of difficulties. So the government became poor and so did the miser, and with this situation assessed, the Chinese came in 1950. To their joy, the Chinese arrived as if they did among a group of sick people. So in this desperate situation, all the people of Tibet requested the Dalai Lama to take over the reins. And though he was not of age, it was a situation where he had no choice. And since then, until now, he has been fervently thinking about the situation. So what was it that needed to be done immediately? On the one hand, the government had become poor, the miser too. Likewise, politically, things had deteriorated. From the outside, the Chinese came in easily and happily since we had no adequate defenses. It was an 11th-hour emergency work and that was how we forfeited. It was stated in the 17-Point Agreement that regarding reforms, the Local Government of Tibet would do them and the Central Government would not interfere in that. With this as a base, the Legjö meeting was called. Usually, in the tsondu meetings, the Kashag would remain above and would not interfere. The various representatives would meet, discuss, and then hand over the decision to the Kashag who would look it over. Since this was important, one Kalön had to come to the meetings. It was thought that with one Kalön present, then the Kashag would be better informed of what exactly transpired. So Kalön Ngabö came. Likewise, the meetings were headed by the trungtsigye and they took responsibility for the meetings, and the various representatives stated their opinions. For this reason, I have written [down] all the names of those who were the trunyichemmo and tsipön, and who the representatives were and what their work entailed. So later, if you refer to that, it will be clear if you want to know that this took place at such and such time and wonder who the people were. However, I could not get 100 percent of the names. It has been a long time since then and there were so many people. I could not remember and there isn't anybody to ask. In some cases, I wrote indicating the number of representatives. Now, if you ask [about how] the Dalai Lama instituted the Legjö Tsondu (the reform assembly meeting) and what was to be done, then it was to make the government better economically, politically and militarily. Since the miser had become poor, then that was done for them. The miser were poor because of high taxes, like the horse corvée, pack animal transportation corvée, and ula, and since all government transportation was done through these taxes, then what was to be done about that? On the other hand, the miser were in difficulty because they could not pay their accumulated loans. So the question was how to reduce that by not having taxes, forgive old loans, and how to make easier repayment plans for new ones. The interest on new loans was to be lowered. These plans did turn out well. Looking at what could have been done on the government economy side, if the dzong and the estates were to be nationalized [Tib. གཞུང་འཛིན]- up to now, according to the tradition, the system was very well organized. But in recent history, things got lawless. And in addition to the traditional [payments] from the miser, they tried to get as much as possible. And then, regarding what had to be given to the government, they only gave a fraction, and most of it was eaten up . Nobody went after [Tib. བདའ་འདེད] this. Then it was nationalized and officials were paid a salary, and like a household worker, he [they] did the work. The profit was handed over to the government and if there was a loss, then they requested [the rest] from the government. In this way, while we were there, within a 2-3 year period, one could clearly witness the benefits and see that this was very successful. Likewise, since the taxes of the miser were reduced, they were also kind of relaxed. As I see it, it was coming along very well. So we thought that once the government and the miser were well organized, then they would start talking about the aristocrats' estates. Before the estates were to be nationalized, a salary would have to be well-provided [for]. Earlier, there was no salary [for aristocratic officials) since the estates were there. So since the estates were to be taken up, a salary had to be provided. These things were planned. Once this was completed, then the religious estates were to be nationalized. At that moment, they could not do that for the time being because the government first had to be economically well off, so it was postponed for a few years. But there were plans to organize it well. However, now, if I look from our the point of view (the ones who were working), it seemed to have worked out for the better. However, this did not go well with the Chinese. What did they want? They wanted something that they themselves could do. They needed the credit and it did not go well. That under the reign of the Dalai Lama, we were instituting reforms on our own people, that was one thing. Secondly, since the aristocrats and the monastic landholders had no wish to make these reforms, the Chinese actually needed a revolt to take place because if it did not take place, then they would lose. And if it did take place, then they would profit. The reason being that they could then immediately use force [Tib. དྲག་གནོན] and take over everything. It was like that in 1959. They used [blamed] the revolt [as the reason] to confiscate and take away things. What was left was done by the Cultural Revolution. Anyway, whatever it was, like sweeping with a broom, unless they got a clean sweep of the country, there were no government or private to look at. The rich have become beggars and beggars have remained beggars. These days they have the relaxed policy and so and so. Maybe people will become rich with such policies, otherwise, there is nothing. Nowadays, the Chinese are talking about the lenient and open policy, and people might become rich. Otherwise, there is nothing [to become rich]. Regarding the Legjö, it did not go well with them and they tried their best to prevent it. In the beginning, Ngabö was the head of the Legjö and at first, he was very good and bright. Then later, as time went by, step by step he seemed to lose interest. So when one examines that and realizes that it did not go well with those who gave the command, then it becomes difficult to do anything. That's how I see it today (in hindsight). Finally, in 1959, with the revolt, all was taken up. This is about it with the Legjö Office. In my book, I discuss all of this on the nationalization of the dzong and the estates, how the misers were to pay their taxes, and the reduction of loans. It's all detailed and you can look in that. So I guess that's it. Did I do pretty good ? What else do you want to know?   

**Q:**  As I mentioned earlier, on the 11th or the 12th there was a tsondu hragdu. Later, the meeting was moved to Shöl Parkhang. By then, the revolt had sort of taken place and the people had already flocked forth, right? What the Dalai Lama had said, at that time, was to calm things down, was that it?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. But it was not like that. In 1959, on the morning of the 10th, the people gathered and shouted that the Dalai Lama could not go see the drama. Regarding this, they tried every means [possible to stop them from demonstrating] and the Kashag also told them [to disperse]. Then, finally, when the people would not listen, the Dalai Lama told them [through Kalön Surkhang] that today, they had told the Dalai Lama not to go to the Chinese show and that "It is as you have petitioned, and so the Dalai Lama is not going. Therefore, the Dalai Lama is sending the Kalöns to tell the Chinese that he cannot go. This is like a victory since the Dalai Lama has done what you wanted. You all have won. And since you have won, you should not stay here and should return home." They were trying to calm things [down] around Norbulinga. On the one hand, the people [at Norbulinga] were shouting that the Dalai Lama could not go to the Chinese show. On the other hand, some people went through all the alleys in Lhasa and they were shouting, "It is not right for the Chinese imperialists to invade Tibet, and the Chinese forces must go home. Tibet is for Tibetans and Chinese are not allowed to stay." So the uprising and commotion were on the rise. The Dalai Lama was saying that this could not go on, that we had to calm things down because we would be the losers. We were not at all prepared in terms of numbers, military equipment [Tib. དྲག་ཆས], and with so many other factors. But they were so angry that it seemed that it was not even possible to listen. At this time, the killing of Chamdo Khenjung and the stoning of Sambo's head had already taken place. People had become enraged. Finally, the Kashag said that just talking to the crowd was a waste of time and that "You all should organize, whether by geographical areas, or courtyards or whatever. But make some groups [Tib. ཚོ] and each group should appoint a leader, and these should come inside the Norbulinga and then we can talk. So they appointed their own leaders. And if you ask "What did they tell their leaders to say?" they said, "Today the Dalai Lama did not go to the show and listened to what we said. In the future, it will not do, at all, for the Dalai Lama to just go recklessly [Tib. གང་བུང་མང་བྱུང] to various Chinese [places, occasions]. Likewise, the Dalai Lama cannot go to the meetings of the Tibet Autonomous Region. The esteem [Tib. མཐོང] of the Dalai Lama is being lost in that way and he should not go, so don't go. And whatever discussions you have with the Chinese, the Chinese cannot approach the Dalai Lama directly, but they must go through the Kashag." They had a number of such grievances. Since they were making these demands, it was turning out to be quite a drawn out affair. Then they said, "Unless this is clearly settled, we are not returning home. We are the Dalai Lama's bodyguards and we will not just leave him like that." So there were so many volunteer soldiers, I should say, people voluntarily surrounding the Norbulinga. All the gates were closed and nobody was being allowed inside the Norbulinga. Outside, many thousands of people were everywhere. The representatives were inside discussing. The representatives said, "We have these grievances to make and in regard to this, there is no such separate thing as the Tibetan government and the people [Tib. མིམང]. The government and the people must be united [as one] and all the government officials must meet with us." The meeting took place in the Shabden Lhagang. What was said there? They were saying that we had to fight and make war, and that the Chinese must be expelled. They were saying all of the bad things like this. So people were talking back and forth. It was not that easy, you know. Everybody had some gun or knife in their pouch and if you did not say something quite right, and if somebody pulled the trigger and killed you, then it was too bad and there would be nothing left to say on that day. On that day, everyone was in a rage.   

**Q:**  Were you there?   

**A:**  Yes, I was. While we were meeting like this, the final decision was that the voluntary bodyguards would remain as is. That the government need not give them a salary, that they would support themselves. What they needed were arms, and those the government must give to them. That's what they were saying. Then it was said, "There's no need for all of us to meet here in such a commotion. We should make two groups. One group will discuss politically what talks we will have with the Chinese. Are we going to talk with them peacefully or are we going to fight with them? The other group will see what should be done with the thousands of people [around the Norbulinga] who said that they are going to remain as bodyguards. They have said that they do not want a salary and will look after themselves, but that will not be sufficient. From this day on, there has to be some channel of communication where orders are sent and petitions are heard." So it was said that a command center [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང] should be instituted. So two groups were made. Now, myself, Tarala and the late Shügüpa [Tib. ཤུད་ཁུད་པ] were in the command center. Most of the government officials and the representative were at the meeting for the political discussion of what to do regarding the Chinese. What we were doing was that of all the soldiers [people now armed] who were voluntarily standing around, our job [the command center] was to organize things for them in terms of food and discipline. The meeting group was meeting in the Shabden Lhagang and so was the command center. The Dalai Lama said that the Chinese were saying that the reactionary base [Tib. རྟེན་གཞི] was at the Norbulinga. I was also here and I knew that we were doing it because we were doing it for our own people's sake. But from the perspective of the Chinese, it would look very bad. So instead of meeting in Norbulinga, it would be better to move someplace outside. That's the reason it was moved to Shöl Parkhang. The idea was to make the Norbulinga section calmer so that the Chinese did not see it and the meeting could go on. Do you understand? That's how it broke into two sections. Later what was discussed at the meetings- we at the command center only heard what was said when we were all together. What was said later, I don't know- neither did we go. So if you want to know about this, then those who were there, there is an elderly Kungö called Tempala [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ལགས].   

**Q:**  Laja Tempala?   

**A:**  Yes, did you meet him?   

**Q:**  Yes, previously, regarding the Laja.   

**A:**  Not this time?   

**Q:**  No.   

**A:**  Tempala was in the tsondu. You are saying something that your father told you, this and that. I have this feeling that Tempala has certain details regarding this meeting. Tempala stays at the palace and when you get the time, you should see him. You should meet him soon because he is old. So if you need in detail about what your grandfather said, what Menkyilinga [Tib. སྨོན་སྐྱིད་གླིང] said, .   

**Q:**  What I heard was that you, Kungö, were also at the meeting.   

**A:**  We were at the command center. Before the command center was formed, we were also at the meeting and we would have said something, and your grandfather must have said something. But mainly, the discussion as to whether we should make war or not, whether we should discuss with them peacefully or surrender—what would happen if we surrendered and what would happen if we did not? What was to be done regarding the Dalai Lama's entourage ? Those [things] were all discussed at their meeting. That's how it was.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that at the meeting, toward the end, they had agreed to fight the Chinese and one [the Tibetan government] needed war funds. It is said that the Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང] and Kündeling labrangs said that they were going to provide support.   

**A:**  Yes, but it was not regarding fighting the war. Just now, we had so many thousands of people under the command center. So we were seeing what supplies were needed, like flour, tsamba, tea, butter. The government didn't have anything to provide. The government had money, but the various departments were in charge of this and anybody couldn't just go with the keys and take it out, right? What we needed were food supplies and arms and ammunition. The arms had to be taken out by the government from the ammunition dump [Tib. གོ་མཛོད་ཁང]. So when we required food supplies, they were saying to borrow from Kündeling. What we needed at the office, it was said to get it from Kündeling and give Kündeling the receipts for the items, like 100 loads of tsamba, 10 loads of flour, tea, butter, and so on. So receipts were given from here and collected for Kündeling. Kündeling was closest to the Norbulinga. So whatever they wanted was given. I have also mentioned [this] in my book. Now, Kündeling was providing supplies. I was the head, but at the labrang, there were others who were taking responsibility at the labrang. We had some excellent people, well-educated, older and efficient. We discussed with the dechang, who were like the chandzö of the gerpa, and I gave a lecture of sorts. I said, "This time, something like this has happened. In Tibet, there has been no worst time like today. Most importantly, today, the people voluntarily came to protect the Dalai Lama, and when they need supplies like grain and money, they were asking to borrow from Kündeling and for them to lend them something like 100 loads of tsamba or 10 loads of flour, and also tea and butter. And [if] the government gives a receipt and we keep it thinking that later we will collect from the Tibetan government—Maybe we should think well. As I look at it, most probably, our government, like a sick person, will not recover. It will die. If this government should die, then Kündeling is also dead. If somehow the government rises up, then we too will rise [Tib. ཤི་ན, མཉམ་ཤི་རེད། ལངས་ན, མཉམ་ལང་རེད]. Therefore, there really isn't much reason to think about ourselves. Whatever the government needs, the necessary items, for example, they don't need satin and brocades to fight a war, right? But, the necessary items, obviously food items. Similarly, money and others, I think that it would be a good idea to give them to the government." They decided to do that and we all went to the command center and said, "Up until now, whatever was demanded, we have given. We also have all of these receipts. Likewise, every day, receipts are sent. Now, we don't [like] this at all. We have offered everything, and so whatever you need, just take it. This house, with all of its quarters, belongs to you. Here is the key." So we handed [over] everything. That's what happened. Since I was in this office [command center], we could overcome a difficulty for us. Since we [Kündeling] ran the house, at first, and went ahead with this. Then there may have been others wealthier than Kündeling or equal to us. Though Kündeling was kind of more famous, they might have followed suit. For this reason, we said all of these things clearly.   

**Q:**  Did others say that they were going to offer [things] too?   

**A:**  There wasn't really time to say or do anything [laughter—even all of them acting voluntarily. In a few days, we also, day and night—things happened. Even among us we had organized groups. A "civil" and a "military [Tib. ཤི་དྲག་གཉིས]" [group], one concerning salary, food supplies and another, arms. During those times, I swear, probably for 7-8 days and nights, sleep was absolutely disturbed. There was no time to sleep and when one tried to sleep, one could not. Then, after the Dalai Lama crossed Ramagang and he was ahead and we were following behind, [when] my servants were holding my horse on both sides, the moment I got on the horse, it was like getting into bed. I snored right away [laughter]. The work was done, right? The difficulties we went through at that time were just astonishing. Anyway, the Dalai Lama was able to get here, right? Even though it was not in a grand style. That's what I did. Anything else in your notes?   

**Q:**  Then on the 5th, Nechung said that the Dalai Lama should leave in three days' time. Right after that, the Kashag gave full responsibility to Drönyerchemmo Phala and [question not finished]...   

**A:**  This thing about giving full responsibility to Drönyerchemmo Phala—Yesterday we talked about it, about making connections with the Chushigandru and Jenkhentsisum. This power was given by the Kashag to Drönyerchemmo, right? It started from there and it was not a question of power being given on the particular day of the 5th. From then on, we were making preparations as to what to do if in case the Dalai Lama should leave and how to protect him if he should stay. So it was not a case where the moment the deity said to leave, the responsibility was given. It was something done many months ahead [of time].   

**Q:**  When was this authority given? I may have gotten the times mixed up.   

**A:**  I don't know, it was earlier, many months ahead, this thing about having connections with the Chushigandru. There were no relations with the Kashag, they could not.   

**Q:**  However, the Kashag knew about this, right?   

**A:**  They should have been informed. They should have known the internal situation. They should have been informed about what was done and what was not done. Anyway, Kungö Chemmo was a kind of a person who, having taken responsibility, could get things done and not one who would say, "Oh, I first have to ask the Kashag," or "I have to ask the Dalai Lama." He was a very decisive person.   

**Q:**  However, the work that was done in '57-58, it is said by many that what he did, the Kashag did not know. Anyway, it seems to me that internally they had to know.   

**A:**  Of course. No one can say that I was given power and take full responsibility. Internally, what has to be decided by oneself, one did it. Matters that had to be referred to the Kashag were referred. Matters that did not concern the Kashag but only the Dalai Lama, then they were referred to him. It was done well in place.   

**Q:**  When I asked many, they said that the Kashag did not know and that they did it with a secret organization.   

**A:**  No, no. You had to do things internally, outwardly and secretly [Tib. ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གསུམ]. You had to believe 100 percent that they knew. It is impossible that the Kashag had no power and that, on the side, somebody else was doing it.   

**Q:**  Yes, I guess it has to do with the situation where the Kashag had to have relations with the Chinese and so they had to say that they had no connections.   

**A:**  Yes. This they needed to say, and they were saying it all the time. And while they were saying that they had no relations, the Chinese were insisting that they did. That problem was always there.   

**Q:**  Yes. Let me ask you a little bit about your relationship with Drönyerchemmo Phala. When did it begin?   

**A:**  Oh, it goes back a long ways to when we were kids. We were at the same school. He was the elder and I, younger.   

**Q:**  Which school was that?   

**A:**  Kyire [Tib. སྐྱིད་རས] School, the same as your father [where your father went]. Kungö Chemmo and the present Phala Phogpön [Tib. ཕོགས་དཔོན] were also there. But Kungö Chemmo was friendly with me and not his brother. Even though they came from the same household, we always shared things to eat. Then he became a tsidrung, and later, I did too. In this way, until his death, we did this together. When I was dismissed during the Reting-Taktra affair, Kungö Chemmo was very concerned and he also bore the difficulties, and it was not easy for him because of him being accused of having relations with me. Then later, when things, as clouds, cleared up, it was . So our relationship goes back to our childhood and it was not a situation where work circumstances had us doing things together.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama came to India during the Buddha Jayanti, you did not come along, right?   

**A:**  Correct.   

**Q:**  Anyway, during this time, one faction was saying that the Dalai Lama should stay and another was saying that he should return. At that time, the Panchen Lama was there, right? And Ngabö was also there. They met and talked, and what happened? What did you hear about it?   

**A:**  Regarding this, I didn't take much notice and since I was not there, I can't give you an interpretation. Because if I did, it would be just a guess [answer not finished]...   

**Q:**  I know, but what did you hear about it?   

**A:**  In terms of hearing, all kinds of things, like [that the Dalai Lama] had to go or had to stay. That Gyalola, Shakabpa and Phala Drönyerchemmo and others said that the Dalai Lama should remain. That Ngabö and others said that he should go back. This type of talk. One you generally hear about, I did hear. However, after returning, the situation was discussed at the tsondu, and what was said was something that was said to all . If I gave an interpretation, I could lie, and guess and say more or less of the situation.   

**Q:**  No, there were such talks like that, right? So I'm just asking you about that. For example, there was Surkhang Sawangchemmo. Was he among those who wanted the Dalai Lama to stay?   

**A:**  Who? Yabshi Gyalola?   

**Q:**  No, no, Surkhang. He was there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was. Was he there? Surkhang was not there, wasn't the other one there? Ragashag? Wasn't Surkhang in Lhasa at that time? I think so.   

**Q:**  In Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. [Note: Surkhangwas in India with the Dalai Lama]  

**Q:**  I thought he was in India.   

**A:**  No, no. I doubt it. It was Ragashag.   

**Q:**  Was Ragashag among those who said that the Dalai Lama should stay or return?   

**A:**  I don't know. He probably stood cautiously [Tib. བརྟན་པོ] , I don't know.   

**Q:**  What about the two tutors, what were their opinions?   

**A:**  I doubt if there was anything. If the Dalai Lama returned, they would, and if he stayed, they would stay.   

**Q:**  Yes, but for people who are writing books, it is important to describe who said to stay and who said to go.   

**A:**  Unless the Dalai Lama said something —my interpretation will not be helpful for you to allow you to think along certain lines. I only write what I know and what I did, and I'm not interested in composing something.   

