# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0108.01  
##  : with Fan Zhizhong  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**© 2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Chengdu, China   
**Date of Interview:** November 18, 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Fan Zhizhong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 86  
**Date of Birth:** 1909  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Fan Zhizhong was an 18th Army Corps officer who became First Party Secretary in Ganzi in 1955. In this interview, he talks mostly about the implementation of democratic reforms in 1956 in the Tibetan areas of Sichuan Province (Kham).   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0108_01/H_0108_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Now it is at 8:00. I will interview Fan Zhizhong.   

**A:**  We fought for 7 years. Where should I start?   

**Q:**  You can start by telling some important events that happened then. For example, you can start by telling us the opinion of people in that period.   

**A:**  [skipped section where subject talked about general Party theory] The democratic reforms and the suppressing of the revolt were connected with each other; they were the same matter. On one side, were the people who supported the democratic reforms, and on the other side were the ones who revolted against the democratic reforms. They [the rebels] also tried to seek national independence. In 1955 [sic. 1956], there was a big situation in Chinese history as the democratic reforms in the Ganzi area were completed. Even though they [Tibetans] lost the Chamdo war and agreed to peaceful liberation, they didn't give up the idea of independence and setting up a separate state. They wanted a Greater Tibet made up of all Tibetans areas in an independent country. They wanted to separate the nationalities. Mao, in an article, "The New Democratic Theory," put forth a new idea concerning the people. There are two responsibilities for carrying our revolution in China. One is to destroy feudalism, and the other is to destroy imperialism. There are two steps to this: 1. democratic revolution. 2. Socialist revolution. The democratic revolution was the baseline of the socialist revolution; the socialist revolution was the natural extension of the democratic revolution. Based on this, all of the democratic reforms were done in China proper before 1955. However, the minority areas were liberated late and the democratic revolution was not completed there. Tibet was still a serfdom society. Although the Tibetan region was peacefully liberated, the task of democratic reforms had not been carried out yet. Also, in 1955, China proper had accomplished the task of democratic reform and was moving toward socialist revolution or socialist construction. In 1955, the first meeting of National People's Congress (NPC) was held. In this meeting, the Central Committee decided to carry out democratic reforms in minority areas. Two roads to Lhasa were finished in 1954. However, the Dalai's government wanted to starve the PLA like they starved Zhao Erfeng [1845-1911] and they want to establish an independent country. Not only did they want Tibet, they wanted to swallow Qinghai and Gansu. In 1955, at the time of the National People's Congress, we examined the completion of the democratic reforms in China and the not completed ones in minority areas [like Kham] and gave the opinion that the democratic reforms should be done in minority areas. The reason for this was: 1. the constitution. In the constitution, it said democratic reforms in the minority areas is a road for improvement and advancement. Not only that, but it is beneficial to the nationalities. However, many people opposed doing this in the minority areas in Kham and Tibet. Mao gave a speech to the high authorities of Tibet. Tibet was against the democratic reforms and said they were aimed at destroying religion. But Mao said that democratic reforms and religion were two separate things. Democratic reforms deal with the structure of politics and are aimed at reforming them. Religion is concerned with people's beliefs." At this time, the Chairman of the National People's Congress was Liu Shaoqi. He gave a speech on the last day of the meeting in which he said, In minority areas, at the proper time, we have to do democratic reforms. The method for doing democratic reforms in minority areas is to do them in a moderate way. At that moment, according to the situation present at that time, we decided that we should do the reform without taking away the possessions of the landlords by force and without beating the landlords as had been done in other areas of China. The decision to start the reforms was made by the Central Committee. That is to say, our Ganzi Prefecture did not have the power to start it without the Central Committee's instructions. The Central Committee made the general decision and according to it we made detailed plans to implement the Central Committee's instructions. Miao Fengshu was in charge of this. The Party Committee of Xikang Province and the Party Committee of Sichuan Province together drafted a specific opinion on how to start the reforms. This was done in Ya'an in May or June in 1955. At this meeting, Tian Bao [Tib. སངགྱེ་ཡེཤེ] was present and spoke against starting the democratic reform in Xikang Province. Yet in fact, at that moment, we drafted the plan according to several documents. First, we drafted it according to our Constitution; second, we did it according to Law of Land-reform; third, we were following Mao's comments on the democratic reforms. Mao said, "Who is our enemy and who is our friend, this we have to understand clearly." We definitely must have good relations with our friends and destroy our enemies.   

