# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0108.03  
##  : with Fan Zhizhong  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**© 2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Chengdu, China   
**Date of Interview:** November 18, 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audio taped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Fan Zhizhong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 86  
**Date of Birth:** 1909  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Fan Zhizhong was an 18th Army Corps officer who became First Party Secretary in Ganzi in 1955. In this interview, he continues to talk about the democratic reforms of 1956 in the Tibetan areas (Ganzi/Kham) of Sichuan Province.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0108_03/H_0108_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  From then on my position was changed, with Tian Bao [taking my position]. Really Tian Bao should have stayed there and worked, but he never stayed there. He was energetic in doing sympathy offering group visits, and he went all over and had meetings with the elite. The guns we collected he personally gave back to the elite. This is in a movie called, "Coming to meet one's relatives over a long distance." He said we were wrong and went around apologizing and giving education. And he didn't let them return. There was a danger to their lives as the mangtso (masses) might rise up and kill them. He kept them [the elite] in Dartsedo. And he kept their possession well and didn't destroy them. He went so far in this but the elite were still not satisfied and gave more criticism. And so in the nomad areas, many nomads in Golok and Seta and Dzagjuka and their leaders rebelled and killed many soldiers and officials and fled to Tibet. So they had to employ my policy. There were two positions at this time. One was that for the farming areas that had rebelled already, there the democratic reforms were done. In the north, in the nomad areas and in monasteries, the democratic reforms were yet to start, so we had to take two steps [to attain the reforms]. At the end of 1958 and the start of 1959, the reforms had been started in all 22 counties and had been finished in some. We were finishing this up. But in 1959, after the revolt arose in Tibet, our Deputy Chairman Ren Mindao and many others went to Tibet to quell the rebellion. I was ordered back to Chengdu, and after that, I didn't have any work. No one said I was wrong or right. So therefore during the Cultural Revolution, Ulanfu put a big hat on me saying I didn't follow party policy so the rebellion started. And up to now no document has come out saying anything about whether the democratic reforms and the rebellion were correct or not.   

