# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0108.02  
##  : with Fan Zhizhong  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

** 2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Chengdu, China   
**Date of Interview:** November 18, 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** anonymous  
**Name:** Fan Zhizhong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 86  
**Date of Birth:** 1909  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Fan Zhizhong was an 18th Army Corps officer who became First Party Secretary in Ganzi in 1955. In this interview, he talks mostly about the implementation of democratic reforms in the Tibetan areas of Sichuan Province in 1956 and about internal disagreements on the Chinese side about how they were implemented.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0108_02/H_0108_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Mao gave instructions on how to divide different classes in rural areas. It was based on the amount of land and wealth owned by the people and on whether the people worked or not. Those who had lots of land and did not work the land themselves were regarded as being in the landlord class. And those without land as the working class. So we should make the poor rise as they were the ones who were truly revolutionary. We also considered and followed comrade Liu Shaoqi's instructions that the reform should be done in a moderate way. Finally, we decided that the main approach we would use to start the reforms would be to mobilize the masses. However, also, in the meantime, we should negotiate with the upper-class people as well. If the masses could not rise to be active, the upper-class people certainly would not move. Only the masses had the power to push the upper-class people to turn to support the reforms. Thus, on the one hand, mobilizing the masses was the most important approach we should take. Yet on the other hand, since Ganzi [previously Xikang] is an ethnic autonomous prefecture, we should also let the regime of the ethnic autonomous prefecture exert its own effort. Under this situation, we should do the reforms by means of representatives' meetings. We should negotiate with the upper-class people to win their support. But we shouldn't lay all our hopes on the upper-class people. Rather, we should mainly depend on the masses, and start the reforms according to the laws of land-reform and the constitution. So in the end, we drafted a document according to the laws and the constitution, as well as by negotiating with the people. After drafting it, we sent this document to the Central Committee for approval. So the Central Committee convened a meeting in Beijing to discuss the issue of the democratic reforms. At this meeting Deng Xiaoping was supposed to come, but due to an internal party struggle against rightists in the party (namely Deng Zihui), he and Li Weihan couldn't come [as they were struggling against these rightists]. The main people attending this meeting included Ulanfu, Liu Geping [head of Nationality Commission and Deputy Head of the United Front under Li Weihan], Wang Feng, Li Jingquan. This meeting was held in October 1955 in Beijing. Tian Bao didn't attend this meting, but I conveyed comrade Tian Bao's opinions to the people who were attending the meeting. At this meeting our plan was discussed, but the Nationalities Affairs Commission didn't agree with us. They thought we should not start the democratic reforms. I wanted to hear their specific suggestions, but they had nothing to say. They just said we should do more research on the situation. In the meeting, since comrade Deng Xiaoping was absent, comrade Song Renqiong conducted the meeting. In the end, we did not reach an agreement on the issue at the meeting. Before we left, comrade Liu Geping suggested that we should stay in Beijing while they did research on this. Actually Liu didn't agree with us on this issue. When Li Jingquan heard this, he didn't agree with Liu so in the end we returned together without considering Liu's suggestion; we didn't stay in Beijing. From Xikang Province, three party secretaries of the Party Committees of three areas, namely, Fan Zhizhong, Ren Mingdao, and Wang Wenjun, attended the meeting. From Sichuan Province Li Jingquan, and Liao Zhigao attended it. Liu Geping didn't pay attention to Li Jingquan's ideas and said we should do more research, so Li and us left Beijing and returned. Another problem we faced then was that if we started the reforms, rebellions might happen. So we said we should make some preparations in case of this beforehand. So on our way back, on the train, I talked with Li Jingquan and told him that we should start the reform, but at the same time we also should make plans for quelling a possible rebellion. We had to make the preparations for war. Our past experiences proves that doing reforms is always accompanied with doing battles. Wherever the democratic reforms were done, there was a need to fight. For example, in both Gansu Province and Xinjiang Province, we did battles. And in Inner Mongolia, battles also happened when the democratic reforms were carried out. So we can say that in minority areas, as long as you want to do reforms, you have to start battles as well. Therefore, we had to make some preparation in that period. If we had to do battles, we would face the situations as follows. In Ganzi there is an area of 160,000 sq. km. but only about 500,000 people. There was only one road, and because it is high altitude, the weather is not good. There are only 4-5 months in a year when we could fight battles. Therefore, if there was a rebellion in a large area like this, we would have to confront great difficulties with food supplies and in traffic issues. With regard to this problem, once in 1954 I discussed it with the people of Southwest Military District, but in the end we did not reach an agreement. At this time the preparations for merging Xikang Province and Sichuan Province were underway. This was done at the meeting of the representatives of the CCP. At this meeting they said we had to reduce the number of staff, soldiers, and expenses. I gave my opinion at the meeting. I said that if we reduced the number of staff, soldiers and expenses before finishing the democratic reforms, we would have tremendous trouble later on. In Ganzi, previously within the Military Affairs Committee, there were 4 big departments: the Headquarters, the Political Department, the Cadres Department, and the Logistics Department. After reducing of number of people and expenses, these became 4 small offices. As for the number of troops, before the reductions, we had one big regiment, or about 2,800 soldiers, but afterwards, we had only 1,500 soldiers. And also, at first we had one Tibetan troop unit, yet after the reductions, it was disbanded. So at the meeting I went to meet the commander Li Da and I told him that we should not disband the Tibetan unit. This troop was established by Deng Xiaoping when he was the Political Commissar and one important task of this Tibetan troops was to train Tibetan cadres. I told him I needed more troops and guns. I went to meet him many times to ask him not to do the reductions. Li Da told me to give him written comments on this and he would consider it later in Chengdu. Later on, he decreased the number of the soldiers of the Tibetan troop unit just by half, and so in the end there were 500 left. As a result, before we started the democratic reforms we had only about 1,500 or so soldiers that were spread out over a large area. Some were stationed at Dafu, and some were stationed on the south road. So my biggest worry was about the soldiers and the military situation. In 1952, there was a rebellion in Jangan as soon as we started the reforms there. Yet my views weren't approved. Once I was a soldier and knew that it was critical to do some preparations since sometimes one had to fight due to other's actions. So during that period, each of the 21 counties had only a handful of troops and officials, from 30 to 50 people or so for each. When I and Li Jingquan went to attend the meeting in Beijing, I told my opinions to Li Jingquan on the train. I told him that I needed troops because we had to do preparation for possible battles [that would occur]. He said, "Let's see what will happen next." I said that the possible rebellion will not happen only in Ganzi, but it will also happen in Tibet since the two areas are adjacent to each other. Yet Li still did not give me a positive response. So in the end, we two did not reach an agreement. In the end Li Jingquan said that these issues would be discussed at the meeting of Sichuan People's Congress which was to be held in December of 1955. After returning from the meeting in Beijing, we stayed in a hotel in Chengdu. Li Jingquan came and talked with some high-ranking representatives. He said that the reforms should be done peacefully. This wholly contradicted what we had decided in our previous plan. Now Li's opinion was to ignore the masses all together and to base all the hopes on the upper-class people. He had built large houses in an enclosure in Sangdung in Chengdu for the upper-class people. However, during the meeting, the upper-class people did not agree and rejected the reforms. On December 26th, while the meeting was held, the Yi people in Liangshan started to rebel. We heard that news on that day. Then all the upper-class people got nervous and sent their servants back to Kham with the news. Then finally, after much persuasion, we got them to agree to sign for doing democratic reforms. The Sichuan Party Committee thought they could do the reforms based on the upper-class people, and the essence of their action was reformism. The National Nationalities Committee didn't want to do the democratic reforms at all. They were against class struggle and against expropriation of land and wealth. If this were the case, the reforms could not be started. They wanted only verbal democratic reforms, rather than the real ones. So even though they said they wanted class struggle and dividing into classes and taking away the wealth, these all were just lies. All these were recorded so if you want to find the original document you can see it. In 1969, during the period of the Cultural Revolution, at a meeting about the work of border defenses, Ulanfu, who was the vice chairman of China then, made a speech. At the meeting, he scolded us, saying that we simply copied the methods of doing democratic reforms from inland provinces, so the rebellion took place in the Tibetan areas. After his speech, in some areas, an evil tendency to denounce our past works of democratic reforms appeared. And then in April or May of 1956 (in the audio he said it was in 1966) Liu Geping led a Work Group went to Sichuan Province to investigate the rebellion. As soon as he arrived, he called the upper-class people together to attend a meeting and at the meeting he said that Fan Zhizhong's action was a mistake, and he said our work of reforms was a mistake, and he said that was the case because he thought we did not take the approach of peaceful reforms. He held this kind of meeting in many areas, in which he criticized and scolded us and mobilized the upper-class people to criticize and scold us as well, and to express the idea that the work of democratic reforms and quelling the rebellion should be stopped. In addition, in Ganzi, he even did a secret investigation to collect materials against us and he made a 14-point statement about our actions. At that moment, I was very busy. I had arrived in Kham in 1950. And after Miao Fengshu left [for Chengdu], I served as the Party Secretary of the Party Committee of Ganzi, as well as the commander of the Sub-Military District and the Political Commissar of Sub-military District. So when the Work Team came I was busy dealing with matters of the reforms and the quelling the rebellion. At this time I was also involved in a dispute with Li Jingquan. When the rebellion started, Li Jingqaun called me and criticized me, and he also sent Liao Zhigao to Kham to investigate. He said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> should withdraw, because he thought the PLA could re-enter these areas in the future. I totally disagreed with him. I had led troops to liberate these areas, but now he asked me to withdraw. If so, all my past efforts would have failed. If I called the troops back, what could we do in Tibet? These areas are key areas through which we could enter Tibet. If the traffic lines to Tibet were cut off and then some problems happened in Tibet, who could take the responsibility? So I said I should not withdraw the troops. I also called commander Li Wenqing and talked with him, and both he and I thought the troops should not withdraw because actually the troops had no where to withdraw to. I completely opposed Li Jingquan's order to withdraw. Instead, I made a request to increase our troop size. Among the 21 counties (in Ganzi), the rebellions took place in 18 counties. And in each county we had only 30 to 50 people, so if we asked them to withdraw and if when they were on the road, they could be attacked and killed by the rebels. So I said I would not withdraw the troops, and instead we should completely quell the rebellion. Mao once said in the past that war is the continuation of political action. So quelling the rebellion was just the continuation of the democratic reforms. We should annihilate the counterrevolutionaries by means of the revolutionaries. We should quell the rebellion resolutely. Then the Headquarters of the General Staff supported our opinion. So two regiments were dispatched from Tibet, namely the 154th Regiment and the 153rd Regiment. And in Yunnan Province, since the two areas Xiangcheng and Daocheng are too remote to reach, troops were dispatched from Yunnan to Xiangcheng and Daocheng directly. As for Batang, since the traffic situation there was tough, our troops had difficulties to reach there as well. So the Headquarters of the General Staff dispatched some planes from Xingping, Shanxi Provinces, to go to Batang where these planes dropped some bombs in the areas around Anming Monastery. This scared the rebels there and then they fled ending the crisis in Batang. In Litang, about 3,000 rebels had assembled as of April 8th. So we dispatched the 5th regiment from Chengdu to Litang, where, along with our troops stationed in Litang previously, the PLA troops together surrounded the rebels. Then, a Tibetan called Artren fled from there with 900 fighters. And Muya Tusi was killed. After annihilating the Litang rebels, the PLA went north to the nomad areas and quelled the rebellions one by one and did the democratic reform there. In total, there were 13.5 regiments involved in quelling the rebellion. So we struggled against Li Jingquan and Liu Geping's opinions. Liu Geping made 14 points against me, and I said I would make my own report to the Sichuan government. We didn't agree with each other. So Liu Geping couldn't stay in Sichuan. Liu did lots of very bad things. As for the comrades in Ganzi, it was Li Chuanfeng who accompanied him; and as for the cadres in Ganzi province, it was Miao Fengshu who accompanied him. One night, Liu Geping called the officials together for a meeting and specially asked Li Chuanfeng to be a representative of the Ganzi Party Committee to announce that we would accept his 14-point statement. Yet certainly we opposed this. At last Liu couldn't stay any longer and he had to leave. I told him to stay one more night in Kangding, but he insisted in leaving, and then he stayed instead at Luding. He said he would go abroad so he couldn't continue to stay. At that moment I trusted his words, yet afterwards I knew that actually he went directly to the Central Committee to complain and criticize us rather than go abroad. And then in June or in July of 1956, in the meeting of the National People's Congress, he tried to mobilize the attendees to criticize our actions in Ganzi. However, Premier Zhou Enlai didn't agree with him. He said this issue shouldn't be discussed at a meeting of the National People's Congress. Rather, Zhou said that after the meeting of the NPC ended, a special meeting should be held to discuss the issues in Ganzi. This kind of meeting was very rare in China. This meeting was about the work of ethnic affairs, and it lasted for 40 days. Then they gave a report to the Politburo, and then Chairman Mao made his decisions on the issue. Some people said our way of implementing democratic reforms was a mistake and the reason for the rebellion was that the cadres didn't implement the policies correctly. They said we didn't follow Liu Geping's policy. However, in the meeting I replied to them that in our work of doing the reforms and quelling the rebellion, we were basing our actions on Mao's instructions and on our Constitution and on the laws of land-reform, so we just implemented the Central Committee's guidelines and so all our actions were right. Mao came to the meeting and said: the reason why the rebellion happened was that the serf-owners did not want to give up their power of exploiting the serfs, so putting down the rebellion was a liberating war and a revolutionary war. So Mao's speech meant that our actions in Kham were all correct, and that their charge that our cadres failed to implement the policy, could not be justified. Mao also said, the essence of the military war lies in class struggle. However, Mao also pointed out that we did 5 things wrong. 1. We didn't make sufficient predictions about the situation. 2. We did not make sufficient preparations. 3. We did not do enough work of negotiations. 4. We did not take enough time to wait. 5. We didn't make enough concessions. Yet, actually, in my opinion, I do not think Mao's words are right, so I can not accept Mao's 5 points. As for the first point that we did not make sufficient predictions for the situation, I do not think this was the case because we can discuss who failed to make sufficient predictions. Was it the Central Committee or the Party Committee of Sichuan Province or us, the Ganzi government? In fact, this first point attributed the mistake to us, which I can not accept. Mao asked us to grab and take away the flag of nationality and the flag of religion which were previously held by the rebels. After this, Mao said the class struggle should not be like a nationality struggle. Class struggle is wholly different from nationality struggles; these are two completely different things. Mao also mentioned the case of Zhuge Liang, who once caught a rebel leader 7 times yet also released him 7 times, and finally the rebel leader gave up and surrendered to Zhuge Liang. Mao said, compared to Zhuge Liang's case, we should catch the rebels for 100 times and then let them go for 100 times, which could make the rebels surrender to us completely as well. Mao also said, all our military actions should be stopped, and that as long as they did not attack us, we would never attack them. With regard to dividing the different classes among the people of Tibetan society, Mao said we should lower the percent from 7% to 3%, or 5% at most. But Mao agreed with us that the weapons of the people should be handed over. Mao gave an example: an educated person depends on books and a tiger depends on legs, which meant that he agreed with our action of taking away the weapons of the serf-owners. Since the rebels had 40,000 guns and the traffic situation there was rather tough, if we wanted to start the reforms, we had to take away their weapons. And then Mao started to discuss the issue of Tibetan Buddhism's monasteries. Mao asked Tian Bao to say his opinion on this, and Tian Bao immediately said he thought that the monasteries should be kept intact away from any reforms both at this moment and in the future. Mao replied that the monasteries could be free of reforms temporarily, but in the future they also should be reformed. The idea that the monasteries could be free of reform temporarily actually came from the Nationalities Committee. Tian Bao knew nothing in fact. He was like a puppet who was actually manipulated by others. I was in Chengdu with Tian Bao and Li Jingquan and I asked him for his opinion about the monasteries. At that moment Tian Bao gave me a wholly different answer that contrasted with his earlier opinion. He said that we should do like we did at Kumbum Monastery. I knew the example of the work at Kumbum because Liu Geping once had told me. At Kumbum in the past the money lending for the monastery was done by the upper-class people. But they stole some of it, so the reform was to have the government officials collect the loans and in this way the monastery would make more income and there would be less burden for the masses. This is a lie. Actually this is a fake reform. The true goal of this kind of reform that was implemented in Kumbum was to protect the monasteries from being reformed. Yet the monasteries must be reformed. In Ganzi, there were only about 500,000 people but there were more than 500 monasteries as well as about 80,000 monks. The monasteries owned lots of lands, so if the monasteries were left intact, the democratic reforms certainly would fail. At this time Mao called Li Jingchuan asking him to tell me that: 1. We must reform the masses completely; 2. We must also unite the upper-class people; and also, the ethnic minorities cadres were not keeping pace with the progress. Here Mao was actually referring to Tian Bao. Mao also asked us to follow the ideas of the cadres of ethnic minorities, which I could not accept. Previously, when I was in Ya'an, I had to follow the ideas of Gaogang, which I did not think was reasonable. Firstly there are the nation's laws, secondly there is our Party's discipline, so I should not follow any ideas of the ethnic minority cadres. Yet we should adhere to the standard of right and wrong. Since Tian Bao did not support the reforms, I could not follow him. The reforms were decided according to the requirements of the constitution, so if I followed all the ideas of Tian Bao, certainly what I would have done would contradict the constitution. The constitution was made by the CCP Party Central Committee. And also according to one of our Party's disciplines, namely, "democratic centralism," the minority should change their ideas to follow the majority. So if I followed any idea of the ethnic minority cadres, how could I obey the Party's discipline at the same time? Tian Bao was very happy at that time. He said, "Is what I said right or wrong? Chairman Mao also agrees with me. I believe Chairman Mao is wise because he accepts my opinion." Tian Bao was so full of hubris.   

**Q:**  Mr. Fan, as far as I know, in 1957, there was a meeting held by the Secretariat of the Central Committee. In this meeting, this issue was put forward and was discussed once again.   

**A:**  Yes. Later on I will talk about it. After Mao made these remarks at the meeting, the Central Committee sent a Work Team which was headed by Wang Weizhou. The vice directors of the team were Liu Geping, Wang Fu, and Tian Bao. They came here in the name of greeting the upper-class people at Kangding. However, even though our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> soldiers and CCP workers had come here and had worked under a very tough situation for 5 to 6 years, they never came to greet us. And also, when we quelled the rebellion, even though lots of PLA soldiers died here, still no one came to greet the PLA soldiers. And also, even though the masses suffered a lot in old days, they never came here to greet the masses. And also, our cadres had worked here for many years, yet they never came to greet the cadres. These people came here just to greet the upper-class people. After they came here, they organized lots of upper-class people into groups, and appointed them as the vice director of the group. Each of the upper-class people was given a piece of woolen cloth as a gift from the Work Group. We didn't know what their aim was when they came here at first. When they came here, a welcoming meeting was held. At that moment I did not know their aim. At this meeting Wang Weizhou made a speech. There were many ordinary people and upper-class people at this meeting. The first thing he said was that: "The Party Committee of the province appoints Tian Bao as the 1st Party Secretary of Ganzi. Do you agree or not? If you agree, you can clap, please." And then the upper-class people started to clap. So at this meeting I was given a demotion. I was demoted to 2nd party secretary. According to them, the reason for my demotion was that I had made a mistake. He also said that if in the future the people found me to violate the policies once again, they could go directly to meet Tian Bao and tell him about it. He meant that because I did not implement the policies in a right way, I was given a demotion. So, Tian Bao would replace me as the 1st Party Secretary to be in charge of all the matters in Ganzi. This was the first thing he said. The second thing he said was that he thought our reforms were a mistake, since the views and opinions of the upper-class people were not respected and accepted by us. Thus, we should go to meet the upper-class people to apologize to them.   

