# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** July 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 68  
**Date of Birth:** 25  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya discusses his job in the Payroll Office, his role as part of Lhalu's staff in charge of the armory, and his appointment to being in charge of grain. He also discusses his role in recruiting the militia in Powo and negotiations with Tibetan leaders there. He also describes a near confrontation in Nangchen between the Powo militia and the Chinese, and a battle in Denkhog involving the Khadang (Trapchi) Regiment. Finally, he discusses military communications betweem Ngabo and the Kashag in Lhasa, and the decision to flee from Chamdo to Lhasa, which was unsuccessful as the Chinese had blocked the road to Lhasa so capturd them and sent him back to Chamdo.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_02/H_0039_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Whether you want to start from '49 or '50, where were you during this time?   

**A:**  I was in Kham. In 1947, Doji Yuthok's time was up and Lhalu was the new doji. I went as a staff or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་བྱ] A lower official, a staff official.">leja</a>, of Lhalu, and so in 1947, I was in Kham. I was in charge of ammunition (Dzendel Dodam (pa) [Tib. རྫས་མདེལ་དོ་དམ (པ)]). When I reached that place, there was a separate Gomdzö Dodam or armormy supervisor. So I handed it over to him, and my colleague, Tsidrung Tsangpala [Tib. གཙང་པ་ལགས], and I, were appointed to be grain interest (Drukye [Tib. འབྲུ་སྐྱེད]) urpervisors (Tib. Do dam pa].   

**Q:**  In '49, what were the Chinese saying? They were probably saying that they were going to liberate Tibet, and so everyone must have been quite attentive? So [during] '49 and '50, you were in Kham, so what were you hearing? Was it that the Chinese were coming up or?   

**A:**  In '49, the Communists defeated the Guomindang and they were in charge, right? As a follow-up, they said that Tibet was also a part of China and so they were definitely going to liberate Tibet. And the power of the foreign imperialists that were in Tibet—they were also going to expel them. And they were also going to liberate the Tibetan people from oppression. They were broadcasting that all over. So since they had won over China, they also took over the administration from the Guomindang, right? The Communists also had their ideology and policy, right? They spread propaganda about these [things] for mobilizing the people, and so we were hearing [about] these things. When this was taking place, from Lhasa, it seemed that the government was also replying through Sir Fox [the radio operator hired by the Tibetan government] . Now in the Dome area, since the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Eastern Tibet who was based in Chamdo. It is an abbreviation of dome jigyab [tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].">doji</a> was an actual kalön, most of the matters was decided by the doji. And so there was nothing to do except that in addition to the regular soldiers, there was the calling up of the militia. This number of militiamen was standardized a long time ago. For Lho <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང], the three dzong of Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་རྫོང་ཁག་གསུམ], Mardzosangsum [Tib. སྨར་མཛོ་ས་གསུམ]; Markham, Dzogang [Tib. མཛོ་སྒང] and Sangachödzong [Tib. གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་རྫོང] orders were sent to these various districts to get them prepared. [They] told them that when the time came, they must be ready. Secondly, in Tibet, there were many Guomindang Chinese. All of these officers and soldiers had been deported earlier [from Lhasa in 1949]. There were some of their relatives at Chamdo and though none of them had any power, some may have had some connections, and so they were now sent out from Tibet. That was about all the work done in '49, but people were concerned and apprehensive. Since the Chinese Communists had taken over in China, they were saying that they were coming to Tibet. In '49, the Tibetan areas that had been lost [were] those on the other side of the Yangtse River since they were under the control of China a long time ago. Actually, this was Tibetan territory. However, it was forcefully occupied by them and the same was true of Amdo. For this reason, all the Guomindang were forced out and the Chinese did the same things in these areas [in Ethnogrphic Tibet] that they did in China, right? But whatever happened to these areas, we heard about it in the Tibetan territories, and so everyone was anxious and afraid. So our first task in '49 was to kick out the Chinese that were in Tibetan areas. They were not the Communists, but the earlier ones [who had came to Tibet]. They could have been leaders or traders or whatever. But the way they were thrown out was not to be done forcefully, but peacefully. Whether they needed help or animals, they were escorted to their territories. They were sort of transported [moved], rather than kicked out.   

**Q:**  Regarding the preparation for the militia, did Lhasa send an order?   

**A:**  This was first done by the Doji. They were told to be ready. The numbers were established, right? But they were told to be ready when called upon. This was during Lhalu's [time as <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. མདོ་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Eastern Tibet who was based in Chamdo. It is an abbreviation of dome jigyab [tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ].">doji</a>]. Then in 1950, under Fox, there was Ford[in Chamdo for the Tibetan government], the wireless operator. He was young, 25 years old, and we got along [well]. He liked to drink and I was also 25 years, and he spoke Tibetan well, too. He stayed at Jangkar [Tib. lcang dkar sp.?] and when we had no work, we used to drink <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> [Tibetan beer] together. So we were pretty close. On the one hand, I was close to him. On the other, he was the only one from which we could hear about news. The Chinese war was very much in the news and we had no other place to listen to [hear about it] except him. So we used to meet quite often. The main wireless station was in Chamdo and a branch station was in Denkhog [Tib. ལྡན་ཁོག]. This was in the 4th Tibetan month and in June in 1950, all of a sudden, at night, many Chinese soldiers from Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ] came like guerrillas [using guerrilla warfare] and stole all the wireless equipment [at Denkhog]. In addition to that, since the Communists are very deceptive/tricky [Tib. གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ཆེན་པོ], they gave them [us] a very sweet lecture. They said, "People say that we eat humans and kill them. It's spoken as if we were ghosts. So do you think we are ghosts or not? We are not, right? We are just humans, right? And we are of the same race. So you should not listen to bad rumors. We are brothers." You know the way they usually say sweet things? Yes, they said it all, but what they wanted they took anyway. However, they did not punish [us], but [they] did steal the wireless. So they sweet-talked us but stole the wireless. So regarding this news, a messenger or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་དྲུང] Official government messengers who carried government letters, edicts, etc. traveling from relay-station to relay-station using corvée animals and people.">adrung</a>, arrived in Chamdo and delivered what happened. [In Denkhog] there was the person in charge, Denma Dzöpa [Tib. ལྡན་མ་མཛོད་པ], and the news was sent up by him [to Chamdo]. This was in 1950 and things were becoming urgent. I think the news arrived at night, about 10-11 p.m. At that time, the Doji was at Sidogthang [Tib. སྲི་ཟློག་ཐང], which was on the other side of the river on a plain. This residence of the doji incumbent's office was built during Lhalu's [time]. Previously, the residence and office [of the doji] were at Chamdo Monastery. It was said that sharing the same compound as the monastery was not good with the flags flying at the monastery. So it was built at Sidogthang. The residence, office, armory, everything was there. At that time, there was a message saying that everyone should assemble there. I had the job of the Drukye and used to come to Chamdo from time to time to clear the accounts of the payroll office. So it was a time when I was there. So I went to the staff office, Lejakhang [Tib. ལས་བྱ་ཁང]. This was headed by a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and a rimshi. There it was said that "Because of the Chinese, there is much danger at the border, and recently from Jyekundo the Chinese came suddenly and robbed the wireless. In addition to that, judging by their talk, things are not good at all. So we have already sent two edicts to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>s and the estates saying that the militia should be ready." The three dzong of Powo had about 570 militia members. The numbers were fixed early on. "And so we have sent orders that they should be sent to Lho dzong, and they should be brought to Chamdo where they will be armed and sent wherever they are needed [which] will be decided later." I was given that order and told to bring them without any problems. Likewise, in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a>,and Mar<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཛོ] A cross between a yak and a cow/ox.">dzo</a>sangsum, et cetera, the same order was given. So I was told to go to Powo. I was told to be the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> [commander], or the head [Tib. འགོ་འདོམས], of the militia until things were decided, and to bring the militia to Chamdo. So the situation was urgent and the subject matter of the meeting was to call up the militias. Now, regarding my leaving, it would not have been right if I delayed, and so I got ready the next day and was to leave the day after. Usually, as I was an official at Chamdo, whichever government official moved about [on official duty], the misers had to get things ready, e.g., the horse corvée and arranging the accommodations, which was quite a nuisance for them, right? I had no need to keep my own animals with me at Chamdo, and I had sent them here and there, and I only had one horse. If I used the horse corvée, then not only would there have been many talks, but [then] they would [have] also suffered difficulties [the miser]. The work wouldn't have gotten done and it would have been a nuisance. So I decided to buy a horse since I only had one, and I thought of doing it on my own and did not think about using the horse corvée system. I had a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> acquaintance and I asked him if he knew anyone who was selling a horse. He came and said the Pagshö Chandzö [Tib. དཔའ་ཤོད] had come. At that time, Kungö Kündeling said that "Pagshö Chandzö has this excellent horse. It is said to be a Xining trotter and he is selling it." So I said, "Oh, go and find out the price. I don't have money to offer immediately, but I can give tea. So buy it." We did not bargain much and Kungö's horse was an excellent, well-fed, light brown horse. The Khamba did the buying. So I took that horse and the servant rode on the other horse. I went to get the instruction order [Tib. ལག་རྩ], the document that gave me the power to call up the troops. I said that I would not use the horse corvée and so there was no need to request the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལམ་ཡིག] A government document (permit) that authorized the holder to receive corvée transportation and riding animals when traveling.">lamyig</a> corvée document. They told me to take the lamyig, and that I should not go without one. So they did give me the lamyig and so I took it. We left early the next day, going beyond the regular stops. I thought that the soldiers may have arrived at Lho dzong, and if they did not have a commander, they would rob the people. They usually robbed them a lot. The people were so very afraid. When I got to Lho dzong, there was not one soldier. Upon enquiring, they said that there wasn't any talk about any soldiers coming. So I waited for two days. I had also pushed too hard without consideration for the horses, so they were also not in that good of shape. I was young at that time and did not have much consideration, right? So for two days I let the horses recover and I asked Lho dzong to get me a guide since I wished to go to Powo. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> [local dzong officials] said, "You should not go like that since it's the time things warm up. It's the fourth month. It's time for avalanches since the weather is warming up, and many people get killed. The Powo Chumdola [Tib. chu mdo la sp.?] Pass is an especially ferocious one." This pass is generally considered very dangerous. One has to cross the pass before the sun even rises. For this reason, there is no way to ride horses and mules, only yaks or dzo [Tib. སྣ་ལོ], [on the pass]. They said that one had to stay one night at the base of the pass and then cross before sunrise. So I said, "Well, no. No, I forgot to tell you about something as soon as I arrived." As soon as I got to Lho dzong, I said that "You have to send a rider to Potö [Tib. སྤོ་སྟོད] Dzong and inform them that the soldiers have not arrived. However, the dzong must be getting them ready. For this reason, in this urgent period, please get the soldiers ready and [say] that I am arriving on such day at Potö. I had instructions tp send to two other dzong, Pomey [Tib. སྤོ་སྨད] and Pochödzong [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་ཤོས་རྫོང], so please have them sent from Potö." So a rider was sent two days earlier. After two days, they said that they had things sort of ready. They sent a helper, but we two were the riders. At the base of the tent, there was a small tent pitched. And they brought a great dzo without a horn for me to ride. We stayed at the bottom of the pass overnight. On that night there was an avalanche and the tent fell, and we didn't have much to sleep [in], but we made a fire for the whole night. So it was not that cold. We left at around 2-3 a.m. I rode the dzo and my servant led one of the horses and they sent a woman to take back the dzo. She led my horse. The dzo paved the way and then the horses followed. The dzo was so big and strong, and it was a very comfortable ride. Otherwise, it was like a porcelain bowl and I couldn't see the road, but the dzo knew the road. Fortunately, there was no sunshine on that day, but there wasn't much snow also. When he got to the top of the pass, the sun hadn't risen. Then all of us were very glad because there was no danger of an avalanche. So I rode the dzo and we reached the bottom of the pass just before dark. Then [we] boiled tea and the woman who [was] supposed to bring back the dzo was crying, saying, "How can I go back alone on this big mountain pass?" Then we told her that we could go together to the place where we stayed overnight and that she could leave at dawn. She said that "Now there is a long way to go through the forest and if I go back tomorrow, there will be sunshine on the pass and I will be driven away by the snow." Then she said that she was going back that night. Then we gave her some money and told her that in the future, women should not come to take back the animals. When we descended the pass, it was a rocky area and my servant's horse's legs stuck in the rocks. So it could not be ridden much. We thought we might encounter some wild animals. The forest was so thick. So there was fear, and in the Powo area, there is the ghost called Asheyma [Tib. ཨ་ཤེ་མ], the one we call the female ghost with a pig's mouth [Tib. འདྲེ་མོ་ཕག་མཆུ], which was considered very scary. So the two of us yelled [Tib. ཀི་རྒྱག] and continued. The horse was lame too. So we went yelling, sometimes losing the tracks, and at times, landing in a thick forest and making it very difficult. It was hard to make out the road. [There were] just some sign of tracks. At night, around 8-9 at night, we heard dogs barking. Then we said that it was good since [it meant] we were approaching some village. Then as we continued, we saw lights glimmering that appeared and faded as [we] rode. So we got to the village and requested shelter for the night. At the house, the mother said to come in, and the two of us were kept in the kitchen. I did not say anything about coming from Chamdo and calling up the soldiers. I thought that then they would have to put up with a lot of nuisances and some fear. So nothing was said. She gave her children some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐུག་པ] 1. A porridge or gruel-like soup typically made with tsamba, and if available, meat and cheese. 2. Noodle dishes in broth.">thukpa</a> and it looked so delicious that I wished I could have had some. The children farted a lot and so that was a bit annoying. We made some tea and put some barley in the tea, and ate some barley dough and dried meat. That's all we had brought. That night, we felt very comfortable since the area had a lot of wood. The woman asked where we were going and I said that we were going to Potö Dzong. She asked for what and I said that we were traders. I asked if people in the area were saying that soldiers were being called. She said yes, and her husband also went since they had to provide a soldier too. She said that she heard that someone was coming from Chamdo for this reason. It seemed that they did receive my instructions. We said, "Oh, I see, and so it hasn't begun?" She said, "Yes, [it has] yet to begin." Again, I was anxious since they had yet to call up the soldiers. Things were so urgent [in Chamdo] that they were talking as if I was to leave immediately, though I was not able to. So I was a bit unsettled since things were not ready. Anyway, there was nothing to do. We stayed that night. We continued on the lame horse, though I could have imposed a horse corvée, right? I had said we were traders so felt awkward saying that now. So I thought, well it's just a distance away, so we continued. It was quite a ways [away], and we saw a lot of people gathered. I said, "Oh, there are a lot of people there. If they are there to greet us, it would also be rather shameful with that lame horse. We continued and they were indeed there to greet us. The dungpa (trumpeters), the leaders, and the prominent people were there. Altogether, there were about 60 people lined up.   

**Q:**  What do you mean [by] dungpa?   

**A:**  Trumpeters. They play them very well, the cavalry notes. They were carrying a flag and it had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> written on it—since they were supposed to be [from] the Jadang Regiment. Drums and trumpets, the whole set was there. When we saw them, my servant was also acting intelligently, and he dismounted and started leading my horse. It felt embarrassing as well as funny. We never expected the reception, we sort of secretly came on our own, hoping that they would be there. However, a letter was sent two days earlier saying that we were coming. So this was the result. I don't know whether it was for the sake of the government, or tradition, or maybe they did not have the soldiers ready, however, for the two of [us], there was a great reception and they gave us <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</a> scarves. So I met the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> and they put us up in their summer cottage [Tib. སྤྲོ་ཁང], and the reception was well arranged.   

**Q:**  Yes, now you were at Powo?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. So I met the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>pön. And [I said], "I have been specially sent from Chamdo to Lho dzong to meet the soldiers, and there have been edicts given to both dzongs saying that the soldiers are to come to Lho dzong, and I have received orders to bring the soldiers from Lho dzong to Chamdo. When I got to Lho dzong, the soldiers had not arrived and neither was there any talk of them coming. And so I could not be unconcerned. So the two of us made our own travel arrangements and went through severe hardships with our important duty for the sake of the nation. We must all do our best and we too came in this way. When we arrived here, the soldiers were not ready and I was a bit saddened by this. I'm sure you must be ready to send them now. If not, then, please get them immediately since I am not staying here for long." This is what we [I] said. The dzongpön was a young tsidrung. I did not know him then, but later I found out that it was Jawdang Kelsangla [Tib. ལྕོག་སྟེང་སྐལ་བཟང་ལགས] [laughter].   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  When he came here [India] later, it turned out that it was him.   

**Q:**  Now, you came to Powo, and so all the various areas under Chamdo were given the same order, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  If we were to add up all the militia, how many were there?   

**A:**  Oh, that's sort of difficult [to answer].   

**Q:**  For example, if were consider the various areas, then, how does it add up?   

**A:**  For example, there were the three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> of Powo. There were 570 odd soldiers. Likewise, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a> had approximately 400-500. That's Shopando, Lho dzong and Tardzong. Likewise, Pagshö had a militia and also Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ], Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ], Markham, [and] Sangngachözong. And so altogether, if I were to just approximate, I don't think there were more than 3-4,000. I don't think there were more than that.   

**Q:**  So they were all recruited on a tax basis, right?   

**A:**  It seemed that they had a military tax basis [Tib. དམག་རྟེན] [Note: land given that required sending a militia fighter when needed]. That when the situation was at an emergency level, then there would be one or two soldiers called. Usually, they didn't have to go, only during an emergency. In the Powo area, the one who started this system was Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ]. Earlier, there was a famous former Tsögo Depön, right? This was during the time of Doji <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Champa Tendar [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར]. So they also had a flag indicating the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Regiment and they had a full set in their band with trumpets and drums. They all had the ranks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡིང་དཔོན] A non-commissioned military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of 25 soldiers (a platoon). It is an alternative name for Shengo in the army.">dingpön</a> and jugpön. So it was not necessary to start recruiting soldiers based on land [it was already done earlier].   

**Q:**  So did they have any training? Some must have known how to shoot and others probably did not.   

**A:**  Oh, the majority did not know how to shoot. For example, if we [were to] consider the whole regiment in Powo, then the majority did not know. However, there were those who had experience and the leaders knew. However, most of them were new. Even though the household sending the soldier remained the same, since time had passed, the ones who were sent were young. Since there were few who had guns, very few knew how to shoot. However, what they were proud of were their sword skills. They said, "We, the ones who have been called up, Pomi, cannot leave a mark by shooting guns [cannot hit anything]. However, we can serve in hand-to-hand combat." They were experts in the use of the sword. Usually, the way Pomi wore their swords and the way the Khambas did was very different. The Pomi sword was much longer. There was a string and it was strapped, and the sword was worn this way on the left hand side [pointing backward]. When the sword was drawn, it could only be drawn with a leap. And they would chop things like wood at an angle, like writing [with a] pen. They did it in an excellent way. When we looked at it, their swords looked very ordinary. However, they [the Pomi] didn't stand by any other swords other than their own, which were hammered out at Powo. Among the militia, the ones from Powo were considered the most fearless. No other region could come close. The Pomi were the most powerful. They were considered very brave. It really seemed that that was the case.   

**Q:**  Even earlier, didn't the government fight a war with the Powo?   

**A:**  Yes, Tagna [Tib. སྟག་སྣ] Depön was killed in Powo and they rebelled.   

**Q:**  Yes, my grandfather married off Seyshika [Tib. ཟས་གཞིས་ཀ] grandmother of the Queen of Powo.   

**A:**  Yes, she was sent to be queen.   

**Q:**  So after this, then you returned?   

**A:**  Then this is what I did. We had the specified number of soldiers that were needed, right? So they asked that the numbers be reduced since on the one hand, "The population in the Powo area is very low. Secondly, there are a lot of taxes to be paid. Besides, there is agricultural work to be done. So this is very difficult and we cannot send that many soldiers. However, they will definitely call them up." So I said, "Please don't say this during such an urgent period." Since we in Chamdo knew more about the situation, I related the urgent situation about what the Chinese were saying and doing. So I said that "During such a dangerous time, everyone must do their utmost and it's best not to talk like [that] saying that you cannot get the people ready and things like that as in the old days. If you say such things, then I will not stay and I will return, and I will really report to the Doji the exact situation. I don't know what the outcome would be then. But during this emergency period, we should not make excuses." I did not know Jawdang Kelsang. And the two of us had some problems. Later, it turned out to be Kungö Jawdang Kelsang. So Kungö did not talk about reduced numbers and did his best, and working day and night, and the soldiers were called up. It did not take long, just four days. So persons were sent to Pomey and Pochö<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, and [they were] told to bring all the soldiers to wherever they would meet us, along with a dzong representative, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>s would not be put in difficulty. There was no time to wait for them. So once all the Potö soldiers were readied, we counted the number of soldiers. Then a pledge [Tib. གན་རྒྱ] was taken saying that if the miser robbed people or they surrender to the enemy, then the punishment would be execution [Tib. དམར་གསོད་ཉེས་པ]. The pledge was sealed by passing the seal around to be stamped [Tib. ཐེལ་རྩེ་ལག་སྐོར] and the public was notified. Then according to tradition, on an auspicious date, incense was burned in the middle, and the cavalry and the infantry circled three times and yelled. So that day there were some monks for the purification rite [Tib. ལྷ་བསངས], and a large incense pot was filled. Then the trumpets blared and they marched off. I was to go to Chamdo. Past Lho dzong, an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་དྲུང] Official government messengers who carried government letters, edicts, etc. traveling from relay-station to relay-station using corvée animals and people.">adrung</a> met us riding up. He handed me an order which said that I should take the leaders and the troops and should cross the Tremong la [Tib. སྲེ་མོང་ལ] and go go to the border of Nangchen to Thamga [Tib. ?]. It also said I should send my representative and five to six able persons from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡིང་དཔོན] A non-commissioned military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of 25 soldiers (a platoon). It is an alternative name for Shengo in the army.">dingpön</a> category [of the militia] to come and get the arms from Chamdo, and send the list of the soldiers. So that evening, I took the adrung aside and made a list of the 570 odd soldiers, and [it was sent] along with one gyagpön, two dingpön, three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅུ་དཔོན] 1. A minor officer in charge of a squad of 10 troops in the traditional Tibetan Army. 2. A minor official.">jugpön</a> and my relative as my representative. So via Riwoche, [we] crossed the Tremong la and arrived at Thamga, which was at the border of Nangchen. This area was mostly nomadic and one couldn't really see any villages. There may have been some on the outskirts, but it was mostly all pastures. The grass was excellent. There were no tents to rent and we did not have any, and so there wasn't any place to stay. So there was nothing to do except to cut sod pieces and we built some sort of walls. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Regiment or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> Regiment was also there. They came ahead. And from the Gusung Regiment, there were people like Rupön Sötrela [Tib. བསོད་བཀྲས་ལགས], [who] had come to teach them how to use the bren-guns, sten-guns, and mortars. So we told them "Please, we can't get proper accommodations. So if you have some tents, please rent them to us." So they used their contacts and we were able to get some nomadic tents. These were divided. It wasn't sufficient. I stayed in the sod hut. All the arms arrived and as you have said, since the people were from remote villages, let alone shooting, they had hardly seen guns. So one day we tested to see if they could shoot, and each person was given two bullets for a trial [shot] and a large target was placed ahead on a hillside. They were lined up in groups of 10. The gyagpön were teaching them. Some were bleeding even from their noses. I guess they didn't brace the butt [of the gun] on the shoulders but on their noses. They were even firing very close and it was dangerous. There was no way that they could learn by firing two bullets each. It was a very difficult situation because we had no authority on the number of bullets that we could use for target practice. We had to request the amount from the Doji. So it was a very difficult situation, wasn't it? We requested five bullets for each soldier. That was also going to take a lot of time, right? We had to send people back and forth, right? We did receive sanction for five bullets. They [the soldiers] said, "We can't manage by shooting guns. What we know is how to use our skills with a sword. We are just thinking about hand-to-hand combat." Those who knew how to shoot said that earlier they only had the long version 303 English Carbine. "Now we have the shorter version and there is no problem as far as the enemy is concerned." Most said that they would use their sword skills. On this side of Thamgala, there are certain areas of Chamdo. In this area, there was a Derge person who had been a kind of bodyguard [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག] earlier with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Champa Tendar. He knew a lot of the Nangchen area. So he was called and given some gifts, and a letter was sent to Nangchen Gyalpo [theking of Nangchen] and to Jyekundo, and to the most important person of Bigu [Tib. ?] by the name of Shongda Bigu. He was not able to come to this side [India]. So a letter was sent to him.   

**A:**  Then we sent him [the Derge person] to ascertain the number of soldiers at Jyekudo, the general number of Chinese soldiers and what the situation was. Since he was an elderly person and a worker of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Champa Tendar, he knew a lot. So he went and gave the letter, and he returned with the replies. He did an excellent job. When he first went he said that there were Chinese there, but not that many. Nangchen Gyalpo sent a letter to the Doji. It had his seal on it, a scorpion figure. Then there was the letter for me from Shondha Bigu. We had not met, but we had excellent relations just through letters. After some time, Nangchen Gyalpo was not allowed to proceed from Jyekundo to Nangchen. The king was kept there. I had made good relations with Lhalu. I sent spies back and forth and made relations. There was a monastery in Nangchen called Kandagön [Tib. ?] Monastery. The charter [Tib. བཅའ་ཡིག] of the monastery was made by the 5th Dalai Lama. They very much looked to the government. We made secret relations with the monastic officials and they would send words [messages] secretly. At one point, I even went to the monastery, but later, they told me not to since it was going to harm both of us. "Whatever news there is, we will send [it]." So we had such relations. Later, when spies were sent, they said, "Oh, the whole place was littered with soldiers. Like the whole land was just covered. They were really soldiers. Their food and drinks were worn around their necks. Their cups were tied to their hips." That's what he said . "They were really soldiers. All they needed was water. They did not need to use the horse corvée or the pack animal [corvée]. The real soldiers are here. Oh, I doubt we can stop them." So it was said that Jyekundo was littered with soldiers and the whole land was covered. What he said was really true. They had their ration bags around their necks. The cups they tied on their hips. It was said to be Beijing tsamba. All they needed was water, nothing else. So I was able to make good relations for the Doji. Shondha Bigu was very sincere [Tib. ལྷོ་ཀརཔོ] and we got a lot of news from him. And whatever we received, we had to inform the Doji, right? Which we did, and the Doji also sent good replies. I was hoping that he would come to India, but Shonda Bigu was not able to come. He was taken for some work in Tibet and could not come. One day, a message came from the monastery. We had scouts on the pass. The message said, "It seems that [your] spies have settled in the Nangchen area, past the border." It seemed that there were Chinese spies too. "The Chinese spies have come too, and they were preparing to send a guerrilla force to kill your spies. The head of this guerrilla force by the name of such and such, and guided by a person from Sog, our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> by such and such name (there was a name), they are definitely coming. It seems that he is past the border and so it is better to withdraw him." So we checked into the matter and the ones who had crossed the border, we withdrew. Only one person had crossed the border. It was just a matter of this and that side of the pass. His tent was pitched on this side of the pass and so was his bunker. So after we had withdrawn the person, we said that their guerrilla force was going to come and so we should destroy them. We called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> and told him to have the person withdrawn and to have three dingshog [units of 25 under the <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ལྡིང་དཔོན] A non-commissioned military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of 25 soldiers (a platoon). It is an alternative name for Shengo in the army.">dingpön</a>] soldiers ready. "On two sides, there will be two dingshog [one on each], and have another one in the middle. Lie low at night, and you guys have said that you want hand-to-hand combat, so now go and really do that. Let them come right in and once they do, then destroy them." So we said we needed three dingshog volunteers and asked them to come forward. The gyagpön went down and told them about the situation. Anyway, everybody volunteered. There were no non-volunteers. Not one. The gyagpön returned and said that everybody wanted to volunteer. So I said, "We can't do [it] like that. So select each dingpön and take them. Put two on the sides and one in the middle, and until they approach, don't shoot. Then use swords and fight." We waited for many nights. Anyway, I don't know what information they got, but they never came. We waited for a number of nights. Then in the seventh Tibetan month, I think in Denkhog, the Khadang [regiment]'s Rupön Bökhangwa [Tib. སྦུད་ཁང་བ], Depön Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a> militiamen were sent to guard the border in Denkhog. When they arrived there, a Chinese group [was] checking out the place, checking the road to see if bridges were needed, boats, et.cetera. However, a fully armed regiment had already come to Denkhog. It was an advanced regiment. Our Tibetan troops did not know about that. Muja, Gyagpön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> [Tib. འབྲོང་ར], and his son were at the mountaintop [Tib. རྩེ་རི]. On the main route [Tib. གཞུང་རུ] there was mainly Rupön Bökhangwa and others with bren-guns and other arms who were traveling it seems. But it seems that before they reached the border, the ones on the main route rested and boiled some tea. At that time, Denma Dzöpa arrived. He said that "You better be careful because, on the hillsides (forested), there were a lot of lights glittering, and so I have the feeling that the Chinese have probably infiltrated [the area]. So be careful." Then Denma Dzöpa and his group left. They were sitting around when all of a sudden, shots rang out. They said, "The enemy is here, get up quickly." They threw out their tea and the fighting began. Quite a number of Chinese were killed and Rupön Bökhangwa was killed along with a lot of the Shotalhosum militia. Among the militia, Shotalhosum was among the earliest, and they were considered very reliable. They suffered a lot of casualties. On the mountain top, Muja and Gyagpön Drongdrag, a famous man, they too saw action, and Gyagpön Drongdrag lost his life. So his son was raving mad and leaped into battle, and he too lost his life. Among the leaders, Drongdrag father and son, and Bökhangwa, were lost, and so the 500 from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</a> Regiment lost their leaders [the other 500 were at the border in Derge]. So they lost their main hero-leaders. When that happened, during the battle the rest, I guess, lost their confidence. So when they heard that Bökhangwa was lost, the [Tibetan] soldiers retreated. The Chinese also fought and suffered casualties, and then they retreated. When one looks at their books, it seems that they actually did not come up to fight. It seems that they were there to survey the area. So they retreated and we returned, and for a few days, Denkhog was left empty. This was the first fight in the seventh Tibetan month. Lhalu was there. Then in the ninth Western month, I am not very sure.   

**Q:**  You mean the Western month?   

**A:**  Yes. Oh, no! The Tibetan month. I think it was the ninth Tibetan month. The Chinese crossed the Yangtse River on October 7. Then Lhalu's time was up and Ngabö came to Chamdo. During this period, with a lot of soldiers and militia, there was difficulty with their salaries. In my place, Thöraba [Tib. དོལ་རབ་པ] was sent up to Powo Dzong and I was called to Chamdo to get the salary ready. There was a payroll office, Phogang, there, but our grain interest office had to give the grain to the Phogang office. In Chamdo, Lhalu was about to leave, and Ngabö and his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Aide/secretary to the Kashag. There were usually two of these, both aristocratic lay officials. Their job was to assist the Kalöns, and their usual work involved writing whatever letters, documents, orders, and recommendations the Kashag sent to the Dalai Lama and other offices. Their office was called the Dröndrungkhang [tib. མགྲོན་དྲུང་ཁང].">kadrung</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] The position of aide to the Kashag that was filled by lay aristocratic officials.">gandrön</a> had arrived. There wasn't anything to do except the Phogang work. So Lhalu returned [toward Lhasa]. I think it was in the ninth Tibetan month, day seven, at 11-12 at night. Oh, no, no. My mistake. It was in the ninth Tibetan month, day four, five, or six—We staff gathered at Chamdo's staff's office and an order was passed through Tsögo saying, "The order from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> was that from all areas, messengers are coming. All that there is to hear is that we have lost land or battles. So now it is urgent to send a message to Lhasa, even a second of an hour [Tib. ཆུ་ཚོད་དབུགས་ཆ] [matters]. We have sent three secret wireless messages." I don't know what was in those messages. "Until now, we have not received any reply. And so because of this, what should we do? And you, staff, also think about this." So we thought about it and said that "If we just stay like this in this torn up area [Tib. ས་ཆ་རྩབ་རལ] [unprotected], [we will be defeated]. There is nothing to hear from the border except that the mouth is broken and the nose is torn [land lost, fights lost]. The time has also come for the Chinese to come to Chamdo. So we think that for the time being, the capital of Chamdo should be moved to Lho <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>. The armory is there and it is also easier to contact Lhasa, and the area is more secure. Also, during [the time of] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Lama Champa Tendar, Lho dzong was the first capital. If the Doji and his staff sacrifice their lives, and if this is useful for Tibet's religion and politics, then we have nothing to say and we have no independent thoughts of ourselves. However, if the Doji and his staff become pawns of the Chinese, then even if the government wants to send in the military, it would become awkward. So if it were to become a hindrance [Tib. དགག་རྐྱེན], we request [for the capital] to please move [the capital to Lho dzong]. This is what we have to request and on our part, we, the staff, have no thoughts of our own except to do whatever order is given." This is what we requested. Tsögo related our views. After some time, Tsögo returned and he said, "As I have told you earlier, we related the situation in a wireless message. When we did that, the one who received our transmission was Kadrung Dumra." We said that "Our situation is most precarious, and so whatever we have to request, we have sent out in the wireless. Until now, we have not received any reply and we have sent three messages. So please, whatever we have to ask, please reply immediately because we are having difficulty every minute." What Dumra said was that the messages have not been translated [decoded] and that "These days, the yearly Kashag picnic is going on." So like a desperate man, I said, "Do you mean the shit Kashag picnic?! We are here counting every minute, so shit on your Kashag picnic!" So I said that. There was no order to wait for and I told Sawangchemmo about our thoughts of transferring [the capital] to Lho dzong, and this is what Sawangchemmo said. He said, "Even if I lose my neck, it is the result of my past <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> and I cannot leave this place. The reason being that I have been given a responsibility by the government to take care of the Dome area. I can't leave this place and just take off. Even if I am to lose my neck, it is the result of my past karmic deeds, and so I am not going." So Sawangchemmo had clearly decided. He also said, "So most of you are the staff of Doji Lhalu, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Doji [Lhalu] has left, so if any one of you desire to leave, then I have no objections at all nor any opinions about it. Whoever wants to go, just do so. I have no objections whatsoever. But I have no wish whatsoever to leave," and so this is what he clearly decided, and so regarding this, there is nothing to say. This is what he [Tsögo] said. Now, if that was the situation, where Doji Sawang [Ngabö] has clearly decided even at the cost of his life, we just could not say, "We are Lhalu's staff. We are leaving and you do what you want. We are all people who have been fed by the Tibetan government. Whether it is Lhalu or Ngabö, there is no difference. Both are the doji. We are all people who have been fed by the Tibetan government. So if one is to lose one's neck, then we want to lose it together; if one is to suffer, then we want to suffer together. If things turn out good, then we will enjoy it together. We will do whatever Doji Sawangchemmo says, and whether good or bad, we will stick together and not do things independently. There were ones who wanted to leave, but now they did not dare to." So internally, since we spoke very forcefully, there was no one who dared leave, even [though] there were some who wanted to go. So now we had all decided to stay. [But] It was definite that we were going to lose. It was definite that we could not fight. It was definite that the Chinese were going to come. So there was no hope that the situation would be okay, and so whether one was going to lose one's neck or whatever, it was one's karma. It had been decided that we were not going to take independent actions. So we said that there was no need to keep so many horses and mules. For example, I sent my mules with some tea to Tibet. I kept two horses and that's it. Now that we had decided not to leave, others too did the same. Even Nyimala. I was telling you earlier that he was getting angry. There was no way to go. Now that we said that, even if we were going to lose our necks, we were going to stay, right? So we stayed like this. In our hearts, we were worried and anxious. However, there was nobody from whom we could listen to news [from] except Ford. So we went to Ford, shared some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a>, and I asked, "What's the news?" "Nothing," he said. "Even Britain is not helping" [laughter]. We were sort of hoping, right? I said, "Oh, my [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་སོང]. Now what to do? What, in your opinion, should we do?" He said that there was something. "If there is, then I said, "think." He said, "The Chinese cannot come in their vehicles. They cannot come in planes. They have to come on loaded animals. So for this reason, in the regions under Chamdo, all the yaks, no matter how many there are, should be driven up and sent to the hills above Chamdo. Once this is done, then all of our food supplies in Chamdo should be transported to the hills. The reason being we don't have many soldiers and the arms are not so good, and so we should stay in the hills. The Chinese will become famished and they will come to Chamdo desperately, thinking that there is something to eat. Don't leave anything for them to eat. Once they enter Chamdo, then attack from the hills. Other than that, there is nothing to do." That was something really intelligent. I swear by the three jewels that I have never forgotten this to this day. I always wished to see him.   

**Q:**  Yes, he is still alive.   

**A:**  Is he?. So that's what he thought up. Anyway, he did think about this, [but unfortunately], whom should I say this to? Who was going to listen to that? There was no way to do that because there was no one who could do it because the situation was like this [anxious]. The Chinese had lit the spark, right? When they did that, people become anxious and let alone others, one's own servants had become like that [became alarmed]. So in such a situation, there was no way to herd the yaks. Most belonged to private owners and the government did not have any aboutr them, right? So there was no way to implement the idea, but his thinking was excellent. There wasn't anything left to do but that. Britain was not helping . He was very sad. Poor thing! He was 25 years old then.   

**Q:**  Earlier, you were talking about Ford's idea. That Chamdo should be abandoned.   

**Q:**  [Question repeated.]   

**A:**  This was something that he told me. It was just talk between us that could not be put into effect. However, his thinking was great, I thought. He was very young then.   

**Q:**  So when you were listening to the news, it was said that from the outside, there was no one helping, right?   

**A:**  Correct. He had a long [sad] face, saying there wasn't any help coming. From the beginning, he was saying, "You won't get by [Tib. ཐར་གྱི་མ་རེད]." It was really true, we did not get by.   

**Q:**  So then what was the situation?   

**A:**  We had agreed to stay, right? No matter what the situation [was]. Then there was a meeting in the ninth Tibetan month, day seven, at around midnight. I was not called to the meeting. I think the reason was that I was staying on the far side of Sidogthang. So they forgot to give me the message. It was passed down to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས], who was then in charge of the horse corvée or Tachi [Tib. རྟ་སྤྱི] [in Tibet]. His servant came and said that "I was sent as soon as the meeting was over, and you did not come to the meeting." I said that I did not receive any notification about any meeting. He said that tomorrow at dawn, the Doji and all had decided to go to Tibet [Lhasa]; they were going to flee. And so at first, everyone should meet at Sidothang. Then together, everyone would leave. They had decided to burn the ammunition dump. This was what was decided. "[That] can't be!" I thought. Earlier, they had decided to not leave, right? So I said, "Come on guy [Po]! It can't be, it can't be." He said, "Oh come on, it's definitely true! Now, I don't have time to talk. Now hurry up, get ready. Everyone is getting ready to leave. I'm going," and the servant left. So I thought for a while. What happened? Something strange had taken place. I didn't even have animals except for two horses. I had two relatives at my service, both reliable. Now, really, how the hell was I going to manage? For example, this was really the situation. With two horses, now I had to go. So we discussed for a while saying, "Now what shall we do?" So we thought that there was nothing to think about because if we didn't leave, then we would end up in Chinese hands, which was going to be worse. The most important thing was food, and so we got some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and meat packed. It was the ninth Tibetan month, day eight, which was also a bad day for a journey according to astrology or chutsa [Tib. ཆུ་རྩག], but this seemed to be getting over [going away] naturally. So that morning, at dawn, we took just a few things and left all [else] behind, like a bug emerging out of a cocoon [Tib. འབུ་ཤུབས་ནས་ཐོན་པ]. We left [everything] because I couldn't take it and there was no place to ask somebody to keep it. When I arrived at Sidothang, I was the earliest. Then after some time, Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང] Kandrön came. He was sort of joking with me and said, "Oh, Mayala has come. It's amazing. People like you are ever prepared to leave. We have not even begun." I said [not too enthusiastically], "Yes, yes. Are we really to leave? Is it really true? Weren't we supposed to stay? Are we really leaving?" He replied, "Yes, we are really going. This is definite!" I said, "Yes, this is what I was told. I didn't even know that there was a meeting. Tsendrön had sent a servant and since it was decided that we would gather here at dawn, I came. I'm really not packed to leave, but I came alone anyway." So we spoke for a while and hung around. By the time the Doji arrived at Sidothang, it was almost sunrise. It seemed the riders and the pack animals were not ready, or it may have been some other reason. However, it took quite some time. So as soon as they left from there, the ammunition dump was set on fire. Instructions for this were given to a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> or a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡིང་དཔོན] A non-commissioned military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of 25 soldiers (a platoon). It is an alternative name for Shengo in the army.">dingpön</a> soldier. So together with the Doji, we left. He himself did not have many horses, and the servants also did not have enough horses. Since they left suddenly, they were not really prepared. Since there was a possibility of meeting the Chinese all of a sudden, and if they start firing, I told <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> that it might be a good idea to send scouts ahead. He said, "Maya, forget about it. Now we'll just go until we run into them, and then things will take their course. So forget it."   

**Q:**  Earlier, everybody met and decided to stay, even the Doji said that he was going to stay. So what happened all of a sudden?   

**A:**  All of a sudden, on the seventh day, the earlier decision changed. This was the reason why everyone was not ready. You know, this [decision] turned out to be really strange. Now, I was not even at that meeting. The meeting took place on the seventh and they decided to leave on the eighth. And to Lhasa, three secret wireless messages were sent for which there was never any reply. The last communication on the wireless was the shit phrase. From there the wireless ended, there was none. I was not at the meeting, and so I don't know how this leaving thing came about. As I mentioned earlier, I lived sort of on the outskirts and the messenger may not have been able to deliver the message.   

**Q:**  But later there must have been some talk. What was the reason for the meeting? To leave?   

**A:**  Yes, to leave. A meeting at which they would decide to flee.   

**Q:**  So later, there was no talk as to the reasons why they decided to leave?   

**A:**  No, nothing. I have heard nothing. And there wasn't anyone specifically raising this topic [Tib. གླེང་སློང་བྱེད]. And from whatever angle one looks at our situation, [it] was one where one couldn't really get things done. Even in Lhasa, oh my, instead of a party, they could have at least sent a reply. Even the Doji, it would have made a difference if he had clearly decided whether to stay or to go. But he decided to stay and then to leave. So we all- it was strange, like that we had no plans, and that things somehow just didn't want to work out. So we left, and on the way, one had to pass at the side of the monastery. I was told to go and call Tsatrütsang Nyimala [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་ཚང་ཉི་མ་ལགས] who was at the monastery. So I went to call Nyimala. He was at the monastery and was relaxed, and not even thinking of leaving. I said, "Ho Zee [oh my], Nyimala! Everyone has decided to leave and the Doji has left." It seemed that he too was not at the meeting. He was not prepared. I said, "You better get ready to leave, everyone has decided to flee." He said, "What? What?," with his mouth all contorted [laughing]. I said, "Everyone has decided to leave. The Doji has left and I was sent to get you, so you better get ready or you might fall into Chinese hands." We did have some hope of escaping. That was our hope, that was all we had. Nyimala had an assistant by the name of Gonjo [Tib. གོ་འཇོ] Sutsatsang [Tib. ?], whose nickname was Silk Show-offish, Silig Troktrok [Tib. སི་ལིག་ཀྲོག་ཀྲོག]. Nyimala was showing his temper and was shouting about his bedding to his servant. So Sutsatsang said, "Kungö, don't worry, I'll keep your things. You can't carry them all yourself. Leave them, I'll look after them." So I left. Now, I was left behind since the Doji had gone ahead, right? So I slowly went, and one had to cross the pass. Now I have almost forgotten the name of the pass. As I climbed the pass called Lagong Ngamda [Tib. ལ་གོང་ལྔ་མདའ], about two or three riders were approaching. It was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a>. He asked where the Doji went. I didn't know where the Doji went. I said he went ahead, and I went to tell Nyimala that the Doji went ahead and that he had probably got through. So we proceeded with the assumption that the Doji got through. Then my private pack animals that I had sent earlier, were returning. I asked, "Why are you returning?" He said, "The pack animals of the lay official Khowang Nangpa [Tib. ཁུ་དབང་ནང་པ] are returning. They report that all the roads are blocked and there's no way to go to Lagong Ngamda. They say Riwoche is blocked. I backtracked as there is no way to go." I asked, "Is that really true?" "Definitely," he said. "There's no way to go." "Didn't the Doji come?" I enquired. "No, he did not," was the reply. So they did not meet and the Doji seemed to have taken a diversion. So the Konang pack animals were the reason we didn't get by. Now things were getting pretty messy, and I was now wondering what to do. Oh my, unlike the others, now I was in a sticky situation . So we were wondering what to do. So I said, "Now it's not like this. There is no way to go or stay. First, let's rest in a house some place and have some tea." As we were proceeding to do this, Ford was coming. He had no dress to wear, damn. He was wearing a shirt and pants, riding a horse without a servant. I said, "Oh my. How come you didn't even put on a dress? This is so conspicuous. It's not good." He said with an English accent, "I have no chupa. I have a box, but the servant took it some place outside." His horse was loaded with a box of his clothes and food. The servant came up for a while and then took it down to Chamdo. See what a lousy servant. Now what to do? We didn't have any dresses for him. Anyway, there was a lot of confusion at that moment, meeting up with the pack animals and all of that. In the meantime, Ford vanished. On enquiring where Ford was, it was said that "He went somewhere around this way." Later, it seems that Tsendrön's servant tricked him and sent him. I didn't know this until recently. Tsendrön has written about it in the book called [Tib. རྒྱུ་ཆ་འདེམས་སྒྲིག]. He said that "We were together and Ford came. We sent the servants to trick him and didn't [let] him leave with us." Now, I didn't know that he was tricked. I liked him. I really liked him. We were sort of drinking partners. Tsendrön must have thought that if he was there, the Chinese might do something. He was clever, such thoughts didn't even cross our minds. We stuck with someone through good and bad times. Now, a lot of pack animals gathered and so did people. There was no way to go, and so we decided to look for a place to rest. There was a village house where we requested shelter. The pack animals rested. We made some tea and ate some barley dough. Soon after, the Chinese arrived. There was nothing to do. At first, some Khambas came. They said, "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་ཞབས] A respectful term of address usually for monks, but also to show respect to a layman.">Kusho</a>, they are saying that unless you surrender, they are going to fire their cannons. It's better to surrender." Obviously, it was better to surrender, right? There wasn't anything we could do, was there? So we surrendered. There really wasn't much to surrender. Unlike us, they had a policy and it was very peaceful [Tib. འཇམ་པོ]. They spoke politely. Oh my, it's amazing how the Chinese spoke. They spoke as one person. Whoever you asked, it was the same. They said things like that they had come to serve the people of Tibet. That they had come to kick out the foreign imperialists from Tibet. That they had come to liberate the Tibetan people. Whomever you asked, it was all one. It's like us saying our mantra, "Om Mane Peme Hum". Really, it was one version [the same] all the way. How such orders were obeyed, it's amazing. [If] you asked the common man, the leader or middle-level persons, it was all one [the same]. I think it was a time when their luck was in momentum. That devil, all the people were machine-like. So they said very politely that they had come to serve us. And so there was nothing to be afraid of and that they were our servants. So there really wasn't anything to be afraid of. However, through politeness, they were able to rob [us]. They said that they needed guns and pack animals, and that we didn't need these things. That even if we had gold, they did not want it. I had pack animals that were sent with tea. All these they took. The two horses that I was riding were taken. It was customary for us Tibetans to have rifles and pistols. They took all the arms. So they divided the two of us and I was told that I had to go down to Chamdo. A few soldiers were sent to escort me.   

