# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** August 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya Tsewang Gyurme discusses the monk official's trip to China under the ideas of Gendun Chompel in order to understand what the Chinese plans for Tibet were and how he also worked as a road builder for Surkhang for six to seven dzongs. He provides information on the Chinese competition and payment policies in this work, and describes the Chamdo Liberation Committee's role in the Tibet Autonomous Region and his work with the Tibet Autonomous Region supplying and arranging meetings. He also discusses Ngabö's trip to China, Tibetan currency and army controversies, as well as Phala's work.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_05/H_0039_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time, you and Thönpa Khenjung went for [to do] road work, right? Since this was in '53, in '51, the Chinese had come up and then [it was] '52, and now it's '53. During this period, the People's Association had risen and so had the problems with the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> risen. The two sitsab were also not there. So what was the situation? On the one hand, there was road construction. Then the women and youth organizations were started. There were tour groups and students were also going to China. The 17-Point Agreement had already been signed and it seems to me that the government was trying their best to work within the terms of the 17-Point Agreement to implement it. Now I know quite a lot about those who were working against the Chinese. But on the part of some, what were they thinking? Were they thinking that the Chinese were not so bad? The Chinese were also saying sweet things at that time. Among the younger ones, maybe they thought that socialism was not so bad. Anyway, what was it like?   

**A:**  In '52, as you mentioned, the youth organization began and so did the women's. When these organization started, they had a lot of occasions set up for dancing. When they gathered for such occasions, it was also the time they preached about their system and ideology. As you mentioned, in '52, a lot of students were sent to the Nationality Institute [Tib. མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ]. That year was the first year when students were sent. When this happened, many feared that [the students] would forget their Tibetan ways and would start thinking like Chinese. The Chinese were saying all of these sweet things, right? And so when one examines the overall situation, no one really was certain what was going on and what was going to happen. So when the Chinese came, they could not say it was good nor bad. So the general populace did not know the difference. A section of the population suspected that gradually, like an oil drop on paper [Tib. ཤོག་བུ་སྣུམ་ཐིགས], the country would become like Chinese land. So when the students were sent down to China, if I were to tell you my own connection with this, then this is what happened. You know the one who was in the Water Dragon People's Association called Chamsur [Tib. བྱམས་ཟུར]? The ex-Chamön Depa [Tib. བྱམས་སྨོན་སྡེ་པ], the one who was with Tsha Trunyi?   

**Q:**  I have not heard of that name.   

**A:**  There was someone called Chamsur, he was the most important person. He was from Sera Mey.   

**Q:**  I see, when you say Chamsur, you mean who?   

**A:**  I don't know his name well. I have documents [his book], but I don't have it in hand.   

**Q:**  There is Thamjö Sonam.   

**A:**  Yes, Thamjö Sonam, he's also called Chamsur. His <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> is Ngawang Sengela [Tib. ངག་དབང་སེང་གེ], whose lay name is Lobsang Yeshe. He also came to India as a staff officer of the Trade Mission. He became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> and Thamjö Sonamla was his maternal uncle. So when he was his shagtsang, as well as his pupil, he was strongly influenced by Thamjö Sonamla, even though he was young. Later, he also became a shöndrön. So including him, three to four tsidrung made a petition to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡིག་ཚང] The highest office dealing with monastic and religious affairs in the traditional Tibetan government. It is often called the Ecclesiastic Office. It was headed by 4 fourth rank monk officials called Trunyichemmo. The senior Trunyichemmo was called Ta Lama.">Yigtsang</a> requesting leave for studies in China. It seems that the Yigtsang was not so disposed to their idea and said, "You all have a thought about something that no one has had before, so it is alright." They did get leave, but it was given reluctantly. The reason being that they did not tell the Yigtsang their real thoughts. So the Yigtsang thought that these people must really be going over to the Chinese side. They would have surely thought that, right? So Ngawang Sengela and I had connections. This was just after the '52 People's Association. It was also decided that many students were to go to the Nationality Institute. The late Ngawang Sengela was there along with a few of us and he said, "A few of us are now going to study in China and we have made a petition, which was granted. And so once we get down there, then what work should we do? It would be good if we discussed and made certain what we should do." We were all young ones and they had preliminary discussions. Anyway, they were not going down there to become Chinese. They were wondering what the Chinese were like and what the Chinese were going to do with Tibet. They went for this reason and as a remembrance, they made a small Tibetan national flag and they formed [wrote] a letter on which they all signed to have solidarity [Tib. རྡོག་རྩ་གཅིག་སྒྲིལ]. From the beginning, they discussed this. We all had different ideas, but finally, it was said that the three had basically three things to do. One was to make sure that the Tibetans remained Tibetans and [did] not adopt a Chinese outlook. This was one responsibility since they were to go down as teachers. Secondly, at this moment, the Chinese were saying so many things, like that they had come to serve the Tibetan people and that they were going to improve Tibet from its backwardness. So the idea was to find out what the real aim was, their real plan. Were they really intending to improve Tibet or were they intending to gradually make Tibetans Chinese and Tibet into China? Thirdly, besides having good relations among themselves, the idea was to spread the Tibetan way of thinking among the students. So this is what I remember and it started that way. Nobody told us to do this. Nobody showed us how to do it and nobody was advising us . It was just us younger ones who thought of these things. Some of the opinions were very beautifully put. In Tibet, our drinking water comes from wells. And it was said that poison had entered our wells. For this reason, "If we just avoid this poison, then this poison will never be destroyed. So since this poison will not go away, there is a danger that we may die from lack of water. Therefore, we must enter the well and examine how much poison there is, how strong it is, and what the means are to draw out the poison. So we must enter the well and draw out the poison because there are no means [to do so] from outside of the well." So we said that "Based on this reason, we welcome your reason for going. Therefore, from among ourselves, whether it is the women's organization or the youth [organization], we must also enter them. Having joined them, then we need to examine the situation. We will probably know something after seeing it. They [the Chinese] are saying all kinds of sweet things and it is like being enveloped in mist [Tib. རྨུག་པའི་ནང་ལ་འཐུམ], and there is not one [person] who can ascertain what is really going on. Even our elders who are guiding us cannot make a judgment as to what will unfold in the future. Therefore, the Dalai Lama, at 16 years [old], had to take over the reins of the government. That too was a tattered one [situation]. It eas a regrettable situation. The Dalai Lama is really Avalokitesvara; whether it is the regent's lake vision [Tib. ལྷ་མོའི་མཚོ་གཟིགས] or the signs [Tib. rtags mthsn ma], the deeds of the Dalai Lama himself, from whatever angle we look, we have such an incomparable leader." So it was only with the Dalai Lama in mind that our minds were working. To tell you straightforwardly, if there had not been someone like the Dalai Lama, I think we would have probably become Chinese because we would not have anything to rely [on in] our minds [Tib. སེམས་འཇོགས་ས]. From all indications, this Dalai Lama was most unusual, and so with this in mind, we said that if in the future things were not going to turn out well, then such a person would not have become our leader. Since this was the reason, "If we younger ones don't do anything and just watch, then this is not good. It is possible that in the eyes of our elder officials, they would not agree with us, saying that 'These guys can't remain still and want to do all kinds of things.' That 'These guys are causing a disturbance [Tib. དཀྲོག་རྐྱེན] about the situation.' They will think that. But there is nothing we can do, and we can't tell them that we are doing this too [either] because if we do, then they will be spooked. It is best not to say anything. So for this reason, we will do it ourselves. We are Tibetans and we must love and have loyalty [Tib. གཅེས་ཞེན] towards the country because we have the Dalai Lama on whom we can base our minds. So since we have the Dalai Lama, let us go and examine the Chinese situation so we don't end up as slaves of the Chinese in the future. If the Tibetans can be Tibetans, then it will be very good for the future." So we had such talks. Among those who went to China, the one we had relations with was Ngawang Sengela. Then there was his companion, his lay name was Dorje Dramdü [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་དགྲ་འདུལ], a tsidrung short in stature [this must be Yeshe Yönden (Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡོན་ཏན)]. He was very trustworthy [Tib. བློ་ཐུབ]. Along with them was Ngawang Thöndrubla [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ], who was also going down with them. But at that time, we did not know each other nor did we have any relations. So in '52, they went to China, and so did many students. When the youth organization first began, our people were in it too. [Our people were] also in the women's organization. So from '52 onwards, it was not a question of not having any thoughts. I can't say all the young ones were there, but there were thinking people. What should I say, it was not a situation where the Chinese were the bosses [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] and the Tibetans were servants. If one examines where one source of inspiration was coming from, then it was from Gendun Chompela [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་ཆོས་འཕེལ་ལགས]. The reason being that, on the one hand, he was an expert, a religious man, a yogi [Tib. རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ], a person who didn't have any hope to get something and he didn't have anything. However, the way he thought, how strong Tibet was during the time of the early dharma kings—it was a country in which the other countries of the eastern world had to be scared and be alert. So during this time, religion, politics, and economics flourished, and so [did] it's culture and craft skills. Now, ever since Tibet became decentralized, until the time of the 5th Dalai Lama, there has been really nothing much to look at, right? Though there were people who did a lot, it was each religious power to themselves and Tibet as a whole was not unified as one. Even in the history books, it is stated that from the time of Lang Tharma [Tib. གླང་དར་མ], Tibet has never been unified under one king. So these historical events, the younger people in Lhasa were much concerned with and liked Gendun Chompel's writings. This was one inspiration. That earlier on, Tibet was so strong. That the country was under no other country. So such a country was now in such a pitiful condition [Tib. ཐབས་སྐྱོ་པོ], a slave of others, that it had become such a sad situation. So it was said that "We don't need to look anywhere for inspiration, but we need to do what our early kings did. If we look to western countries as models, then we don't have the means. But we should see what our religious kings did and if we can return to the days of the religious kings, then that would be really good." So from this line of thinking, an organization was developing from '52 onwards. So from the point of many young ones, this was the thinking. The other section of the ordinary younger people and, I guess I can't say just the young ones, but in Lhasa, people of Wobaling [Ch. he ba liang] and others who had earlier been of Chinese origin [Tib. རྒྱ་རྩ]—now, they were satisfied and sort of happy that the Chinese had come. Actually, the Tibetan government was very good to them and just let them be happy. When one says Wobaling, it was like a separate section of a town in Lhasa with exactly the same rights as everyone. However, when the Chinese came, they went to receive them and played the dragon dance [Tib. འབྲུག་དམག]. They did a lot in 1951. Even in the youth organization, most were Wobaling. Our people were in the organization. They were no Chinese youth [on the Chinese side]. They were in the youth organization examining what they were doing, saying, teaching and thinking. Likewise, we also had our people in the women's organization. So in '52-'53, this was the situation. Mainly, we could not judge the situation. Our main leaders may have known, but the majority of the people could not really figure things out. What the Chinese were saying was all sweet things. So it was during this time that Thönpa Khenjung and I were sent to begin [working on] the road construction. At that time, the plan was not big. The various areas under Metrogongkar, i.e., the monastic, private, and government estates, whether it was regarding land or whatever, the Kashag had already made a plan and appointed the person in charge. So the various people appointed went to Metrogongkar and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> was called. Under Metrogongkar, the strongest was considered Thakpa [Tib. དག་པ] Labrang. There was an elderly <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> and it seems that he was more powerful than the dzong. One day, everyone met. The Chinese were there too. The two of us were there with the Chinese soldiers. Our main job was to collect [bring] the people.   

**Q:**  Now, was this the Office for Road Construction?   

**A:**  At that time, the instructions were coming from [the Chinese] Tibet military headquarters [Tib. བོད་དམག་ཁུལ་ཁང]. I think it was the Military Road Construction Department. We were appointed by the Kashag.   

**Q:**  So whatever they required for road construction, workers, et cetera, they requested it [from] the two of you, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they informed us about the people they required and as per our instructions, we discussed this with the village <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོ་དྲག] An important local dzong/county official in the traditional society who was selected from among the rich peasant households or estates in the dzong.">tsodrag</a> about the number of people that we were going to send from the various areas. Secondly, the wages were discussed. Then the fields that were used for the road, [and the] compensation by the Chinese or the land substitute [Tib. ས་ཚབ] by the Tibetan government was discussed so that the land owners were not at a loss. Wages were paid per the going rate at that time. The wage was not high, the rate in the country itself was not high. Wages were paid in dayan. Plans were made for compensation and some of the fields that were swallowed up by the roads were paid some compensation, but I don't know if it was paid in full. The wage rate was based on the measurement [of work completed] and there were teams of ten workers [Tib. bcu shok]. The Chinese called it [Ch. gong fang], but it is a square meter. So the rate was based on the square meters done. The wages were paid every two weeks if possible, if not, monthly. So some got paid a lot while others did not. In 1954, the scope of the plan [Tib. གཞི་རྒྱ] increased. From the Tibetan side, the head of the road construction work was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang. From the Chinese side, I think it was Tan Guansan or the army commander Zhang [Ch. jun zhang]. Under the head office, another office was established, a command headquarters [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང], and three road construction offices began. Under each of the three offices was a commander [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་པ], and there were accountants, surveying people, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> (stewards), those who paid wages, a leader with soldiers and a foreman [Tib. ལས་རྒྱབ་པ]. So there were three road construction departments with the headquarters, which made four. Sawang Surkhang was at the headquarters from our side. So Thönpa Khenjung, Depön Shakchang Surpa [Tib. ཤག་བྱང་ཟུར་པ], Letsen Ludru <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> and myself were appointed. Among the four of us, Thönpa Khenjung was at the headquarters of the three construction departments. He also stayed at the highest ranking area, a little past Metrogongkar. Then the second highest ranking area was that of Depön Shakchang Surpa. Now, the Chinese considered the ranking very important. One was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and the other a rimshi. One was a Letsenpa, Ludrub Namgyal. He was in the second [third] group. Since I was a common lay official with no portfolio, I was at the end of the third group in the Kongpo area. So each group had a complete set of workers as mentioned above. We each had guards. Now, when they did something , they really did it. They were playing it up, even assigning us guards . So we stayed in tents and there were guards outside. Our title was also commander, and we each had a Chinese counterpart. He was the senior commander and we had the junior title. All we had to do was call up the people. Because we didn't know how to measure, and we didn't have wages to give, so there wasn't much to be done, right? But if we didn't talk to the Tibetans, then they were not going to listen, right? They didn't listen. Really, they didn't listen to the Chinese. Even the poor misers didn't listen to the Chinese. Tibetans are really good people it seems. Actually, it is very strange. So they really needed us, and they would assign [us] guards and do many things for us.   

**Q:**  Now, regarding the recruitment of laborers, you would talk to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and then they were recruited [people] on the basis of the earlier taxation system with wages paid?   

**A:**  The Kashag had done the division [Tib. ཆ་གསེས] for calling people. I don't know whether it was done on the basis of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</a> [by the size of land held] or by each household—I think it was done on the gang and dön basis with wages paid. For example, under me were the three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> of Kongpo, Dakpo, Gyatsha [Tib. རྒྱ་ཚ], and Kuro <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. སྐུ་རབ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. Then Lhobra Senge Dzong [Tib. ལྷོ་བྲག་སེང་གེ་རྫོང], Lhobra Dowa Dzong, and Lhobra Lhagang Shidö [Tib. ལྷ་ཁང་གཞིས་སྡོད]. Even under me there were six to seven dzong, and so there were a lot of people. So the Kashag had already sent edicts to these areas. But the people had not gathered by the instructed time, and so I had to go all the way to the three dzong in the Powo area to gather them. On the one hand, the Powo area had few people and they were very reluctant [Tib. 'tser po] to send [people]. Then I had to tell them that they would not lose [out] and that they would be paid. That the road construction was going to be in their own areas and that much later, they would not have to send a horse corvée and pack animals [since there would be roads]. So I had to do a lot of interpreting [explaining], and the people in Kongpo were very tough [Tib. གྱོངབོ]. Anyway, I had to go to the various places. They had instructions from the Kashag, but there were details on the number of people from each area also in our instructions. There was a head who was paid [for] each dzong and estate, and we were the overall heads of the dzong and estates. From [out of] the three of us, Thönpa Khenjung was the head, with Surkhang as the overall head. This began in '53 and continued all through '54, and in 1955, the main route was completed. In '54, the Dalai Lama went down to China while we were still working on the road.   

**Q:**  So you stayed like this in tents, and did you have to get to together for meetings and shows at times?   

**A:**  Yes, we did.   

**Q:**  And during these times, did they say anything political, about socialism and things like that?   

**A:**  At first, they did not say these things forcefully. They just concentrated on the roads. They continuously implied that when the roads were completed, clothes and food items were going to come from Beijing. Now, they had to fool the people, right? They said this to inflernce the people's minds. They would have good clothes and an abundance of food. So at that time, they just spoke about the work and nothing else. When the roads were almost complete, then they began their political talk. So they once again begin their antagonistic [Tib. འགལ་ཟླ་བཟོ་ཡས] talk. The talk about making the people rise up. The Chinese take pride in the fact that they are very good at making the people rise up. It really seems to be true. They never told us that later on. At times, they showed plays. So most of the time, their performing group [Ch. wen gong tuan] on the military side, they [would] come specially to act [and] to greet the road construction [team]. At one period, I don't know what happened, but all the members of the performing group had to work on the road. Poor fellows, the boys and girls were all from the better off families. One could tell because their faces were more beautiful, their voices were better, better style and [they] knew everything. That is why they were recruited from the various schools all of a sudden. They were all from the better off families. And so they had a most difficult time and were grumbling a lot [Tib. སྐད་ཤོར] with blistered hands.   

**Q:**  Our Tibetan workers, since they were being paid by the square meter, did they work diligently and [work] extra hours?   

**A:**  They would do this, right? Since it was divided and since they paid according to ability, it was very easy to organize work. You didn't have to say a word like, "Oh, you are not doing [this]."Or that "You are just sitting around." It was a situation where they may have even overworked [themselves]. Then they selected exemplary workers [Tib. དཔེ་བཟང]. They incited competition. They generally choose women as examples saying, "She worked even without a rest." I don't know if they were lying, but the foreman would note [this] and hand over the list of possible candidates [as models of exemplary workers]. So on that particular day, there would be a meeting and snacks were handed out and tea, and tables were set up with chairs and they would say things like, "This girl named Yangki [Tib. དབྱངས་སྐྱིད] is too much, so industrious for labor and diligent." The person was not that great, but it was just praise in order to incite the rest. So when they showered praise on women, the men become ashamed and they became compelled to work harder. They said, "Oh my, using women as models. This is too much." So the Chinese were very skilled at getting work done. On the one hand, they praised [us]. Then they made them compete, then they paid them according to work (piecemeal) and then used examples [exemplary models of good work]. It was absolutely different from the way we organized work . You didn't have to say, "Do this, or again, you guys are sleeping around." Our work was very difficult, like saying, "Oh, now, this guy didn't show up again," or, "Oh, he's sleeping over there," "What is he doing?" There was none of this. All the work was competition. Poor fellows, it took it's toll [Tib. གཟན་སྒོ] on the people. But they were experts at getting people to work. I don't know whether competition was really permitted or not, but it had its own force.   

**Q:**  In 1954, the Dalai Lama went down to China, right? What was the situation around this time? You must have been coming to Lhasa and heard things, no?   

**A:**  Now, during this construction period, I was down [on] that side [Kongpo]. However, a problem arose during this time. I know all about the problem in 1954. In that year, there was the People's Association and I had no connections with this organization at all. I don't know much about this people's association. However, an organization was started and three persons were arrested, and one seems to have died in prison. Two were released later. They made a petition. I don't know what it contained and all since I was down [on] that side. It was different from the Water Dragon Year People's Association. It was quite striking. Though I was not around to see [it], they wore uniform dresses and hats.   

**Q:**  This was the one with Alo Chöndze, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Alo Chöndze, Gyabing [Tib. སྐྱབས་དབྱིང] Chöndze. The three main ones were Alo Chöndze, Bumtang Trunyi [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང་དྲུང་ཡིག] and Shigatse Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག]. The later was very enthusiastic, but he died in prison. The other two were released. Alo Chöndze got to India and Bumtang Trunyi was left behind. I don't know much about this organization, but what we heard was that they had uniform dresses and hats. But it was this reason that the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> had a lot of difficulties. [Note: He is mixed up; the sitsab were dismissed in 1952] They were saying that the two sitsab made this [happen] and that foreign imperialists were behind the sitsab. And on account of this, their work was always disorganization. So the two sitsab must be dismissed. So the Dalai Lama was put in a lot of difficulties. If the two sitsab were not dismissed, then they were going to arrest them. So it's said that this was what they told the Dalai Lama. It was very difficult because, on the one hand, the sitsab held important positions. On the other, the Chinese were so powerful and forceful. And so when the time approached that they were going to take matters into their own hands, it was not only a dangerous time for the two sitsab, but it was also said that they had begun military preparations. They say that it was sure that they were going to take matters into their own hands. Therefore, the Dalai Lama thought about this. In the Dalai Lama's biography, he said that the two sitsab had taken actions that would endanger their lives, and so for this reason, in order to calm the situation, he reluctantly agreed to dismiss them. So the sitsab were dismissed in 1954.   

**Q:**  In '54?   

**A:**  And so from this time onwards, all matters were taken up directly with the Dalai Lama. When the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were there, they took responsibility, and so the Dalai Lama was not disturbed. So they first got rid of the sitsab and then the Dalai Lama was invited to China. It seems that this also coincided with a meeting in China.   

**Q:**  So were there discussions in Lhasa about whether he should go down or not?   

**A:**  Yes, it seems there were a lot of those. It was said that they didn't know what dangers there would be to the Dalai Lama's life. However, the Dalai Lama himself also thought about [this] and from the government's side, they also felt compelled to really think about the situation since there were many things to discuss, even many that were mentioned in the 17-Point Agreement. For example, there was the article on instituting the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. And so a danger was perceived since that would be in charge of both military and civilian matters. On the other hand, there were many matters relating to the Panchen Lama about the position of Ü [Tib. དབུས] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [Tib. གཙང] that had not been clarified, right? So these two seemed to be a main concern, although there may have been others. So it seems that there was some compulsion to go. However, most of the people did not know that, right? So they were all wishing that he would not go. The day the Dalai Lama left, people mourned like someone had died. When the Dalai Lama crossed the river at the Lhadong Shenka [Tib. ལྷ་གདོང་ཤན་ཁ] ferry port, it is said that an old lady jumped into the river and drowned. It is also said some elderly died from depression or stress [Tib. རླུང]. Many suspected that the Dalai Lama would probably not return. Until the Dalai Lama returned, there was no ease. People did not like it at all.   

**Q:**  Now, the Military Administrative Committee in the 17-Point Agreement was to be implemented, right? So when this was done, it was from a military [question not finished]   

**A:**  It was both [a] civil and military office. So it seems that the Tibetan government's power would be lost all of a sudden. Now, earlier there was a Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  This was to remain as before, right? As in the 17-Point Agreement.   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that, but this power [government] was probably not to remain. It would be lost all of a sudden under the Military Administrative Committee. So it seems that they put a very dangerous phrase [in the 17-Point Agreement] which would cause the [Tibetan] government to disband naturally [Tib. rang bzhin gyis sgrom zgig pa].   

**Q:**  Later, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was begun and there were many offices under it, right? Was the Military Administrative Committee to be similar?   

**A:**  It seems that that would have been the case with many offices [underneath it]. But the power of the Military Administrative Committee would be complete since the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was only preparatory. So this was considered important. The Chinese immediately divided Tibet into three parts. The Chamdo Liberation Committee pulled Kham away. The Panchen <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནང་མ་སྒང] The top administrative office of the Panchen Lama&#x27;s Labrang/government.">Nangmagang</a> Uyön Lhengang with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> [was] gone. [Note: it only dealt with the estates and miser of the Labrang - the Panchen Lama's administration] Then Ü was left alone. Since that was the case, our strength was non-existent. So when they discussed [this] in China, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was to be the union of the government, Labrang and Kham [Tib. གཞུང་བླ་ཁམས་གསུམ] together. This was very important and for this reason, we stayed like that until 1959. Now, what Kham said was that their appointments and privileges in the area would all belong to the Tibetan government. That they had no personnel to appoint. So when this happened, except for the Panchen's Nangmagang, the Tibetan government got both. They were not able to separate. When the Panchen Nangmagang appointed people, they did not have personnel like us, the Tibetan government. Since they had no experience in running a government, they did not have the personnel. And even those who were there were not effective. For these reasons, even though the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was begun, it dilly-dallied and did not move along . There were 51 Uyön [Ch. wei yuan] and two-thirds were from the Tibetan government, and a third [was] from the Panchen Nangmagang.   

**Q:**  Now, what did you say [about] the Chamdo Liberation Committee?   

**A:**  They asked that the appointments be made by the Tibetan government since they did not have the personnel. So even though the Chinese separated [the regions], they were not able to actually do it. So when the Dalai Lama went down, this was done.   

**Q:**  Yes, so then you finished the road construction work in 1955?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then when the Dalai Lama came up [back] in 1955, was the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region [started] in 1956?   

**A:**  I think it was in latter part of '55.   

**Q:**  So, at that time, had you come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, the Dalai Lama had come and the celebrations had begun.   

**Q:**  The road construction work was done, and so what did you do after that?   

**A:**  After that, I went to work in the Tibet Autonomous Region. Generally, it was like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> [steward's] work, providing supplies to the various offices. Even providing ink and paper. I and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a>, what's his name—?   

**Q:**  What was the name of the office?   

**A:**  I have forgotten. Our head was Sumdo [Tib. གསུམ་མདོ] Rimshi , and there were three other officials. Myself. Then there was a tsendrön. His nickname was "Sour" Kyurmola since he had a sour face [Tib. སྐྱུར་མོ་ལགས] [this is Gyentsen Tempel (Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་བསྟན་འཕེལ)] . I have forgotten his name, but he was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> [Tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] Trunyichemmo. Then there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Lobsang Lengden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་ལེགས་ལྡན]. Then there was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> nicknamed "leather pouch," Kyebala [Tib. རྐྱལ་པ་ལགས]. Now I only remember the nicknames. He was the shagtsang of [Drönyer] Chemmo Ngawang Chösang [Tib. ངག་དབང་ཆོས་བཟང]. So there were the four of us.   

**Q:**  Now, the Dalai Lama went down to Beijing and had a lot of discussions, right, regarding the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. Then the work actually had to begin. So what were people talking about? Were they saying that "Previously, the Military Administrative Committee was to be started. So now the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was agreed upon and this is very good."? Or, were they saying [question not finished]   

**A:**  It was said that it was good. After they arrived, Ngabö gave a briefing [Tib. གསལ་བཤད] for about a week. For one week, either in the Trede Linga [Tib. འཕྲལ་བདེ་གླིང་ག] or the Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག], I don't remember [which one], but he spoke for a week [about] the time they first went down to China about the discussions and their results, what was said, and what they said, et cetera, et cetera. The whole thing. Ngabö was the main person and Surkhang was there too. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> also. Ngabö was the main speaker who related everything, and then he asked if he had forgotten to mention something. He mentioned that they were able to get the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region instead of the Military Administrative Committee, and that this was done by all three; the government, Labrang and Kham. So everyone was happy.   

**Q:**  Did Ngabö say this was a good achievement and everyone must do their best?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. It was presented as the accomplishment [Tib. མཛད་རྗེས] of the Dalai Lama's visit. "And so since the Owner of All [Tib. དོན་གྱི་བདག་པོ] [the Dalai Lama] went and discussed these, then we should work on them." He said that very strongly. He made everything very clear, saying that on such and such month, on this date, such and such happened and so on. He was so precise that one wonders how anyone could remember so much.   

**Q:**  He did not read it?   

**A:**  He did have a paper, but he only glanced at it and spoke. He gave such a good speech. Now, there were two matters which were not so satisfactory. I was not satisfied and I must tell you truthfully, right? One concerned the Tibetan paper currency that Zhongyang was going to exchange [into Chinese currency]. Then the Chinese were going to give a specified amount for the expenses of the Local Tibetan Government. The second concerned the amalgamation of the Tibetan Army into the People's Liberation Army, and that this was going to be a border security regiment. That all the expenses for this would be born [paid for] by Zhongyang.   

**Q:**  So they discussed this in China?   

**Q:**  In the 17-Point Agreement there was the article on the army becoming part of the People's Liberation Army. I don't think I remember the part on the money exchange in the 17-Point Agreement. I don't know about others, but regarding these two matters, I was not satisfied. When this was to take place, then things would be pretty much gone. One could not use one's currency . There were no soldiers and no Tibetan identity was left [Tib. བོད་པའི་རྣམ་པ]. It [Tibet] was immediately becoming Chinese. However, we Tibetans were very stubborn/obdurate [Tib. གྱོངཀོ]. Regarding the money, there was a lot of dilly-dallying [Tib. ཀ་རེ་ཀོ་རེ] here and there . It seemed like the three monasteries may have been careless [Tib. བ་རེ་བོ་རེ] and dilly-dallied here and there . They never allowed the money to be changed. The Tibetans looked like people who only had a vague understanding [Tib. འཚོད་ལ་མ་ཚོད]. But oh, the Tibetans were really headstrong and tough, you know? [We] acted as if we knew and also did not know, you know how it is? Deep inside, we are firm. They [Tibetans] never said they would not change, but they were also not allowing them to change. So it dragged on until '59 and it was the same with the army. Now, the Gusung Regiment, they put on the People's Liberation Army uniforms . Yes, yes. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> changed clothes, I think the army changed.   

**Q:**  PT: What I heard was that, let me see, it was said that the Gusung Regiment changed because they were not wearing Tibetan uniforms but English . And the others, the commanders changed their uniforms, but the soldiers did not.   

**A:**  Yes, yes, that's it exactly. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> wore Chinese uniforms but the soldiers did not change. The Gusung Regiment definitely changed. So in this way, they dilly-dallied. Neither yes or no, and [this] went on for 9-10 years. The Chinese could not do anything. They said that they were going to start reforms and when there was a commotion, then they said that the reforms were [going to be] postponed. So in this way, they were not able to do anything in Central Tibet. On the Kham and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> side, they started the reforms in '55-'56. They referred to them as reforms, but actually, it was [more like] robbing [Tib. ཇག་པ] [the people]. For example, if they needed my carpets and they just took them away, I was going to shout, right? I would say, "Oh, don't take my carpets. This is my carpet." The Communist Party is a bandit. So they said, "It is reforms," and they would "Incite the beggars, the good for nothing people." They told them that they had been mistreated, had their blood and serum sucked, and everything, and these other people enjoyed the fruits and ate. So now these people had to be destroyed. That they were reactionaries and this and that. So they sent these people and took the owners of the wealth, and held struggle sessions and [then they (the owner of the wealth) were] imprisoned. Backtracking.   

**Q:**  In 1955, you completed your work and then you came to Lhasa. So in 1955-56, what shall I say, since the Chinese system itself was socialist, one day one had to tread on the path of socialism, right? Since the whole of China was socialist. So in order to do that, at meetings, were they saying that socialism was good?   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that.   

**Q:**  Some, like my father [Tsarong Rimshi], said that there was talk of starting a cadre's school [Tib. ལས་བྱེད་སློབ་གྲྭ], and [they were] even saying that there was no need for a home since the state was going to look after the children. There was talk of the cadres staying at the school, and he heard things like that. Since the final destiny had to be socialism, I was wondering whether they were already planning this. Whether if at the youth or women's organization, or the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region meetings, maybe they were saying something? If not, then were they going into the villages? How was it?   

**A:**  Yes, they went into the villages on visiting tours [Tib. འཚམ་འདྲི་ལྟ་སྐོར]. In 1955, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region started and the Chinese representative Chen Yi came. He was the assistant of Zhou Enlai, so I guess he was the Vice Premier [Tib. སྲིད་བློན་གཞོན་པ]. He was high ranking. He came as a representative and the meeting began. There were a lot of preparations from the Chinese and the Tibetan sides. At the ceremony, the Dalai Lama was there, and the Panchen Lama, Sakya Daktri [Tib. ས་སྐྱ་བདག་ཁྲི] and others were there. Gyawa Karmapa [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་ཀར་མ་པ] was probably there, as well as many lamas. I too was among the workers. At that time, I was making preparations for the royal dancers, the Garpa [Tib. གར་པ], and the performers [Tib. ཟློས་གར]. This was the preparatory work for the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. That is what Chen Yi said, that the final road was socialism and no other. That if one thread [was on] the path of socialism, then everyone would be happy. So everyone had to go on that path. Since there were many methods, the democratic reforms was the main one. So he said that democratic reforms must be done. So from those reforms, then they must start the Mutual Aid Teams [Tib. རོགས་རེས་ཚོགས་ཆུང]. From this, then they must begin the People's Commune [Tib. མི་དམངས; Ch. gong she]. So from this, everyone would enter socialism where everything would become common without any private ownership. He said a lot of these things. Later, there was a lot of education on these.   

**Q:**  Were they saying all of this at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. We were even taught about these things.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  All the government officials were called to Trungji Linga. So the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region had begun, and the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region made the various appointments, and the secretariat office, Trungchi Legung [Tib. དྲུང་ཆེའི་ལས་ཁུངས], was the most important. Let me see, who was the secretary general [Ch. mishu zhang] [thinking]... Most probably it was Ngabö, and then Tsögo, and then Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན]. Then Phünwang Buzhang was there. This was the highest office. Then there were other [offices] concerning law, security, religion and more. Our work was like [that of] a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a>, just providing things. Providing ink, paper for the offices. If they said that there was a meeting tomorrow, then we had to get the tents ready. If they said that there was a dance, then alcoholic beverages and other [things] must be prepared. That such and such leader was coming and [so to make preparations]. That was all the work. Then at Trungji Linga, all the government officials were there. At this time—shall I relate a story of your grandfather during a meeting of the Tibet Autonomous Region? When the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region began, first, the Dalai Lama gave a speech, and then others followed. As the representative of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེ་ཇི] A third rank position in the Tibetan government.">theiji</a>, your grandfather was there.   

**Q:**  What representative?   

**A:**  From the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐེ་ཇི] A third rank position in the Tibetan government.">theiji</a> category. On the one hand, he was a dzasa. On the other, he was head of the schools . So he spoke and as you know, his way of talking was very precise and short [Tib. འདུམ་འདུམ]. However, [it had] with a lot of meaning. Yes, [it was] very unusual. However, most people did not pay much heed to it. What he said was most unusual. From all the speeches, that was the one I liked best. He said, "There is no alternative but to go on the socialist way. Our road is socialism. We all have to tread on the socialist path. There is no doubt about that. However, we have something called religion and that road is in the space. So whoever tries to stop this, harm will come to that person." This is what he said. The majority did not pay much attention to it. But he said something that had such a great message. That we had to go on the socialist road. However, the thing that we must hold on to [religion], that was what he pointed out. I was happy with that speech. Generally, [with] speeches [from individuals] like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a>, it was said that there are thirteen signs of a hero. One of these things is the way he speaks. Immediately upon hearing this, it seemed to be useless, but one had to think a lot about it. So in our books, they said this was one sign of a hero. The books spoke of the 13 signs of a hero [Tib. དཔའ་བོའི་ཉམས་བཅུ་གསུམ], with this being one. So when the ceremony for the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region began, he made that speech. After that, in the Trungji Linga, not all the officials, but those who were a part of the Tibet Autonomous Region, were taught the China's constitution. The Chinese called this the Common Program [Ch. gong tong gang ling] or something. I wonder what the name of the secretary general who taught us the constitution [was]. Anyway, he was one of the early ones who came to Chamdo. He came with Wang Qimei, a thin man. He was the teacher. After [going over] each part of the articles of the constitution, they made us discuss them. After the discussions, they asked our opinions. When they did that, they probably found out how much these people [we] could understand and what they [we] thought. This was quite "strange" [Tib. ཁྱད་མཚར་པོ]. I think this was political education. They said something and then made us relate it. You say something and I reply to it. If we didn't agree, then they made us discuss [it]. And we had to hand in the results of the discussions. The general education was done together, but we were broken down into discussion groups. This took quite a long time. We went for an education and then went to work.   

**Q:**  This was in the morning?   

**A:**  Yes, every morning. This was regarding the constitution, but the constitution was about their system anyway.   

**Q:**  How many days did it take?   

**A:**  Probably about a month. They made us really learn through discussions and [talking about out] opinions. If you could give your own opinion, it was considered best, if not, then the five in the group [discussed] together. You really couldn't keep saying you didn't have an opinion. One felt [like] one was compelled to say [something]. That was their custom. In the discussions, interesting things happened. You know Janglojen Gung, who was extremely well-educated, sharp and articulate? In the constitution, there was mention of the "feudal system [Tib. བཀས་བཀོད་རྒྱུད་འཛིན]" and the bureaucracy capitalist [system] [Tib. དཔོན་ངན་མ་རྩའི་རིང་ལུགས]. These were the two roads that they wanted to destroy. So he [the Chinese teacher] explained that in Tibet, there was no capitalism. That there were no large capitalists. "This means that the state has political control, but individuals do business privately. This is not found in Tibet. There is feudalism in Tibet." So he said that, but [he] did not spell it out. He said, "There is feudalism, and so you must discuss and realize this." So when he said that, Janglojen, though he knew it all, said, "Yes. Now we are to realize the existence of the feudal system and so, therefore, I would first like to ask a question. When one says 'gives the order [Tib. བཀས་བཀོད]' and 'inherit [Tib. རྒྱུད་འཛིན]', who is the one who gives the order? This we need to know. Now regarding the 'inherit', I suppose that we must be the ones [receiving the order]. Let's say that we are the ones [receiving the order]. But who is the one that gives the order?" The Chinese had a most difficult time replying. So now the question was put on the teacher, right? So it was said that "We have discussed feudalism and we have accepted that we are the ones who inherit [will receive the order], but we cannot agree on who gives the order. Please advise us on who gives the order." So, he had nothing to say. He said, "Yes, yes. Now, we can approach things slowly." [He] didn't say [anything] at all. So we were also trying to make it difficult for them, as much as possible. We were educated for about a month. This was for the workers of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. Your grandfather was there also. I think he was in [getting] the education, no?   

**Q:**  No, he was with Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] in the Construction Office [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན; Ch. qu].   

**A:**  In the Construction Office, I see.   

**Q:**  It was first begun in our house, and then it was said to have moved somewhere—to the old Mentöpa [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད་པ] house or something. That's what I remember.   

**A:**  I think our office was quite important. It was in the same place as the main office. It had nothing to do with politics, but it really was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> [office]. [It] had a lot of power too.   

**Q:**  So, during this time, wasn't the situation in the Kham area one where they were starting reforms and taking up arms? This is now '56.   

**A:**  Yes, [in] '56 they were starting. In '55-'56, they were starting.   

**Q:**  Just then, the problems had not started, and the Khambas and Amdos [weren't] coming to Lhasa?   

**A:**  In '55, not at this moment. In '56, then things started moving and the democratic reforms had begun. Many lamas and chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] were destroyed. The better off ones were robbed of their wealth. The wealth owners were looked down upon and struggle sessions were held by the people. [It was] almost as if they [the wealthy] were not human, and they had a lot of difficulties. So from the Kham area, people gradually came to Lhasa. Some moved away to Lhasa, and others moved to the hills and began guerrilla warfare. So many came to Lhasa. In 1956, things were very tense.   

**Q:**  So then things were getting worse. If one starts from '51 and then [until] now, '54, '55, when did things get worse?   

**A:**  From [after] '55, things got worse.   

**Q:**  What was the reason [for this]?   

**A:**  It seems that now they were very anxious for reforms. For example, they could not begin the reforms. So [even though] many Chinese had come, there was nothing they could do. [It was] as if they were there just to sit and eat. And so it was like they could not accomplish their task. And since the reforms were also not moving along, the people were not listening to the Chinese. They were also going to the villages as visiting groups [Tib. འཚམས་འདྲི་ཚོགས་པ]. They went to the various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and held performances, and gave some gifts. Then [they] gave their lecture about doing reforms and that the people are the owners of the country. You know, all the sweet things that they know how to say. So they did go. However, our people were not moved much. Later—I think it was in 1955-56 that they said that they were going to start doing democratic reforms in Tibet. Even in the various dzong, they started the County Administrative Offices [Tib. རྫོང་རིམ་པའི་དོན་གཅོད་ཁང], and in these, they specifically sent groups to preach about doing democratic reforms and how in the end, it would be beneficial. So they made them make petitions. The dzongs had a lot of difficulties. If we said we agreed, then the Tibetan government had to not make a move. If we said no, then they [would] send people to the corner [Tib. ཟུར་བཀག་བཏང]. And so there were such things. A few played up the Chinese, those who wanted to go beyond what was asked. Anyway, in '55-56, talk about democratic reforms increased. A lot of people also came from Kham and Amdo. The country now became—for example, even regarding security, it was now dangerous to move about after dark, and there were many who just started shooting their guns from the rooftops. At that time, we kept guns in Tibet. They had not managed to confiscate them. At night, there was spurious firing from the rooftops.   

**Q:**  Just like that?   

**A:**  Yes, just like that, and the whole country sort of became disturbed and uneasy [Tib. བ་རེ་བེ་རེ].   

**Q:**  And what did you say about night time? That one feared moving about?   

**A:**  Yes, after dark there was sort of a fear of going about. Then the Chinese also changed their attitude. It was not [no longer] their earlier attitude. Then there was, I think [it was] the Dalai Lama's stableman, he was killed on the Kuru Bridge. And so their behavior was somewhat worse. The Kashag also had a lot of difficulties. Generally, they say a lot of sweet things, right? Now Tan Guansan and others were speaking very roughly. What should I say, [they were using] words of force [Tib. བཙན་ཤེད]. So with all of their demands, it seems they had a very difficult time. Then in 1956, the situation was very rough edged. Then in '57, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> rose up. Before that, a golden throne was offered. This was done before the Dalai Lama went to China. Finally, in '57, under the leadership of Andru Gombo Tashi, Chushigandru rose [up]. There were people from all three provinces. The name had to be kept as Chushigandru since it was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> government that was sort of in connection with the Chinese, as per the 17-Point Agreement. After Chushigandru rose [up], then the commotion got stronger from everywhere. Even in Lhasa things were not at ease.   

**Q:**  Some say that around this time, many Chinese were gathered and sent down to China, and that the Amdos and the Khambas were also sent. Such talk is there. Sometimes, it's said that people used to disappear at night.   

**A:**  Around this time, there were a lot of Chinese in blue clothes. We thought that they were with the Communists. Apparently, it seems, they were not with them. They were all arrested at night and put into trucks. I don't know where they were sent. Many were arrested. After this, and the reason why the Khambas rose up, was that they were told that Khambas should not be in Lhasa and that they must be sent [back] to their homeland [Tib. ལུང་པ]. Then it was said that a Chinese man riding a bicycle in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> made the announcement. So the Khambas said that they had no place to go [and that they could not go] home since the Chinese destroyed them [their homes] and did lawless things. So they were left with no alternative but to form an organization. So, I think <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> said that later. That a Chinese riding a bicycle announced that "We have to go home and so we have to rise up." That was stated in their petition to the Tibetan government. They did make a petition. Anyway, it seems that they were not going to leave the Khambas alone. At first, the blue Chinese were expelled. I don't know how they got there. They rented quarters in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a> houses. They were all arrested at night and expelled. You could not make out anything during the day. Then in '57 ...   

**Q:**  Yes, around this time, the Dalai Lama went to India.   

**A:**  Then in '56, the Dalai Lama was to go to India. It seems that Mao Zedong would have [had] to approve this. So when the people heard that the Dalai Lama was invited by the Indian Buddhist Association, everyone greeted [reacted to] this with enthusiasm, as if Tibet [had] just gotten independence. They were just delighted. When the Dalai Lama went to China, they behaved as if [they were] in mourning. When they heard that he was going to India, they were so happy. Then in '56, he went.   

**Q:**  Now, in India, some were saying that the Dalai Lama should stay while others [said] that he should go. I think that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>, and others must have asked that the Dalai Lama remains in India. At that time, Ngabö had come, [and] so too [had] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> and others. Regarding this, the different opinions, have you heard much about this?   

**A:**  I don't know clearly about this, but it seems that the one who said that the Dalai Lama should stay was Jenkhentsisum. On the other hand, those who had come from Tibet must have been saying that the Dalai Lama should return. I don't have anything definite to say about this, however, one did not hear that they asked the Dalai Lama to stay. Finally, for the time being, it seems they said that it was better to return. . Ngabö had to return earlier because of his wife or daughter—his wife was sick or something and he had to return. We were in Lhasa and it was said that the Dalai Lama was going to stay and that he was not returning. Then the Chinese were very alarmed that there would be trouble in Lhasa and they put sand bags on the rooftops. Even in the Tibet Autonomous Region, they gave a lot of lectures saying that the Dalai Lama must be brought back. That he must return to his own country. If he did that, then he would be considered the Dalai Lama, Gyawa Rimpoche [Tib. རྒྱལ་བ་རིམ་པོ་ཆེ]. That if he did not, then, that he would be nothing. And so they said that we had to send letters and send a reception [a group to receive him].   

**Q:**  The letters must have been sent from the Tibet Autonomous Region, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were. I think the Tibet Autonomous Region sent people to receive him [Tib. ཕེབས་བསུ]. During that time, the Chinese were very concerned that he would not return. [Interruption].   

**Q:**  Earlier, we were talking about India. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> had this organization, the Dedön Tshogpa [Tib. བདེ་དོན་ཚོགས་པ], right? The three <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> were sent by Drönyerchemmo Phala, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it seem [that they were] sent by him. What one generally hears is that they ran away. Later, Phala told me that he had sent the three of them.   

**Q:**  I heard that Yuthok <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> went to receive the Dalai Lama's return, but instead of returning, stayed in India. Later, he was in Kalimpong, and Kungö and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> Angula [Tib. ཨ་འགུག་ལགས] were left by the government. There is such talk.   

**A:**  I have heard the same thing. I did not have any talks with them. However, what everyone knows is that Yuthok <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawangchemmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawangchemmo</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang office (Ecclesiastic Office).">Trunyichemmo</a> Angula were appointed by the government to stay behind. Not only have I heard this, but if one looks at the situation, that one was a kalön and the other was a trunyichemmo, both [were] politically important. And so the government may have thought that they might [have] made a difference here [in Kalimpong]. So I also accept this [have considered this].   

**Q:**  During this time, Sitsab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> was also here.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Now, I don't quite understand this very well, but, the main one doing the work was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a>, and so what about the others?   

**A:**  Later, internally, I have a feeling that, maybe, they did not get along. I don't have anything definite to say, but as you have also indicated, since important people were left behind and since one did not hear that they organized and did something, I think that they may have had some problems on the work lines [Tib. མཛད་ཕྱོགས]. If they had agreed, then something would have come about. So perhaps, I suspect that they did not agree. However, I don't have anything definite to say about that.   

**Q:**  Generally, the people in Kalimpong must have considered them like a government.   

**A:**  For those who felt strongly about Tibet, for them, definitely. However, it is said that some tried to cause a disturbance [Tib. དཀྲོག་རྐྱེན].   

**Q:**  I was thinking [about] that from the point of view of the people. On the one hand, Tsipön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> was there. Gyalola was there and Kungö Khenjung was there. Around that time, he was [a part of] the Trade Mission and I hear that he also acted like an official representing the Tibetan government, a dönjö. I'm not sure about this. Then [ex-] Sitsab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and everyone were there, and I was thinking that from the point of view of the people, this may have been important. But this is just my thinking . Yes, when one is doing research, one sort of has to think from all sorts of angles, and say, "Maybe it's something like this," et cetera.   

**A:**  Yes. Regarding this, I don't have much to say. But from the point of view of the Chinese, they considered <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> [to be] a real enemy.   

**Q:**  When you were there, you may have heard something.   

**A:**  The Chinese said that they must be thrown out or that they must be brought to Tibet. But that they could not interfere in Tibetan affairs. That they must be excommunicated from Tibetan society.   

**Q:**  [They said this] at a meeting?   

**A:**  In the meeting hall. The Kashag had most probably given an order saying that they must be returned to Tibet or else they could not interfere in Tibetan affairs. The reason was that the Chinese made them write it, right?   

**Q:**  Now, was this in a meeting or what?   

**A:**  They said that in a meeting, and in the Kashag, it seems, they also discussed this.   

**Q:**  Where did you hear about this?   

**A:**  We heard it in a meeting.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, at the Shabden Lhagang [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལྷ་ཁང]. The meeting to subdue the Khambas' disturbance and to appease Zhongyang.   

**Q:**  I see, at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time. It was said that they must return to Tibet and if they did not, then they could not interfere in Tibetan affairs. That they must be excommunicated [Tib. ཕུད] from the Tibetan side. That the Chinese were also saying this forcefully. This was in '57.   

