# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** July 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya discusses his imprisonment in Chamdo where he was interrogated about his work in the Grain Interest Department and how he was taught songs that praised Mao Zedong. He talks about his release from prison and an early mass struggle session. He also discusses Ngabö's political advice to the dzong and describes a Guomindang spy in the People's Liberation Army who distributed anti-communist leaflets. Finally, he discusses the political differences between Lhalu and Ngabö.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_03/H_0039_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Whatever I have, I am telling you. I consider your work to be very important. What should I say—whatever I have to say, I am saying it. More than this, I don't have anything to write in my book [to be published in 1994]. I am telling you everything. And this too is what truly took place and what I really remember. There is no use in saying uncertain things. That I do not like. Really, what took place, did take place, and what did not, did not, isn't that right? In human life, one can't have only good things, isn't that right?   

**Q:**  Yes, [I agree]. Kungö, let me ask you this. Last time we got to the point where you were taken down to Chamdo.   

**A:**  Oh, this happened. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso , along with the Chinese soldiers, went as sort of an introduction [Tib. སྣེ་སྤྲོད] [a welcome group] to Ngabö, who was at Drugugön. I was being sent to Chamdo Prison along with quite a few Chinese soldiers. In Chamdo, there was the Regimental Commander Wang [Ch. tuan zhang], who had a beard. From among the people that we were to meet, he was the highest [ranking official].   

**Q:**  Could it have been the Commander-in-Chief Wang [Qimei] [Ch. si ling]?   

**A:**  No, Wang Siling had not arrived yet. It was Wang Tuanzhang. There was a letter sent to him and the Chinese soldiers gave him the letter. There was nothing they could do for the time being since they were in quite a commotion [predicament] with problems of accommodation, food, and housing. So they told me that for a few days, I could leave. They asked me where I was going to stay. I said that "At the moment, I don't have any place to stay. So I'm going to rent some place." So they let me go. They were in such commotion [distress] that they didn't pay much attention to me. So I went to the place where I used to stay. It was full of Chinese soldiers and there was no way to even go inside. [It was] packed with soldiers. So I was wondering where to go and pondered [this] for a while. At Chamdo Labrang, there were some workers called Sheyta [Tib. ?]. I knew one of them and told him I was looking for a place to stay and [asked] if he could loan me a place. He said yes. I stayed at his house for about two days. After that, they sent an interpreter and called me [back]. I went there and it was the occasion where they grouped us in tens and put us in prison . We consisted of the staff at Chamdo, military leaders, and others. They grouped us in tens at the military camp. I was in the second group of ten persons. This second group was all government lay officials and tsidrung. All there was to do was to send somebody to get my bedding. I think it was our first or second day in prison when Ngabö was brought down from Drugugön. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Ngabö, two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་དྲུང] Aide/secretary to the Kashag. There were usually two of these, both aristocratic lay officials. Their job was to assist the Kalöns, and their usual work involved writing whatever letters, documents, orders, and recommendations the Kashag sent to the Dalai Lama and other offices. Their office was called the Dröndrungkhang [tib. མགྲོན་དྲུང་ཁང].">kadrung</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་མགྲོན] The position of aide to the Kashag that was filled by lay aristocratic officials.">gandrön</a>, and probably Kungö Khenjung Simpön Khembo [Tib. གཟིམ་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ]—since Rimshi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བ] The name of the aristocratic family of an important government official.">Trogawa</a> [Tib. ཁྲོ་དགའ་བ] had already left, they were all imprisoned in Sidogthang and nothing special was done. So in groups of ten, they told us the same old sweet things that they always said. That they had come to serve the Tibetan people and you know, the usual sweet stuff. So every morning, we were lined up and listened to this. Then they taught us songs. The interpreter of the song teacher was a Baba by the name of Kel<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> Yanga [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་གཡང་དགའ]. Though interpreters changed, he stayed the longest. They preached about the goodness of socialism, that there probably wasn't any system better in the world. You know, they have steps in teaching their system, like our religion. From the very first social institutions to communism [the evolution of their system]. So they preached that and how in the end, the world has no choice but to end up with communism. Once one had traveled on this path, then there would be prosperity, no difference between people, a society without court and soldiers—you know, the way they talk about the socialist paradise [Tib. ལྷ་ཡུལ]. So they taught us these things. Then they taught us songs. The first song was "The East is Red [Tib. ཤར་ཕྱོགས་དམར]," what the Chinese call [Tib. དོང་ཕ༹ང་ཧོང], the one they always play on the radio these days. It was praise for Mao Zedong. There were Tibetan lyrics. I don't know who made them. Words like, "In the east, the sun rises, and in the PRC, Mao Zedong was born." That he looked after the serfs and things like that. That was the first song they taught us. The song did not have anything else except praise for Mao Zedong. I used to smoke at that time and on the cigarette pack—they were not good cigarettes, but the yellow pack No. 10 [Indian]. So on the empty No. 10 pack, I wrote some lyrics in praise of the Dalai Lama instead of praise for Mao Zedong, "The lotus holder in the snow land, our only support. The sun and moon of religion and politics shine [on] the world. All people trust in him. May the life of Tenzin Gyatso live till [for a] hundred eons. Buddhism and politics will not decline and we will hold our own capital [Tib. གངས་ཇན་ལྗོང། པད་དཀར་འཆང། རང་ཅག་ཀྱེ་རྒུ་ཡོང་ཀྱི་སྐྱབ་གཅིག་པུ། ཆོས་སྲིད་ཉི་ཟླས་འཛམ་གླིང་གསལ། ཐམས་ཅད་བློ་སེམས་ཁོང་ལ་གཏོད། བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་སྐུ་ཚེ་ནི། བསྐལ་བརྒྱའི་བར་དུ་མི་འགྱུར་རྟག་བཏན་ཤོག། རྒྱལ་བསྟན་ཆབ་སྲིད་མི་ཉམས། རང་རིགས་རང་གི་རྒྱལ་ས་ཟིན་པར་ཤོག]." So I wrote that and we sang it in our group. They were all government officials and they all said it was very good and that we all should learn these words. So everyone learned these words, and instead of the Chinese words, we sang these words. Now, that was sort of ruthless, right ? They didn't find out for about two days. After that, along with the Baba interpreter, they said that "Your group has made new lyrics to a national song. Who is the person who did it?" Now, it's not good to keep quiet, right? So I said that I made it. "This is a big mistake," they said. I said that I didn't know that it was a mistake, but that I did make the words. Then they talked among themselves and they told me to come [go with them]. I was taken from the group along with the interpreter and a soldier. They took me to their office at Chamdo Marthang. They wrote down my name, age, birthplace, and position. Then they said, "Permanent words to a national song have been altered. New words have been composed. Did you make [do] that?" I said yes. They continued, "Who told you to make this and what is your goal for doing this?" I replied, "Nobody told me to. I did it on my own. I don't have any goal. However, we Tibetans all recognize the Dalai Lama as the Avalokitesvara [Tib. སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས]. All Tibetans do, not only me. So for this reason, we are always praying to Avalokitesvara, saying may he live a long life, may he really have success. Whenever it is, we Tibetans always pray in this manner. So what I have written are prayers for him. I don't have any other goal." They could not really assess the situation. They said, "Actually, the words to this song have been permanently instituted by the country. If you make changes to this, then it is a great crime, not at all a small one. However, you people are in the minority lands. Moreover, you did not know the situation. For these reasons, we have specially absolved any punishments. However, you cannot do such things in the future. These words [lyrics] are made by the country and anyone who thinks of something cannot make up words [lyrics]." So I said all right. There wasn't anything to say except that, right? So I said, "Alright, I won't compose any in the future." After that, they said, "Your work was with grain interest or drukhe, and up to now, you have not handed over any grain to the liberation soldiers. So where has the grain been kept and how much do you have? These days, food is scarce for the liberation soldiers and they are facing difficulties. This grain belongs to the people and so you are also not entitled to it. This you have to hand over to us since the liberation soldiers are the soldiers of the people." They always have the people on their tongues, but the ones they rob are the people . I said, "Yes, it's true that I was the drukhe, but we don't just collect [grain] and store it in a house. What the drukhe does is loan the grain and collect the interest. This interest is collected yearly through the Payroll Office or Phogang. We do accounts with the Phogang office yearly and we, ourselves, don't store the grain." They said, "You say that you loan the grain and collect the interest. If that is the case, then the loans that have been given to the people, we the liberation forces will never take. But to the various labrangs, private [estates], and traders, are there loans given out or not?" "That I don't remember," I replied. "It is in the documents. And I also have a colleague and assistants, and so I don't remember any specific loan takers." "Where are the document?" they asked. I said, "They are in my house. However, I did not know that the liberation forces could listen and discuss. What we have heard is that the liberation forces kill and eat people, bury people alive, cut necks, and [I] have heard all the worst things. So out of great fright, we ran away. And in the process, more important than the documents, I left my belongings. When I returned, my house was filled with your soldiers and there was no way for me to even go in. So I cannot hand over the documents to you. Maybe the people of Chamdo have them or your soldiers may have them. If you ask them, they might have them." Then they asked me if this was true, and so I said, "It's as I have said." So they returned me. After that, they endlessly asked me about the documents, you know. Now, it was not the same person, but another. Even the office that they took me to was different. From this time on, until we were let out of prison and until their biggest leader, Wang Qimei, came to Sidogthang, they continued to ask me about the documents. At that time, Phünwang and the others were there and he was the interpreter. I didn't specifically have any relations with Phünwang, but his brother, Lobsang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. བློ་བཟང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], also known as Jiang Jeshek, and you know Lo Chömpel [Tib. བློ་ཆོས་འཕེལ], who stayed in your house's courtyard?—Oh, that's right, you wouldn't know since you were a child . They are all brothers. Their son is in Switzerland [and he is] called Tarsey Tsültrim [Tib. star sras sp.? tshul khrims]. He went to Tibet and became quite famous [Tib. སྐད་གྲགས].   

**Q:**  Yes, something like that.   

**A:**  He is Baba Chömpel's son. We used to know each other in those days and used to joke around. Politically, they took a keen interest. And they had great loyalty towards Tibetans. And so Phünwang was also advising me to hand in the documents. I told him, "I don't have any to hand in and even if I did, what's the use? More important than the documents, I can't even get my own belongings." That's what I said. Later, Phünwang was a bit angry and sent the lay official Norgyela [Tib. ནོར་རྒྱས་ལགས] the next day or so. Norgyela said, "Phünwang said that 'Maya is known to me and so I showed my mouth and spoke to him, but Maya showed his ass to me. The Phogang has accounted for everything to the Liberation Army, right down to the smallest receipt. But not a single letter of the drukhe has been handed over, nor a single grain of barley. If he does that [doesn't hand anything over], then, in the future, he will have a lot of difficulties. I have told him that it is better to hand in what he has, but he won't listen to me. You know each other, and so approach Maya and tell him to hand over the letters because he will have a lot of difficulties in the future [if he doesn't]. So go and advise him.' This is what he told me." So Norgyela came to see me. He is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> regiment's Rupön Drala Tenzin's [Tib. དགྲ་ལྷ་བསྟན་འཛིན] son. Later, he requested lay official status. He is a tall person and a good friend of Phünwang. So this is what he said. I was kind of disappointed because we were prisoners and they had sort of become leaders [Tib. དཔོན་པོ], wasn't that it? So I related [things] from beginning to end and really substantiated the matter. But still I was sort of suspicious in my mind, and I was sort of disappointed. So I told Norgyela, "I have not shown my ass to Phünwang. Phünwang advised me to hand over [the documents]. This is true, it's good. But if I had something to hand over, I would [have]. What am I going to do with them? More important than the drukhe documents, my life is in their hands. My life is in their hands. No matter how stupid I may be, that much I understand. The Tibetan government's land, officials, and people are in their hands. So is my life, and so what the hell am I going to do holding onto the documents? I must be very stupid or else, why the hell should I hold on to them?" This is what I said, but his anger was not appeased. "Today you came and advised me, and this is very good. However, it is still because you did not believe me. And since this is the situation, Phünwangla is the officer and we are prisoners, and he can do what he wishes. I will leave. Whatever it is, these are the only quarters I have rented. Whatever I have is in these quarters. So I will step out and you [can] search everywhere. If you find one piece of letter, don't hesitate at all to cut my neck. I have not one bit of hesitation in regard to [doing] this. If you find [anything], then it is my fault and you can automatically [immediately] cut my neck." So I got up and started to leave, and told him to search. Just then he caught me, "What are you talking about? I was never told to search your house . We are friends and so I just [came to] advise [you]. If there are no letters, then nothing can be done about that. I will leave and there is no need for you to be so angry." I said, "Yes, [I] am not really angry, but disappointed. I should be disappointed, right? I've been asked to produce something I don't have. To tell a dead man to rise is very difficult, isn't it? I absolutely don't have anything." So he left. So regarding these documents, I went through a lot of anguish. I had no documents to hand over. So this is what happened. Now let me take you back to the prison again. Later, we were released, right? So we were in prison and stayed there continuously. Wang Qimei and Phünwang came later. After their arrival, they started the Chamdo Liberation Committee [Tib. བཅིངས་བཀྲོལ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. Phünwang was the director or Zhuren. Now the peaceful process began. As representatives, the person who was with me, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso and Kandrön Samling were appointed. Ngabö sent them to Lhasa to begin the peace discussions. They went to Lhasa and they would have given an account of the whole situation, right? Between this period, the Dalai Lama suddenly took over the reigns of the government. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> and Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] divined that the Dalai Lama must be given the reigns of the government. It was in that same year of 1950, I think, that the Dalai Lama took over the reigns of the government. However, it was a tattered political entity and everything was not in hand. Chamdo was already lost and it was a question of when they were going to come to Lhasa. So it was only at this stage that the government was handed over to the Dalai Lama, and also that the country was not completely intact. This was really true. It was not a question of criticizing out of like or dislike. If we were not capable, then we were part of it. Really, we were not capable. So a tattered country was handed over. The Dalai Lama was sixteen, and at that tender age, they handed it over . However, this turned out to be most wonderful. The moment the Dalai Lama took over the reigns, for example, the feelings on the part of everyone, lay officials, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a>, monks, government clerks, traders, the public—in everyone's mind, the moment it was said the Dalai Lama had taken over the reigns of the government, everyone was united as one. This automatically took place. Things like this are very strange. Nobody had to advise, nor give money and things. There was no need to make any policy and plan. Just the Dalai Lama's name alone; the moment it was said that he took over the reigns of the government, in everyone's mind there was such great loyalty to the government. Now that it had become the Dalai Lama's government, everyone felt that they automatically had to really do something great. Such things are very strange, you know. [It] could have been <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐར་མ] 1. The smallest currency unit (a copper coin) in the traditional Tibetan currency system. Ten karma equaled 1 sho. 2. A work point in post-1959 Tibet. 3. A person&#x27;s name.">karma</a> and prayers. Very strange. Just his name alone, that he took over the country, [and] everyone became united. Otherwise, during the regency period, since they did not get along, everyone's mind was in a state of commotion. This was really true. Besides commotion, there were also contending groups. Right? Some liked Reting, others <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, with the majority in the middle. So everyone's mind was unsettled. Unlike a foreign confrontation, it was internal, and so many families had various relations. The moment it was said the Dalai Lama took over the reigns, all of this was forgotten. It was like it never existed at all. Strange, peoples' minds seemed to automatically unite. He is absolutely incomparable [Tib. བླ་ན་མ་མཆིས་པ], or else Tibet would have been gone a long time ago. There would have been no occasion to demonstrate. Internally it was like that, and so one would not have even thought about challenging the Chinese at all. There was no way to even think about it. So from this situation, I have absolute faith that he is indeed the living Avalokitesvara. [There is] not a shadow of doubt. After the Dalai Lama took over the reigns, an order was sent to Ngabö. In that letter, the Dalai Lama said that "Such a situation has come to pass, however, do not be disappointed and disheartened [Tib. སེམས་ཕམ་དང་ཞུམ་པ་མ་བྱེད]." Another letter was for Mao Zedong to be handed [given] via Wang Qimei. Now, this letter was very deep. It read, "During the period where I was not of age, there had been contradictions in the friendly relations between Tibet and China. Since this is the case, now, just as all the monk and lay people of Tibet have requested, I have taken over the religious and the political reigns of the country. Since this is the case, I have gotten rid of the contradictions between Tibet and China in mind. For this reason, Zhongyang has control over, or has kind of invaded, my land and my people. All of this [the military et cetera] should be withdrawn. I will restore the friendly relations [Tib. མཐུན་ལམ་སླར་གསོ]." Such a letter was sent. This was to be sent to Mao Zedong. For all of us civilian and military officers who were in prison, the Dalai Lama had sent some money. One day, suddenly, Ngabö came into the prison accompanied by Kadrung Tsögö. He said, "The Dalai Lama has sent such a letter and this I want to read in front of you." He read the letter and we all cried. Isn't [that] it? What shall I say, the Dalai Lama, at such a tender age, during such a difficult period, he had to take over the reigns. However, his advice and actions were so thoughtful. If everything broke up, like pouring hot water into a bottle [Tib. ཚ་གས་འཐེབས], we would surely have gotten the bad end of it, right? His message was so tactful and even consoled us, and [he] gave us some money and in one's heart, one became sad and happy at the same time. And it also took place in prison. So we all cried and there wasn't anything to do but that. So on the basis of the message which said that friendly relations were going to be established once more, and also the message that said that my land which had been invaded must be restored—the Chinese found it very difficult to do anything. They couldn't say that they were going to hand over the land. Neither could they say that they did not want friendly relations since they needed relations. Neither could they stretch nor curtail [figure of speech: [Tib. བརྐྱངས་མ་ཤེས, བསྐུམ་མ་ཤེས]]. When I remember this way of thinking, though they may not have had the education of the West, I thought that our politicians were very knowledgeable and had a gift. Very deep, very adroit, and difficult to act on and handle [laughter]. And this was issued in the Dalai Lama's name. So when this took place, we were relaxed. The moment the Dalai Lama's letter arrived, things began to unwind for us. There was this famous head of a division by the name of Wu Sizhang [Ch. shi zhang]. It is said that a film was [made] specially about the military accomplishments of Wu Sizhang and the chief of staff, Li Canmuzhang [Ch. can mou zhang]. We were all taken to the courtyard of the prison since Wu Sizhang was to be there. They kept us there and they all sat on chairs, nothing really fancy. However, tables were covered with cloth and chairs [were] placed. Wu Sizhang came and said their [the Chinese] usual attractive things, their set of mantras. What they had learned, they recited it all [laughter]. After that, the specific thing he said was this. He said, "You all are about to complete your education. Until now, you all have received an education. Some say that you are prisoners. You are not prisoners. This is a school. Now you are about to graduate from the school. For this reason, in two weeks, you will graduate and you can return to Lhasa or you can stay in Chamdo. You can go to any place in Tibet and you can do whatever work you'd like. This is your choice and we can't say do this or that. If you are going to Lhasa, then we have one thing to say. And this is up to now. You have received [an] education, and so you clearly [can] tell what the Communist Party is like and what the liberation war is like. You all know what it is like, how we think, what work we do and what our aim is. You all have been educated and you know. For this reason, up to now, the foreign imperialists and the reactionary Guomindang government have instigated problems between us. Since they have done that, the Tibetan people have become alarmed. We are indeed here to serve. However, as a result of the instigation, there is a confrontation between us. Now you have the responsibility of getting rid of this confrontation. So if you are going to Lhasa, whether it is to the leaders or the people, you have to clearly state things. Otherwise, you can go anywhere. So in two weeks, you will graduate. You cannot ever say that it is a prison. It is not. It is a school." I was even laughing inside since that was such boasting [Tib. ཧམ་པ]. So when they boast like that and when one is in a situation where the other is powerful, there isn't anything to say . So they said that we have graduated from school. That it was not a prison, but a school, [that] makes one laugh. In situations like that, they didn't have any shame. So anyway, it was thanks to the Dalai Lama's letter. If the Dalai Lama's letter had not arrived, they had no intention of releasing us. They were definitely going to take action based on the situation. However, with the Dalai Lama's letter and the beginning of the peaceful dialogue, they released us. So in about two weeks, they released us. Having been released, there wasn't any place to stay or to go. Anyway, it was better than prison since one could meet friends and acquaintances.   

**Q:**  I want to ask you about the action at Denkhog. The Doji and others left after setting fire to the ammunition dump. Then how many days after that was Chamdo taken? When Chamdo was taken, was there any fighting?   

**A:**  There was no resistance at Chamdo. But at the borders, in particular, there seemed to have been a number of fights.   

**Q:**  There were soldiers still there at the borders?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. I think there was some fighting at the borders, but those who were [at the] upper areas, I don't know, but I think they all ran away. Everyone managed to get to Lhasa. All the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> were at Lhasa . We, who were not the military but civilian officers, remained, and the depön, who had soldiers and arms, had all gone to Lhasa. It was like that, really like that. However, the way we did our work, there was not much investigation, but it could get really funny. Muja fought and also [so did] Tsidrung Ludrub <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ], who was head of the Traya militia. I don't really remember the place, but it could have been [at the] Domsum [Tib. ?] Drukha ferry site, or right at the border someplace. Anyway, he fought a lot. He had a brother referred to as Bula. He was also wounded and a lot of the militia was lost. Likewise, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a> militia was with Bökhangwa and they fought a lot. They did fight and there weren't any instances where they did not fight at all. However, better arms, greater numbers and better tactics, won the fight. You know, the Chinese had arrived the day that they [Ngabö and company] left Chamdo. Chamdo is here and Drugugön is up here. The Chinese had already arrived here. They blocked the main route as well as the northern route. The Chinese arrived on that very day [that they left], or it was the next day. The reason being that those who fought at Denkhog, like Muja Depön and the border patrols at Derge, under Depön Karchung [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང], as well as the Thadang Regiment Depön, they were all together, fleeing to Drugugön. So they arrived at Drugugön on that very day and not the next. Anyway, they would have arrived on the 8th. What they said was that they came to Chamdo and since the Doji was not there, they came. I think this is true in the case of Muja.   

**Q:**  Now, earlier we talked about the Yangtse River as the border, right? As far as the Chinese were concerned, they crossed the Yangtse and came, right? So in that case, then they did not consider that to be the border?   

**A:**  Yes, they did consider that to be the border, but later the Chinese said that Tibet is a part of China.   

**Q:**  So, therefore, they did not consider that to be the border?   

**A:**  Yes, they did not consider it and said that the whole of Tibet is a part of China. Yes, so they did not consider it and came. They crossed the Yangtse River on March [October] 7th. So it was not a question of not fighting. They did fight, but they could not manage because the Chinese out numbered the Tibetans. They ran and fought and ran and fought. Jangda Khyushur [Tib. ?]—and when Karchung Depön was wearing a robe [Tib. ཟླ་གམ] and fleeing [laughter], the Chinese made that night attack. Now, those who were in the upper areas, like the Riwoche border patrol, Nangchen Thangka and others, they had all arrived in Lhasa. Depön Phulung [Tib. ཕུ་ལུང] was the border patrol at Riwoche. Perhaps the day that Ngabö left, the next day the Chinese had definitely arrived. On the 9th Tibetan day, the Chinese were there because on that day, the 9th, we were sent to Chamdo. So on that day, Wang Tuanzhang was already there.   

**Q:**  Alright, now you got out from prison—now you have graduated from school, right ?   

**A:**  Yes, the wonderful school I graduated from. And did I tell you about some incident at the prison earlier on or not?   

**Q:**  Ah, you related the incident where Ngabö came to the prison.   

**A:**  Other than that, I did not?   

**Q:**  No.   

**A:**  Ah, I forgot something that took place earlier. Shall I tell you about that or—it's just sort of a side thing. It's not that important.   

**Q:**  Relate it because one never knows what might come out of it .   

**A:**  So let me backtrack somew<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a>. Ngabö has yet to arrive. It was just before the peaceful relations were to begin. It was just after we were put into prison. They lined us all up with Chinese soldiers on both sides, and we were taken to a plain to the east of Chamdo. We, prisoners, were made to sit on the ground with soldiers on the sides. There were a number of chairs arranged on which Wang Tuanzhang and a number of Chinese officers sat with quite a lot of soldiers. Seated on the chair were one or two of our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> persons. They had gathered the people and they were standing around. They did not sit on the ground. We prisoners were the only ones sitting on the ground. On that day, the usual long lecture was given. On that day, now as I think about it, they sort of spoke a lot about their future plans. They said a lot of things aimed at the Chamdo people. They told them that the Liberation Army belongs to the people and is there to serve the people. That they have specifically come to liberate the people, for the sake of the people. Otherwise, the people were put under a lot of difficulties and exploited while the landlords enjoyed themselves. That the actual hard work was done by the people. That the people were the real owners of the country. However, since they had not been able to rise up, they had faced these difficulties and now the liberation force had liberated the people. So they said things like that. It was kind of like introducing us, the military and civilian officers of the Tibetan government, to the people as the exploiters. It was to say that now people have risen and that they have the power. The implication was that if you want to shape these guys up, then you can now do it. However, the people of Chamdo, when all of a sudden everything around them changed, only wept, and there was not even a single person who disliked us and acted sarcastic [Tib. ཟུར་ཟ]. Not even a single person. There was not even one. There were so many who also wept. Not one showed their anger. After that, they said, "At this moment, the foreign imperialists, in order to instigate trouble among us brothers, established wireless communication and have specially assigned spies, like Ford. Now if one asks to whom do these wireless sets belong to? They belong to the people. If one asks who the owner is, then it is the wealth of the people. Now, this cannot be handed over to someone. Besides not being able to hand over [the wireless communicators], some say that they have been thrown into the river, or broken. However, these spies have not accounted for the wealth of the people. So you must apologize to the people and own up to the work that you have done. You must speak out about it and beg the pardon of the people." At that time, there was a staff person who was born in Kalimpong or Gangtok. I think his real name was Thöndrub. But he used to say that his name was Thönyö Shagpa [Tib. དོན་ཡོད་བཞག་པ]. A young sort of hard headed man. He was one of the more capable persons who worked under Ford. He was there with a new shirt, and his hat tilted in a show-offish manner. They took him and said that he must apologize to the people. They asked him what he had done with the wireless items and where he had taken them. And [said] that he must publicize this at this gathering. If he apologized to the people, and since he is living in a minority's area, there would be no punishment. Actually, there was no other place to go except one [prison or execution]. They scolded him a lot and the interpreter was a Baba. So they brought him and told him to apologize to the people. He said, "Okay [Tib. ལསོ]." His speech was that of the Tibetans in these parts (Darjeeling-Sikkim). It is Tibetan and one can understand it, but it has its own beauty. So he came up to the microphone and said, "This system actually originated from the Soviet Union . You guys wouldn't know that." Right there and then, they scolded him and asked, "What [the hell] are you saying? You are here to confess and apologize to the people and you don't have the right to say such things regarding the system. You are very bad. If you can, confess, otherwise, there is only one place for you to go. Can you apologize to the people?" He said, "Yes [Tib. ལསོ]," and returned [to the mic]. He even put his hands behind his back and said, "This system was first made by one man called Stalin. You guys wouldn't know about this." [It was] so funny. They arrested him and took him to prison. They didn't allow him to speak any further . Really, he was a brave person who didn't blink an eye. He was not to be seen anywhere. He must have been sent to China. Later, in the sixties, the Indian government must have interceded and he was released. He was working as an accountant in Dalhousie for the government in exile. I said, "Oh, you are here." "Yes, I'm here," he said. He suffered a lot of hardships. I don't know what happened after that, but he was not there and is not even to be seen [has not been seen]. I don't know where he is. He was a brave man. Remember the time I told you that they left us to ourselves for two days before they imprisoned us? At that time, Kungö Horkhang and I were together at his house. Thönyö Shagpa was approaching. He said [with his accent], "Kungö, the Americans are going to bomb. We are not there and they are also not there [Tib. ཨ་མེ་རི་ཀས་འབོམ་གཞུ་གི་རེད། ང་རང་ཚོ་མི་འདུག་ལ་ཁོ་རང་ཚོ་ཡང་མི་འདུག]. [Means that both the Tibetans and the Chinese were going to get killed]." [He was] a very odd fellow . Kungö was alarmed and asked, "Oh my, what are you saying? You don't come to my house. You are saying all sorts of things [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང]." I burst out laughing. The way he spoke was so strangely beautiful. He was such an obdurate [Tib. རྫབ་ཆེན] person. But, you know, we really did have hopes that someone would help us by bombing. We really did, but there was no one. But we really did have hopes. He also thought the same, but he said it [out] loud. I thought for a moment that it was true. So, he was one brave person. So that was one slice of our prison life. On another occasion, they lined us up and, once more, with armed soldiers in formation on either side, they took us a very long distance to Sidogthang. The area was just completely packed with soldiers in their khaki tents. So many soldiers had arrived. We prisoners were set down on the ground. On the sides of the hill, they placed targets and it was a target practice for the cannons. The cannons were fired in rapid sequences [succession] [or all at once] [Tib. དགུ་ཤོག], and it was like firing in line. The reason, it seems, was to show us their firepower. To make us frightened and destroy our determination. To lose our resolve, you know, like saying, "Oh my, it's now better to do whatever they say." Truly, the cannons were accurate and could fire in rapid sequences and were very impressive. They were amazingly accurate. So for day one, they showed us that. After that, it was as I have related earlier, where Ngabö came [to prison] and the peaceful process had started. Then later, we were released and there was a message sent by the Doji Ngabö asking me to come to his residence. So we all went there and the Doji said, "The reason I am calling you today is that your work through the most difficult times is over. However, there is still some unfinished work. What's left to be done is [left], and I have also spoken with Wang Qimei, and he said that the Doji must take control of the various areas under it. That I must appoint <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> to the various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and estates, and do the necessary things. That all the administrative power of the Dome area is in my hands. So this is what he said. Now, if that is the case, then I think that this is excellent, and so I have called you here. So since they told me that I have the power to appoint the dzongpön—most of the dzongpön, out of fear, have fled." Dzogang Dzong Tsidrung, out of fear, committed suicide, you know? And most of them had fled [Ngabö continues], "So since the Dome area administration has been handed to me, and if we don't look after it, then that won't do. The Chinese are telling us to send our people, not because they don't have the personnel—they do—so I think that it may be a good idea if we take care of the region. Now the hard work is over, and don't hesitate on the easier road ahead. This is what I feel, and today I have made some tentative appointments and it would be nice if everyone could go to the respective dzong." So he made appointments for the four or five of us. I was told to go to Pembar Tar Dzong because "Since the peaceful process has begun, whether it is concerning dispatch,adrung and other personal come frequently. They have to send corvée horses and in order to not to have any hindrances, you have to go there since the dzongpöns have fled. At times, there may be some danger. So you should also check security," and so in order for there to be no obstacles to the peaceful process, I was asked to go there. Likewise, Gonjo Shidö, Dzogang Dzong, Sangnga chöling, and there were quite a few others, Ngabö told a few of us lay officials and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> to go to these areas. It was said that since this was what the Doji ordered, we would discuss it first. So they discussed and said, "There is just no way to go. How can we go? During the time of our service for the Tibetan government, we had servants, we had arms, [and] we had power. For this reason, a few of us in the dzong could administer [watch over] the area. Now we don't have this. The situation is such that we don't have servants, no arms, and if we sit above the people and speak, who is going to listen? Let alone listening, there is even a real danger to one's life. And since this is the situation, we can't go. And so we have no choice but to ask for leave." This is what they said and I said, "Yes, you are not to be blamed at all. Just go ahead and ask for leave, and I will also support your leave. However, I have been asked to go to Pembar. First of all, it is situated in the upper area, and secondly, I worked in the Pembar area of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤོ་སྟར་ལྷོ་གསུམ] A large area/region in Chamdo prefecture whose three main dzongs were Shopando, Pembar, and Lho.">Shotalhosum</a>, in Khyungpo Karnagsesum [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་དཀར་ནག་སེར་གསུམ] . So I know the area. I have good relations with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>s and the peaceful process is also very important. If this peaceful process falls apart, then one never knows what can happen, and so I am going. Though I don't have servants, a horse under my ass, or arms, I am just going to bear the hardships and go [Tib. དབུ་རུ་མུ་རུ]. Your assignments are more in the lower areas, and so no doubt you [will] have difficulties. And so you are not to be blamed and I will support your leave." So we approached Ngabö and they asked for leave. Ngabö did insist somewhat. He said, "Now, you think carefully. The most difficult impasse has already passed. Now, this is just for the time being, just the tail end of the work. And basically, there might be a settlement [Tib. གཏན་འབེབས] in the future. But now, since the dzong and the estates are empty, our own people should go there and look after them. When others are telling us to take care of them and then if we can't do so, then it looks rather hopeless. So how about going. I realize how difficult it is, but having worked through the difficult period, it no use saying that you don't want to work during lenient times." They said, "Please, now we can't. Let alone anything else, we won't even be able to take care of our own lives. For this reason, please." Now I kept quiet and then said that I would go. "The peaceful process is important. However, you all are not to be blamed and it is not a case where you do not want to work. However, you are being asked based on the situation. My place of work is in Pembar and I am on good terms with the misers, and whether I succeed or not, I don't have thoughts that it will be dangerous for myself. For this reason, I am going and must serve to the best of my capability. As you have ordered [stated], the most difficult period is over and there is no need to hesitate on the less difficult times ahead." So I said I was going and he was sort of happy about it. So the rest resigned and returned to Lhasa. I went to Pembar. It was very difficult with no horses to ride, but friends and acquaintances brought horses and mules and I was just able to leave. With me were two persons who were related to me a little. In Pembar, Pembar Labrang really treated me very well. The reincarnate was very young, but there was the son [Tib. གདུང་སྲས] of the former Pembar Lama. A very wonderful person, and so was the chandzö. Since I had worked there earlier, they knew me and I got along well with the miser. Wherever I went, I had never exploited anyone. This is one thing I can carry with pride. I always got along very well with the miser. This was my karma. When I went to Khyungpo, there was talk in the kitchen [that] I [could] hear. It was said, "It's strange. The younger government <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> appear to be better." "Otherwise, when we hear the sound of bells hung on horses, our hearts throb with pain." The bell that sounds "wang-wang" [tied on the horses' chests]. They had to get places to stay, send horses, kitchen workers and [had] other difficulties, right? Anyway, I got along with the people and my colleague was Tsidrung Tsangpala. He was also someone who thought much about the people. [He was] also strongly supportive of the government. We got along well. Pembar Labrang helped a lot and allowed me to stay in their guest house. Now I did not have anything, right? I was given <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a>, flour, meat, and butter. And the miser that I knew, poor things, they brought eggs and meat, fodder for the animals, tea, and chang. The people really did their best. When I was at Pembar, about 300 Chinese had already come. A moment ago, I was a prisoner, and now I was called dzongpön by the Chinese. They have no shame and we also now seem to have become shameless . From a prisoner, I became a dzongpön [laughter]. [It] makes you laugh. It's like we were opera performers. Therefore, one sees that worldly existence, or samsara [Tib. འཁོར་བ], is absolutely useless. A moment ago, when I was in Chamdo, I was a prisoner. Now in Pembar, I was called a dzongpön. It was all meaningless. So for the peaceful talks, I did my best with the reception of the people going by and sending the corvée horses, and all of these [things] were done very well, without hindrance, fulfilling the transportation obligations. In such cases, the Pembar people were very good and very supportive of the government. Lhodzong and Pembar, they had loyalty towards the government. They were part of the government from early times. They were very good, attentive and well prepared. At Pembar, I had a good rest. I enjoyed it very much.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay there?   

**A:**  Until Ngabö went to China and returned. Until 1951.   

**Q:**  During that time, there were about 300 Chinese there, right? At this time, whether from the government or the Doji- what was the order? There must have been supplies that the Chinese needed, food and other [things]. Were the various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> asked to help with these supplies or was that later?   

**A:**  Yes. This was very strange. Until the peace process was ratified, the Chinese were not to go beyond Chamdo. However, they were already in Pembar. I don't think that even Ngabö knew that the Chinese had come to Pembar. I'm not sure. There was a border agreed to until the peace process was completed. I think it was Chamdo, but I am not sure, but there was one made. Anyway, they had passed the border and were in Pembar. There were about 300 of them. When we got there, it had already been some time since the Chinese had arrived. And as you have said, at times they wanted eggs and chickens, and food items like grains. However, at that time, money was paid for [them] and it was not a situation where it was collected from taxes or collected by dividing the amount needed [Tib. ཆ་གསེས་བཏང] among the households. It was bought and sold willingly. They also did not bother me very much about these things, only when they were having difficulties.   

**Q:**  During this time, were the Chinese continuing to instigate the people or not?   

**A:**  Yes, they were continuing that.   

**Q:**  With operas and the like?   

**Q:**  Oh yes. [They were] showing operas, and they also liked to play games like basketball and volleyball. After work, they always played. From time to time, there were shows for the people. They put up a stage and acted out plays. They entertained the people and also, at the same time, [would] say the necessary political lines . However, after the letter [from the Dalai Lama] arrived and the peace process began, they did not utter any harsh words. This is true. They calmed down a lot. Otherwise, their talk was confrontational and this they stopped.   

**Q:**  So while you were at Pembar, Ngabö and all went to Beijing, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And so during this time, did you hear anything about the 17-Point Agreement?   

**A:**  Absolutely nothing. Later, what the Chinese were saying was that it had been agreed [upon]. The Agreement was implemented and the peaceful means was agreed upon, and that this was very good without difficulties on both sides. Later, there was the Chinese section leader, Li Kezhang, who spoke fluent Tibetan. He was also saying that. Among them were Lu Kezhang and Du Kezhang, and they also spoke Tibetan. The 300 Chinese that came- it seems that they belonged to military intelligence, and their purpose was to find out about the roads, bridges, products and villages, and how many passes have to be passed. That was all of their work. I was staying at the Pembar summer cottage [Tib. སྤྲོ་ཁང], and in the Pembar park [Tib. གླིང་ཀ], there were two who were previously with the Guomindang who were investigating about flying planes. They had a wooden box and it is said that they were studying whether planes could fly or not. All of their books were in English. There were two of them named Cao Qimei and I have forgotten the other name. One was from Zhejiang, the other from Chengdu. Poor fellows, they were the target of everyone's scorn [Tib. མཐོང་ཆུང་བཏང་ས]. They were never taken to Tibet. After dark, they used to come. We could communicate only a little. I knew very little Chinese, [it was] difficult. But it happened that we were of one mind. Gradually, they related things. They said, "We were selected from the best in physical stature and education. However, Chaing Kaishek is bad. He abandoned us." They were both pilots. "Chang Kaishek is very bad. We had the best food, accommodations, and clothes. The people were [treated] badly, we are good." They said things that had a lot of messages [meaning]. Later, we got on well. The one who was staying below was from Zhejiang, he used to like playing the Huqing instrument very much. He made a Huqing from a horn and played and acted opera. He used to play such sad tunes. At night, I usually used to call them for dinner. All of their books were in English. It seems that it was not yet written in Chinese. All of their clothes were torn.   

**Q:**  When Lhalu was there, Ngabö came down right? During this period, it seemed that they both worked together. At that time, did they agree or not? What I heard was that Lhalu used to study the prayers and Lamrim from Geshe Sherab.   

**A:**  It's Geshe Champa Thaye [Tib. བྱམས་པ་མཐའ་ཡས].   

**Q:**  It is said that this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> passed away.   

**A:**  That's correct.   

**Q:**  In front of the remains of this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a>, or Geshe Sherab, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཟན་རིལ] A divine lottery. Multiple answers to a question were written on paper of the same size and rolled in dough balls of the same size and weight. These were shaken in a plate or bowl in front of a statue of a deity until one of the balls popped out. The ball that popped out was considered to have been selected by the deity before which the lottery was done.">senriy</a> (divine divination) was done as to whether he should fight or not. So it is said that it was divined that he should make war. There was such talk. I wonder if you heard about that?   

**A:**  No, I did not hear clearly about that. I did not.   

**A:**  Then, later, Lhalu came up and there was an order from the government telling him not to come to Lhasa.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. That's correct.   

**Q:**  So when you were there, what was the situation? Did they agree or not?   

**A:**  To tell you outright, they had different ideas. Lhalu's lama was Geshe Champa Thaye and not Geshe Sherab. Geshe Sherab was in Beijing. Geshe Champa Thayela's attendant was, you know, the main Champa Kalden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་སྐལ་ལྡན] in Dharamsala.   

**Q:**  Yes, yes.   

**A:**  Lhalu's main lama was this Champa Thaye.   

**Q:**  He [Champa Kalden] is supposed to be in the Mussoorie or Rajpur area.   

**A:**  Yes, he did a lot of security work and these days, maybe he is still working. He is building an old people's home for retired soldiers. So Champa Kalden was Champa Thaye's attendant. Lhalu's personal lama was Champa Thaye. If he did request a divination, let's assume he did—however, Lhalu and Ngabö thought differently. However, both had reasons of their own. Lhalu's idea was sort of straight forward. Lhalu had called up all the militia, right? We also did a lot of work on that and it was Lhalu's order. He thought that he would fight. Regarding the war, in my mind, I feel that most probably he made a petition to Lhasa. If at that time that battle [had] started, then in Jyekundo, there was a big spy of the Guomindang among the Communists. His name was Liu Taioyuan. He was actually a Communist leader, but his philosophy was Guomindang. He was saying we should fight and then we would be one. He was distributing a lot of letters. He said that he had three enemies: lamas, monks and "chiefs" [Tib. pönpo]. "I have three relatives: thieves, robbers, and beggars." When he saw old people, he said that they were useless [Tib. ཟ་འདྲེ] and [that they should] be executed. So this was done to get people nauseous about the communist ideology. Later he tried to escape to India and was caught in Yadong. We saw him get arrested and led away. However, once again, he was able to escape from prison. So Lhalu was thinking of fighting and I don't think he thought that he would lose in the end. What should I call such thinking? I think he was thinking that he would win and not thinking that he would lose. Shall one say not so far-sighted? Or something like that. However, it was all in sincerity because he was thinking that the Tibetan government's land and people would be lost. So it was better to fight that to do that. Even Ford received better treatment under Lhalu. I think he must have written [this] in his book, though I haven't seen [read] it. Ngabö also had reasons. We never discussed it, but as I sort of look at his speech, "Earlier, Luzijun, the army of one province of China, ate [successfully fought] all the way to Lhasa." The Water Mouse Chinese War came all the way to Lhasa. "Now, when the whole army of China comes, there is no way to fight. We cannot manage to fight. All there is left [to do] is to talk." Now, there is reason in that too, right?   

**Q:**  Now, some say that when the Chinese first came, they were so tired that one could have even beaten [them] with a stick. And the way they sat down was one motion from falling and sitting on the ground .   

**A:**  Well, it was not quite like that. Not like that at all. However, since they had reached a high altitude, they couldn't breathe properly. The cold weather produced mouth sores and some limped around. But they were not the Chinese of the old days. The Communists were absolutely hardened people who would continue until they died. So it was not that easy. However, if we had fought one battle, we had hopes of winning. There was hope. The reason being that they were poorly armed. Not good at all. [They were] almost like us. However, they were a bit better than the Tibetans because they had more big guns and machine guns. The arms that the majority of the soldiers [had] were not really good. When they came to our areas, there were some areas where one could only walk single file. It was 100 percent sure that we would have been able to have one fight. It was [also] sure that in the end, we would have lost, right? So it was definite that Lhalu wanted to fight, and he thought that he could win. Ngabö thought that it was not possible to fight, but only to discuss. I recall [believe] that what I am saying is accurate. Lhalu, it seems, definitely got ready for a showdown. This was in Jyekundo, and preparations were made. The Gyantse regiment was sent. I was also to be sent with the militia. He thought that he could win and he had a strong loyalty to the government [Tib. གཞུང་ཞེན]. It was not a question of Ngabö lacking such loyalty, but knowing that it was impossible to win and that if we didn't find a way, we would suffer. So one could say he was the more clever of the two. Isn't [that] it? . If I had written that in a history book, most probably, corrections could not be made.   

**Q:**  From Pembar Dzong, where did you go?   

**A:**  At Pembar Dzong - in Beijing, the peace negotiation was settled and they, Ngabö and his group, likewise, Wang Qimei, Phünwang and others, along with about 5-6,000 troops, arrived at Pembar. Since the Doji was the main one for us, we prepared his seat. Wang Qimei, and others, their preparations were made in tents by the Chinese. They all chipped in. They enjoyed Pembar. They came early one day and rested, and in the evening, at the Labrang, a play was shown. That night, I went to see Ngabö. I said, "Until now, I have stayed at Pembar according to your order, and now in the Kham area, there is not one government official. So I would not like to remain. The peace discussions are over and so I would like to request leave, and may I be permitted to return to Lhasa?" Ngabö said, "It is as you have said. Up until now, you have stayed here and done good work. Now you are the only one and you are not at all to blame. You may definitely return to Lhasa, and as a substitute, I will ask the Pembar clerk Ledrung Bu Dündül [Tib. བུ་བདུད་འདུལ]," to be the acting dzongpön. And so I got permission and I was happy. One could return to one's place where one's parents and relatives were. Ngabö, Wang Qimei, and the soldiers went ahead, and I took my time in leaving.   

**Q:**  So during this time, when Ngabö came, was there any talk of the 17-Point Agreement?   

**Q:**  Yes, he did. He said, "Now, a 17-Point Agreement has been implemented and considering the situation, it is good compared to a bad one [Tib. སྡུག་པ་ལ་དཔག་པའི་ཡག་པོ]. There is no need for me to state the specific articles, as you will know about them gradually." This is one thing he said. Secondly, he said, "Until now, in our government work, there has always been a kind of a curtain to cover things up. Now among the Dome civilian and military workers, I will truthfully, without any bias, report on what was and was not done. You people have worked hard and I will not leave [turn] a blind [eye] to that." So they went ahead and we went later. I arrived sort of towards the end of '51. So I took leave to go to my estate [Tib. གཞིས་སྐོར] and I went to the estates. Although I did not have any appointments to take leave, however—as a government official, it was customary to make a petition to seek leave. I was given leave for about a few months. So I stayed at the estate and when the period was over, I petitioned for sick leave. During this time, there was an incident. It's 1952 now.   

**Q:**  So you came up to Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes, from Pembar, and then I requested leave to stay at my estate.   

**Q:**  Yes, but when you came to Lhasa, had the Dalai Lama arrived from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, long since [he had arrived].   

**Q:**  Had all the Chinese army arrived?   

**A:**  Yes, everybody. Representatives Zhang [Ch. dai biao] and Alo Buzhang had come earlier on, in 1950 [actually 1951]. In addition to that, Ngabö, Wang Qimei, and Phünwang had arrived. About 5-6,000 soldiers had come too. Even later when I was in Lhasa, from the northern route came the Commander-in-Chief, Fan Siling [Ch. si ling], the Political Commissar, Tan [Ch. zheng wei], the Chief of Staff, Li [Ch. can mou zhang] and other leaders. Then a hell of a lot of soldiers arrived. At first, they stayed at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་གླིང་ག] A park/grove in the southeast part of Lhasa by the river.">Tsidrung Linga</a>, where the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> previously used to have their summer picnic [Tib. དབྱར་སྐྱིད]. This was handed over to the Chinese and they built it up a lot. Towards the end of 1951, I took leave and went to my estate for a few months. When my leave was over, I petitioned for sick leave. I was not sick, but I was physically weak. Then in 1952, I received an order that I must go to Lhasa. I petitioned that I was sick and could not go. Then Gyantse Dzong received a phone call, and I think it was the clerk, Ledrung Gyangshor [Tib. ?]—anyway, there was this <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལས་དྲུང] A clerk.">ledrung</a> (clerk). Our Kharka [Tib. མཁར་ཁ] estate is a day's journey from Gyantse, and so he arrived. He said that "There was a phone call from the Kashag and they said that you were sick. So they asked me to come and check to see if you were really sick." I said, "I have to tell you the truth. I am not really sick. However, I was in the Kham area for so many years and suffered great hardships, so I am physically weak. Please request [say] that I am sick and that I wish to take leave for a while." He stayed the night with us and left. He reported to the Kashag that I was indeed sick. Then after some time, one day, suddenly, some of the Chinese who were in Pembar, like Li Kezhang, Lu Canmou, and about 10 odd soldiers, arrived. They came via Gyantse and it was the first time that the villagers had set eyes on the Chinese. The elder ones thought it was an ill omen and cried, and the younger ones ran away as if they had seen a terrifying ghost. They came and gave me presents, and said that they had come to see me. Then, once again, an order arrived saying that I must go to Lhasa at once. I thought that it was strange. I had no work and they never told me that I had an appointment [to a position]. But [they were] always telling [me] to come to Lhasa, so I could not rest at ease and went to Lhasa. There they did not say a word to me. Later when I inquired [about this], it had to do with the 1952 Water Dragon Year People's Association. This was the first insurrection [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ] against the Chinese. In this organization there was a relative of mine named Trinley, the son of Khado Wogpa [Tib. ?]. He traded between India and Tibet. In this organization there was also our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་པ] A steward or manager. In some monasteries, the nyerpa was in charge of storerooms under the authority of a higher manager called a chandzö.">nyerpa</a> (steward)called Nyima Gyelpo. Nyima Gyaelpo and others were among those who went to make the petition to the Kashag. Kadrung Dumrala asked [for] their names and who they belonged to. He replied that he belonged to Maya and his name was Nyima Gyelpo. The Kashag got very suspicious and the reason they continued to ask me to come to Lhasa was that they probably thought that I might be involved in the People's Association. Much, much later, in Lhasa, the Chinese Lu Kezhang told me that he came to see me because they suspected that I had gone to India. So they suspected me.  

