# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** July 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 68  
**Date of Birth:** 25  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya Tsewang Gyurme discusses the formation of the People's Association and the tension between the Chinese and Tibetan factions. He also describes Ngabö's role in the 17-Point Agreement and his report to the Tibetan government.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_04/H_0039_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  So I said, "Was it said that I went to India?" He said, "No, they didn't say that, but I thought you might have gone. I came to check, but don't tell anyone, okay?" So they had a suspicion [that I left] and that was the reason [he came].   

**Q:**  Now, were Nyima Gyelpo and them in the People's Association?   

**A:**  Yes, Nyima Gyelpola and Trinleyla had both joined. I was in Tsang, so I didn't know about it.   

**Q:**  Kungö, regarding the people's voice—in the traditional society, if the miser wanted to have their concerns [Tib. སྡེ་སྡུག] heard about taxes and such, there were channels for [to make a] petition, right? So when they made such petitions, would one say that the people made the petition? Were the words "the people" used? If they made a petition, or if the people in Lhasa made a petition, would that have been called the people's petition?   

**A:**  These words "the people" were almost non-existent, the reason being that if the miser in a dzong suffered hardships and could not bear them, they could go to Lhasa to shout and petition. This would be referred to as, "The miser of such and such dzong have made a petition". Likewise, "The miser of this Gerpa (aristocrat) or Chöshi (monastic estate)." So these words, "the people", were not really used much. However, at that time, the Water Dragon Year People's Association was the first [people's association], and they took the name of the people [Tib. མིམང]. They did not refer to themselves as miser. I think this was probably the first time that the words "the people" were used in Tibet by Tibetans.   

**Q:**  As I think about it, in Western thinking, whether it is democracy or socialism, an important place is set aside for the people, right? For this reason, whenever the Chinese gave lectures, they always said that it was for the sake of the people. Maybe in the 17-Point Agreement there were articles which said that there would be no change unless the people agreed to it... So I sort of think that some of those who were politically astute had connections with the People's Association and formed an organization. So this is just my thinking.   

**A:**  Yes, it's exactly that. It had come to the point where one had no choice but to think politically. As I look at it, and as you have indicated also, if the Chinese did not give any lectures, then that was it, right? But whenever they gave a lecture, they always had the words "the people" on the tips of their tongues. It was almost like if the people had said to jump in a river, the Communist Party would have jumped. That's how much they sort of considered the people and incited them. Should I say incited [Tib. དཔའ་སྐེད་བསླབ] [flamed the fires], or deceived, or what? Actually, they were really fixing them [Tib. བཟོ་ཏ་སྤྲད]. Isn't that right? So when we needed to challenge the Chinese, if we didn't use these words, then no other words would do. This was how the name "the people" was used. That's for sure. The Chinese considered the people to be most precious, saying that they had come to serve the people, and this and that the people. So if the people revolted against them, then [laughter] - if the thing that they considered so precious revolted against them, then what would have happened? What would they have said? If the upper classes had done it, there were many names one could give. Likewise, with religious persons and monks, there were many names one could give. But since they always had the people on their tongues, if the very thing that they said was good revolted against them, then... The thinking was that that might have been the best strategy. It was definitely something we thought about putting into action and not something that just arose by itself. It was exactly as you thought. The reason was because the Chinese over-used the words "the people". However, they did not use the words because of world's democratic processes. [They used them] because the Chinese kept on saying "the people", "the people". And so what if the people revolted against the Chinese? Then this would be good, right? So as you have said, these words were used because of the Chinese. For example, the Tibetans forgot about seeing America. Most would not even hear about it, right? But all the people of Tibet, when they heard about America, [they] liked it very much. We couldn't point to any help or gift that the Americans had given us, right? But when we heard "America", we thought, "Oh, this is very good." We considered it [America] like a god. So what was the reason for this? It was because the Chinese overly criticized the Americans. When they said, "The American imperialists", it was their foremost enemy. They always mentioned that. When it was said "The American imperialists", one would think Americans probably ate people on the spot. Then when they drew caricatures of the American imperialists, the figures were very ugly. Therefore, we had thought the "opposite [Tib. ལྡོག་ཕྱོགས]". Who the Chinese considered to be their enemies must truly be our relatives [friends], right? What they considered to be devils, we considered gods. So it was a political use [tactic]. They kept on saying "the people", almost as if whatever the people said, they had to forthrightly obey [Tib. ཅི་གསུང་བཀའ་སྒྲུབ]. So the thinking was that if the people revolted against the Chinese, [then] that would be very suitable. Just as with the example of the Americans, it was something used because the Chinese overly indulged in it. This is definite.   

**Q:**  Now, among the People's Association, there was Thamjö Sonamla and Tsha Trunyila, and many were of the categories of clerks and chandzö of the monasteries. During this time, the two sitsab were also challenging the Chinese. Now, the Chinese were saying that the two sitsab instigated the matter, while we said that that was not the case. Whether it was or not, a revolt of sorts was taking place. So if you were to think about the situation, were the People's Association and the two sitsab in consultation, or was the People's Association just supporting them? One thing I heard was that Sitsab Lukhangwa was the guardian, tsondzin [Tib. འཚོ་འཛིན] of some monastery or khamtsen in Sera or someplace. This tratsang gave some specified amount of barley to the People's Association. There was such talk. So what was the situation?   

**A:**  At that time, what should I say—the statement that the People's Association did it on their own and that the two sitsab were not involved was also a political statement, right? There was no choice but to say that. Because the Chinese were saying that it was not the People's Association, but the sitsab—they were trying to divide us, right? So we had to say that it was not the two sitsab, but that the People's Association did it on their own. So it was political, see? However, unless there was someone to show the road and give the order to the People's Association, it would not have been possible for the People's Association to gather. This is my own opinion. Even if they did gather, all the members were not knowledgeable. Some would say, "East," and others would say, "West." And so it would have been disunited, right? Our Nyerpa and Trinleyla were in it, and when they were asked about it, they said that tea and droma dresi were served. When they were asked who provided these things and who the sponsor was, they didn't know . [laughter] So when such things happened, there was definitely someone to show the way. I think that there definitely was. Now, regarding the sitsab, their story is also in the Dalai Lama's book. But whenever the two sitsab met the Chinese, they always argued. Let alone other things, when it was said that they wanted to hoist a flag on top of the Potala, they said that this was not possible, that you could not hoist a flag on top of the palace. The Chinese said that they would since it was the flag of the country. The sitsab said, "If you hoist the flag one hundred times, we will take it down one hundred times". [laughter] So things like that happened. Likewise, when the Chinese had difficulties with food, there was a provision in the 17-Point Agreement for the government to help with supplies. Lukhangwa said that we had enough for ourselves, but we didn't have any to give to others. Production was not something that could instantly be increased. Besides, there was no need for so many of you—so many soldiers, to hang around. There was no need for so many soldiers in Tibet. The Chinese replied that they had come to expel the power of the foreign imperialists from Tibet and to guard our borders. [That] we needed soldiers. The sitsab said that "In Tibet, we don't have a single foreign imperialist suppressing [Tib. བཙན་དབང] us. Not one. At the borders, the only ones who are making problems are the Chinese." They really said that, you know. So from the time Zhang Dai Biao [Zhang Jingwu] came in 1950 [1951], whenever they met, there was confrontation. Lukhangwa refused to accept the 17-Point Agreement from the very first day that Zhang Dai Biao came. Lukhangwa said, "You say that you have signed a 17-Point Agreement, but don't know about this. We have not accepted it. If you want to discuss such things, then you have to discuss it all over again, or else we will not accept it." From the very first day on, it was like that. For this reason, the Chinese disliked the sitsab very much. The two sitsab just sacrificed themselves and did the work [of opposition].   

**Q:**  One thing I heard—now, when Ngabö and all came to Lhasa, there would have been some discussions, right? There would have had to have been [some] since the 17-Point Agreement was discussed; whether to the Kashag or others, he would have had to talk about it, right? So after the talk, a meeting was called. Lhautara in Tibet had written about it. At the meeting, Ngabö spoke, it seems, for a long time, and related everything that had taken place [in Beijing]. He was supposed to have said that that was the best that they could do. That there was no alternative but to sign, and "as far as we are concerned, whatever punishment you wish to give us, we have nothing to say about [this]," or something like that. So the tsondu (Assembly) recommended that it was better to accept the Agreement and handed its resolution to the Dalai Lama. It is stated somewhere in the Chinese documents that in May or so, the Dalai Lama sent a telegram to Mao Zedong saying that they had all discussed and accepted the Agreement. Then, on some 20th day, Mao sent a reply saying that this was good. Regarding the telegrams, I don't know whether Lhautara said it, however, the Chinese have published it. There was talk that this telegram also appeared in the Russian papers. So regarding this, was there any talk, or was it secret? People must have known about the assembly meeting.   

**A:**  I think it was said that at the meeting, Ngabö spoke for a long time. As I mentioned, I was not in Lhasa and had taken leave for my estate. During this interlude, it seems that Ngabö spoke for a long time, and clearly spoke on many matters. It seems he also spoke on the 17-Point Agreement. Regarding this, the sitsab were first saying that they didn't know anything about it. The reason why they said that was that our representatives had not consulted with them as to whether they should sign it or not. So since they signed it without consultation, that is why they said that they didn't know anything about it. Finally, when Ngabö came, it became very difficult to say that we were not going to accept it. The Chinese had already come. It had already been signed. When Ngabö was sent down, he was sent down with full authority and there was no talk of consulting the government. He had been given full authority. So it is my opinion that no one could have said that they would not accept it. Later, what happened was that there were two views. The Chinese were saying that the Tibetans destroyed [broke] the Agreement, while Tibetans were saying that the Chinese had torn it up [did not abide by it]. So the question of not accepting the 17-Point Agreement was something that was said later. Earlier, it was a situation where they could not say they would not accept it. I don't recall anything about the Dalai Lama sending a telegram, but I do recall what Ngabö said. There was no way to say that we would not accept the 17-Point Agreement. I think it was definitely accepted. In 1952, I came down. I heard that Ngabö made a lot of clarifications. Besides that, he also spoke clearly on the various accomplishments of civil and military officials. Among the military leaders, Depön Muja and Letsen Ludrub Namgyal, the two received gifts of grain, and ranks. Muja was granted the position Jidzong [in Shigatse]. Now, I didn't at all know that Ngabö was intending to do such things. I have never gone before the Kashag and requested positions. So from their perspective, it was said that maybe I was a communist because I never requested such things. I, on my part, was rather stupid in not doing so, thinking that there was no use in doing such things. From the civilian workers, though, we didn't accomplish much, but at a ceremony where all the officials gathered, Ngabö had presented an excellent report on my accomplishments. And so from the gag [Secretariate], Drönyerchemmo Phala made the announcement during the Trungja. So I was presented with the position of Düjung Shidö [Tib. འདུས་བྱུང་གཞིས་སྡོད] [head of Düjung] for a period of three years, and was also given the privilege of sending a representative there [instead of going oneself]. More than being appointed the Düjung Shidö, I was so glad about the remarks about my work. One gets the feeling that if one serves, then one does leave something behind. If someone says something [good] about something that one has done, then it makes you happy. Ngabö submitted an excellent report. He spoke about these things and then gave the recommendations to the Kashag. I got the Düjung Shidö with representative dispatching privileges. Then I was sent for road construction along with Thönpa [Tib. ཐོན་པ] Khenjung.   

**Q:**  It was to oversee the roads?   

**A:**  It was the main road for vehicles from Metrogongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] to Kongpo and Powo and downwards. I was given Düjung Shidö for three years, but I was not able to do it for three years. Now I remember it so vividly. In '53, I was given Düjung Shidö, right? In '54, the government nationalized the dzongs and estates. Now I remember it so clearly [earlier trying to figure out the date of the Legjö [reforms]. I did not have anything to meddle in because it was nationalized. But I didn't regret it since that was a good decision, and I rejoiced because of it. Otherwise, it was functioning in a strange way, with neither the miser nor the government getting anything.   

