# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** August 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, he discusses the Chinese reforms in Tibet, inflation of food prices, and the Khambas and Amdos. He discusses his role as a representative of the ordinary lay officials in the Assembly Meetings called in 1958 to cease the Khamba's disturbances/uprising and to mollify China, and also to expel the Jenkhentsisum from the Tibetans, and how the meeting became a discussion of support for Chushigandru. Finally, he discusses the problems with the Tibetan political structure and details the secret organization called the Tibetan Solidarity Association.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_06/H_0039_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I will ask you about the meeting a bit later, but let me ask you this. After the Dalai Lama returned from India there was also talk that the democratic reforms could be postponed for as long as possible. Then after the return, what happened? Did they say that now the reforms were postponed?   

**A:**  They said that the reforms were postponed. Now this is very strange. At first, regarding the 17-Point Agreement, it was said that when the Tibetan people wanted the reforms, then the local government of Tibet must think about it. Now, the reforms were all instigated from below to the top and as I mentioned earlier, since they needed to rob [people], the essential part of their system was to give names to the powerful and wealthy and destroy them. Under the Chinese, the Tibetan people did not budge, and so they changed their policy. They said that "In Tibet, the democratic reforms are a special case and they must be instituted from top to bottom." Really, from above to below [laughter]. The reason being that they said the people had not reached that level. Anyway, since the people did not budge, this was desperate talk. Now even in this case, there was nobody to accept the reforms starting from above to below, right? At the same time, nobody said that they did not want reforms. So since the commotion had begun, they said that they were going to postpone the reforms. This was in 1956. I don't remember the number of years, but they said that for so many of years. That the reforms had been postponed and if necessary, it would be extended even further. Almost without a deadline. After the Dalai Lama returned, that was it, the situation was one where the reforms were postponed.   

**Q:**  Compared to the time when the Dalai Lama left, was the period of his return sort of a calmer time?   

**A:**  Yes, somewhat. Before the Dalai Lama left there was some commotion with the Chinese filling bags of sands, and they also spoke harshly [while] in the Tibet Autonomous Region [saying] that they had to send people to request the Dalai Lama to return [from India]. That "You have to send letters to that effect." That "It is no use for the Dalai Lama to stay in another's country." people and request letters were most probably sent. The Chinese had invited all the kalön and the trunyichemmo to the Tibet Autonomous Region and I think the Chinese said a lot of things. So I think people were definitely sent. So after the return, the reforms were postponed and all that talk was not there. However, in the country, a lot of people from Kham and Amdo arrived and the price of food increased 10 times. From 1953-54, the prices increased and kept on increasing, and in '56-57, it increased 10 times 10 [1000%]. If something cost 10, now it cost 100. And there were also signs of famine in Tibet now that there were so many Chinese. Everyone was not at ease [Tib. སེམས་བཀྱག་བསད་པ་བཟོ་འདྲ་པོ] and from all angles, it was certain that nothing good was going to come about. The Chinese attitude too was forceful. From '57 on, they also became very militant. Our Chushigandru had also risen. Around that time if one walked about after dark, the Chinese would possibly shoot [you]. Two or three of our Gyantse Regiment soldiers seemed to have gone to Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] to drink chang. When they were returning, the Chinese did not say a word but shot them both. Then when some Trapchi soldiers were returning, Sombü's [Tib. གཟོམ་ཕུད] house was occupied by the Chinese. Shots rang out from there and the soldiers were killed. So when they discussed these things, they blamed it on our side saying that the soldiers lifted women onto their shoulders and took them away while the women screamed, and that was the reason they shot [the soldiers]. It seems that was not the case.   

**Q:**  So, in '57, the situation was getting worse and in '58, Chushigandru had already left [for Drigutang]. Regarding the meeting, the Chinese must have been telling the Kashag a lot, namely, to subdue the Khamba commotion. Now, regarding this meeting, how did this take place?   

**A:**  It seems to have taken place in the following manner. The Chinese told the Kashag that "In the area of the local government of Tibet, a commotion/disturbance [Tib. ཟིང་ཆ] has started. From our point of view, you guys started this commotion. Chushigandru is something that you made. Since this is the case—on the one hand, you diplomatically say that you are having friendly relations with us. Then, on the other hand, you have started an organization to oppose us. In addition to that, you have started an organization in Kalimpong to complain [Tib. སྐད་རྒྱག] against us. Therefore, to subdue this Khamba disturbance/uprising, the Kashag must take full responsibility." They were saying that "If this is not done, then we can arrest you." They really put the Kashag in a difficult spot. Now, from the point of the Kashag, this could not have been done alone. For this reason, they called the meeting in the Norbulinga's Shabden Lhagang. On that day, the Kashag announced that the Khambas' disturbance/uprising had begun and that in the Nyemo area, they took arms [from Shang Ganden Chöngor Monastery]. They were telling us that this was done in collusion with the Kashag. They were saying that the Khambas' commotion must be stopped and that this responsibility lays with the Tibetan local government. Since this was the case, we had to do something because, if we didn't, then the situation was approaching a very tense, dangerous level. On the one hand, the Central Committee also suspected that the local government was doing it, and so we had to "appease their anger". Therefore, the meeting needed to discuss these two factors; to quell the Khambas' disturbance and to mollify the Central Committee (Zhongyang's) [Tib. kham pa'i zing cha 'jags thabs dang zhongyang dgongs pa dangs thabs]. In addition to that, those who were abroad (Jenkhentsisum), were distributing leaflets, and so if they returned, then very well. If not, then they must be removed from Tibetan society and have nothing to do with Tibetan affairs. So this is what they were saying. So regarding these three matters, we had to discuss and see what could be done.   

**Q:**  Who was at the meeting?   

**A:**  All the government officials were there. It was headed by the Kashag, the Trunyichemmo, and the Tsipön. All ranking officers were there.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that the only person who spoke [initially] was Kalön Surkhang.   

**A:**  No. I think the person who spoke that day was Ngabö [Note: he is incorrect]. The one where Surkhang spoke alone was after the disturbance/uprising had begun. This was around '57 [Note: 1958]. On that day, it was Ngabö who spoke. And so it was decided that the discussions would take place in the Legjö Legung. So at that time, there were only representatives and I was a representative from the common lay official category. At that time, we sort of acted like the Chinese and voted. There were representatives from the various ranks, the Dzasa, Khenjung, Rimshi, Letsenpa, and the ordinary ones or Kyüma [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ]. And we met in the Legjö Legung. Ngabö was not there then, only Surkhang.   

**Q:**  So what was the talk later? Ngabö didn't come?   

**A:**  Ngabö was not there then [Said in a whispering like manner]. At the first meeting, Ngabö was there, when they were to discuss the three points. At the meeting in the Legjö Legung, Ngabö was not there. I wonder if he heard something or he was afraid. Anyway, something uncomfortable did take place it seems. I wonder if he was representing Ngabö or what.   

**Q:**  Surkhang was also a kalön.   

**A:**  Yes, the head kalön.   

**Q:**  Maybe they did not agree?   

**A:**  I wonder what happened.   

**Q:**  You did not hear anything later?   

**A:**  Nothing. However, something funny, maybe that is not the word. Anyway, the meeting was about subduing the Khambas, alleviating the Chinese anger, and removing Jenkhentsisum from the Tibetan race. But it now became one where it was said that it was impossible to live under the oppression of the Chinese [Tib. བཙན་དབང]. That Chushigandru had begun, so we had to support them in words and deeds. Anyway, we had to rise from under the Chinese power and also ensure the safety of the Dalai Lama. So now the talk changed to this, and there was no talk about alleviating the Chinese anger and subduing the Khambas [laughter].   

**Q:**  Was this said by Surkhang?   

**A:**  No, no, we said it [laughter]. Some of us were there as representatives. Barshi Jedrung [Tib. བར་གཞིས་རྗེ་དྲུང] was there and so was I and Yingön Yeshe Targyela [Tib. དབྱིངས་མགོན་ཡེ་ཤེས་དར་རྒྱས], who was a very enthusiastic person. So when the talk began, everyone was of one mind! Each one was scared to say things [generally], but when they opened their mouths [on this occasion,] everyone was of the same mind. Of course, nobody wanted to live under the Chinese right? So when they spoke, everyone was one, starting from Surkhang downwards [laughter].   

**Q:**  At first, Sawang Surkhang must have said something.   

**A:**  Yes, that's it. The Sawang [Kalön] spoke about the three issues . It was said that when we all met together, there was no progress and so we should break up into smaller groups. There were about four groups. I was there along with Bartso [Tib. བར་མཚོ]. Bartso and I were in the smaller group headed by Sawang Surkhang. I think it was the smaller group number two or three [laughter]. So this talk of appeasing the Chinese and subduing the Khambas was not there any longer and the talk was about the dangerous situation and the safety of the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  So when Sawang Surkhang and you all were meeting, how many were there?   

**A:**  We had 10 people or so. There were about 4-5 smaller groups with about 10 or so individuals in each group. So when we all met, the whole talk changed. Surkhang knew everything, but he's not alive. Now, I told you about the late Ngawang Sengela, he had already gone to Chushigandru. So of "our type", there was Cheyba Ala [Tib. ?]. He was staying in Kündeling with Künsangla [the interviewer's Father's Father's Brother's Daughter] and was working in the Women's Association. This was not the Women's Association started by the Chinese. Tibetans were starting their own women's association. Likewise, the tsidrung were in the middle school. So we were quite spread out. Some were in the monasteries, some lamas. Some were in the army. Everywhere. So the idea was the same, that we had reached a dangerous point and the most important thing was the Dalai Lama's safety. That now we just couldn't let the Chinese do whatever they wanted. That Chushigandru had rebelled and that this was good. And that we also couldn't just sit like that. So in this way, in the Legjö Office, we had many meetings.   

**Q:**  Barshi Jedrung said many things. I think he said it at the Tibetan Medical Astrology Institute, Mentsigang, and it seems that he was in another group.   

**A:**  I see. He was in another sub-group [Tib. ཙོགས་ཆུང]. But the talk was like that. The original subjects to be discussed were completely lost. And in each group, one had to discuss things, right? But after some time [laughter], I think they got scared and not too many people were coming. So Barshi Jedrung and others sent a notice saying to come to the meeting. He said that those who came to the meeting were of one mind. That we all should sign a letter saying that we were all united and make a pledge. That those who did not come then, that was too bad. They liked the Chinese, and those who liked the Chinese should not be included in our group. So he was acting a bit excessive [Tib. ཐལ་ཆ]. The day they sent the message, I did not receive the message. On that day, the head of the Dalai Lama's dance group, Garpön Pasang Wangdü [Tib. གར་དཔོན་པ་སངས་དབང་འདུས], was there. He is a very enthusiastic fellow. Garpönla came to me the next day and said, "Kungö, you must come to the meeting. Barshi Jedrungla is saying such strong things and there is a danger that such talk will result in the splitting of the officials into two groups. That would be horrible if something like that happens. And if on account of this the Chinese hear about it, then such things would cause the situation to get worse sooner [Tib. མགྱོགས་རྐྱེན]." So I asked him if there was a meeting the next day and he said there was. So I went the next day and since Garpönla had already told me the situation, I asked Barshi Jedrung, "What happened at yesterday's meeting?" He said, "Now, I swear by the Three Jewels that it is not good. These people are backtracking [Tib. ཕྱི་འཐེན་རྒྱག] [go back on their word]. So those who want to backtrack, let them and with those who are left, something will turn out. I am pushing for that." I said, "No, it's not like that. This is very dangerous. Definitely dangerous. This will not bring you victory Jedrungla. We have to be wise and act skillfully [Tib. ཐབས་མཁས་ཐུབ་ཆེ]. We have to slowly bring things around. Otherwise, if among ourselves we split into two groups, then it will be a disaster [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་གི་རེད]." He said, "Oh, it doesn't matter. These people were good for nothing." That "Even if one shits on their head, they will just sit." There wasn't much that one could say to him at that time, and so at the meeting, they discussed. And so the two of us did not agree. Something like that happened. However, we don't speak ill of each other. Basically, we are the same and we both were in the movement.   

**Q:**  After the various smaller group meetings, didn't you have to pass a resolution in the end?   

**A:**  I think when the various opinions were handed in, people may have been afraid. There were fewer and fewer people at the meetings [laughter]. So Barshi Jedrung got mad, I guess. And since they did not come to the meeting, he sent notices and said that those who did come would sign [a pledge] and forget about those who did not. If that happened, then there was going to be a split. I said, "We have to be wise and act skillfully. All of us here are those who have been fed by the Tibetan government and who are thinking about the Dalai Lama, Tibet, and the Tibetan nationality, and so I have no doubt that you all will not disagree with each other. What Jedrungla said was said for no other reason than great enthusiasm [Tib. སེམས་ཤུགས]. However, this we must discuss internally, and [we must] get along [Tib. ནང་འགྲིག] and not make judgments immediately." That "There is no need to immediately get signatures and make pledges." This is what I said and there was good support for this. Garpönla was one of these, right? Anyway, we did not split. We didn't sign and make the pledge [Tib. གན་རྒྱ]. What Jedrungla was saying was that everyone should sign. That those who came would sign and that those who did not come, then they did not come. Finally, the meeting kind of became less intense [Tib. སླ་རུ་ཕྱིན] and toward the end, out of fear, there were fewer and fewer people. And even if they did come, then there were few who spoke their minds. So Jedrungla and some of us, since people did not come to the meetings, we met. However, the main idea was that we would not split into two groups. Internally, we did what we could. What shall I say, nobody was coaching us. We had no knowledge, no plans about what the future would hold. However, we did it with great sincerity [Tib. ལྷག་བསམ་རྣམ་དག] and with one mind. And there were few who went to India. In our group, there was Tseden Namgyela [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟན་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. Our group was based on unity. If we didn't do that, it would become difficult.   

**Q:**  Who do you mean by Tseden Namgyela?   

**A:**  You know, our Lhenga [Tib. ལྷ་ལྔ], Tseden Namgyela. This is how a tshogchung works. If you and I were leaders, we would discuss among ourselves, right. But your group member [Tib. ཚོགས་ཁོངས], you appoint someone. You will tell me who that person is but they don't know who I am. I would appoint my side, but they would not know that you are part of the group. Unless we did this one by one, it was very scary. So Jedrungla had his own people. Among the leaders, there were quite a few of us. There was Yingön Yeshe Targye, Barshi Jedrung, Ngawang Senge, myself and Gyagpön Kedramla from the military. So each one made their own appointments, but they didn't know each other. For example, I recruited Tsenamla. He selected someone else, and that someone appointed someone, and so on. Our group was called the Tibetan Solidarity Association [Tib. བོད་རིགས་ཆིག་སྒྲིལ་ཚོགས་པ]. If we did not do this, then there were Amdo and Khamba and Phöba [Tib. བོད་པ], and it would seems like they were not Phöba. That was the name given. So the fact that the Dalai Lama was able to leave was thanks to the protective deity, the Dalai Lama's own prayers [Tib. ཐུགས་སྐྱེད], and the merits of the Tibetan people. Anyway, we had nothing to show, though we worked hard. Some were in the schools, others in the women's organization. We had reached everywhere, and so we used to hear a lot of things.   

**Q:**  Finally, what was agreed to in the meeting and concluded?   

**A:**  In the end, from our side, we could not give any reply. From our side, we were not able to give any replies to the question of subduing the Khambas and appeasing the Chinese anger. It was a situation where there was a meeting but there were no recommendations as to what should be done [laughter]. Internally, there was Sawang Surkhang and we don't know what he may have said, right? But the meeting had no results to show. We had to show results based on the three points, right? But this was just cast aside. They had to say something to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Yes, they had to say something.   

**A:**  Now, I don't know what was said. I think they must have said something very skillful and shrewd [Tib. ཐབས་མཁས་པོ]. Finally, the results—Oh! Yes! This happened—What am I saying, I don't know. One keeps [I keep] forgetting. On the question of the reply, it was said that "If the Local Government must suppress the Khambas, then we have to send our regiments. However, they don't have good arms and so Zhongyang has to provide the arms. We will sincerely send the army. However, since we can't predict the actions of our people, if they surrender to them and join them in the rebellion against us, this we cannot accept responsibility for." This is what was said. Yes! This is what was said. So when they said this, then the Chinese must have become suspicious and they themselves expelled [Tib. མཐའ་སྐྲོད་བཏང] them. Then the Chinese soldiers were sent against them. Not the Tibetan soldiers.   

**Q:**  Then what about the two representatives?   

**A:**  Which ones?   

**Q:**  Samjola and Namseling?   

**A:**  The two of them were supposedly sent to negotiate with the Khambas telling them to stay still, and they [government] couldn't do anything through the military. However, the two were staying at Yarlung. I don't think they had the occasion [a chance] to talk and even if they did, it would have been difficult. Most probably [laughter], they did not have anything to say and must have joined them. When we were escaping the two were at Yarlung [laughter].   

**Q:**  Well, I guess that is about all for today.   

