# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.10 : Tape 10  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya Tsewang Gyurme discusses his work as the Grain Interest Officer in Chamdo, particularly in regard to loan documents. He reiterates the beggars' demonstration led by the Women's Association and the shelling that followed. He also discusses members of the Chushigandru and political pressures on many Tibetans to flee to India. He discusses the Freedom Press in Darjeeling after 1970, violence against Tibetans by the Khambas, and the lack of arms and ammunition for Tibetans to defend themselves. He also discusses issues surrounding the Khambas' attempt to fight the Chinese, discussing how they were ill-prepared and ill-armed. Additionally, he talks about the future of the Tibetan people in light of the Dalai Lama's life in India and the amount of Chinese in Tibet. He concludes by discussing the arrival of the People's Liberation Army and his song of greeting, "We welcome the People's Liberation Army. We have the Americans here."   

---  
### Tape 10  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_10/H_0039_10.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  So, Kungö, tell us.   

**A:**  The last time [we spoke], I told Paljor Tsarong that when we first met, there were 15 people. This was not at the first meeting. At the first meeting, it was as I told you last time—there were seven of us. That's one. Then, regarding the question that Cheba Ala asked at the Youth meeting, when he said, "If it is not karma, then how does the marmot take food to the owl? The animal is not a marmot but an otter"—among the seven people, there was a "brother/relative [Tib. སྤུན་ཀྱག]" of mine called Ngawang Thutob [Tib. ngag dbang mtu thob]. [This may be his brother, Maya Trülku.] Other than that, my parents and relatives/brother were in Tsang. So regarding our work, others in the family did not know at all. That I forgot to mention. Later, the Chinese squeezed them, put them in prison and asked them how the family was involved. Truly, they didn't know a thing. At that time, we didn't tell our parents or relatives/brother. We kept it a secret since it was possible that the work could be stopped, right? Now, regarding the song that I wrote in prison, the way it got to Lhasa was that my fellow prisoners left for Lhasa earlier. I had gone to Pembar, right? I got there in '51. They [got there] in '50. So it seems they taught each other. Then in '50, it was not just the song, but regarding my work, they investigated me a lot. I forgot to mention that. My work was to give grain loans to the poorer misers. Grain loans with low interest. However, later, more than [with] the poor misers, the loans ended up with the traders, gerpa, labrang. The loans were low interest, right? This did not take place during our time, but earlier. So regarding this, the Chinese investigated a lot and took me to many offices. They said that they needed food commodities and "You are working with grain. Where have the loans been made, where is the grain [being] stored and from which sources do you have to collect grains? We need this information since our soldiers don't have anything to eat." It was true, they had nothing to eat, they were in great difficulty. So many people had come all of a sudden. So I said the following. "I ran away to Chamdo. All the grain documents and my belongings were just left there, and I just rode on a horse and left. I had nothing with me. Then when we were caught and taken down, I went to see if I could go to my house. It was full of soldiers and I could not go. So I don't remember where the loans were made. The documents are in my house. The Chamdo people may have them and so may the People's Liberation Army, and so ask the people who are staying at my house. They have it and I don't." From the beginning until the end, I stuck to this story. But actually, I had the documents with me.   

**Q:**  Is that right? [Laughter]   

**A:**  I left the documents with a chang seller, a Changma. Her name was Kamika Ashey. I used to know her. I left the documents with her, but never thought of leaving my things with her. In my mind, I knew that the Chinese had come all of a sudden and that there had to be someone who would help us. Ford was there at that time. I always used to go and see him and ask him how things were. In the beginning, he was quite confident, saying that London would help. So I said, "This is very good." Later, he was disgusted, saying, "London is not helping, no one is helping." However, I never thought that they would just abandon us completely. We had the greatest hope, especially with the English. They had relations with Tibet, they knew the situation, and we concluded the Simla Agreement with them. Among the European [nations], the late 13th [Dalai Lama] had the best relationship with the British. Now, the one who was sending wireless and publicity was Ford, who too was English. I was very close with Ford. Earlier, he came to India, and I was very disappointed that I did not meet him then. He was good at Tibetan. They gave him a very difficult time and said disgraceful things against him in front of the people. So with this as hope, I never handed [over] the documents. I was stupid in a gutsy manner [Tib. གླེན་རྟགས] and [was] not thinking about one's things. As far as the documents are concerned, they were something that the Tibetan government handed over to me and if I couldn't show [that I had] them later, it would have been disgraceful [Tib. ཐབས་སྐྱོ་པོ]. So I kept it a secret. In the end, the interrogation ended up with Wang Qimei, and Phüntso Wangyal was the interpreter. You know, I was taken to the highest level. The way it was done was at a tea party. It was a tea party, but they needed to achieve their aim [laughter]. The Payroll Office—Phogang—was under Horkhang and Khenjung, the latter had already left . Horkhang had handed [over] all the receipts. Phünwang was saying that Horkhang had handed over all the accounts and that it was a great help for the Liberation Army, who had difficulty with food. "You have not even handed [over] one letter, not even one receipt. There is no use in doing something like that. This you should hand it over." Phünwang and I used to know each other a long time ago. I was a bit angry. He had become a boss. We were prisoners and of course, I would think that he was sort of belittling me. They just took it for granted that I had the documents. So I said, "Phünwangla, more important than the documents, you have my body and life in your hands. A person's most important thing is their life. That too is in your hands. So what's the point of me keeping the documents? I know that it is useless for me to keep the documents when my life is in your hands." I said these things quite roughly. I don't know whether he translated [this] exactly or not, but, Wang Qimei just [grunted in acknowledgment of what Phünwang said] and went inside and didn't say much. It seems he left instructions with Phünwang. Then the party continued. So I said the same thing that I said earlier. I said that I ran away. That it was said that the Liberation Army eats people. That they kill people, that they decapitate [people] [laughter]. That they bury people alive. So out of great fear, I ran away. All the documents were left behind. Now one can see that the Liberation Army does not eat people or decapitate [people], and that they are very good, aren't they? [laughter] . At that time, we were afraid. It seems that the Guomindang people just spread these rumors [laughter]. There was no choice but to say such things. So I was allowed to leave that day. If Phünwang was here, we would have a lot of things to confirm. Phünwang had a friend, Norgyela [Tib. ནོར་རྒྱས་ལགས], who was a government official. They were very good friends. Since we were officials like Norgye, we knew each other, and so Norgye was sent. [Phünwang told Norgye] "I used to know Maya from a long time ago. I showed him my face [Tib. ཁ་ལྟ] and advised him, and in return, he showed me his ass. So you advise him and tell him that it would be good to hand over the documents. If not, then later he will definitely have trouble." This is what Norgyela told me. At that time, I was already out of prison. Therefore, from the time I was in prison until I was out of prison, taking me to Wang Qimei, they continued to interrogate [me]. So I was renting a house from an acquaintance and staying with no belongings. So I said, "Norgyela, today Phünwang has instructed you. I have told everything to him, but he was not satisfied. If I had hidden the documents, then they are in this house. So I am going to leave the house and you [can] search everything. If you find the documents, then it does not matter whether my neck is cut or shot with a gun. If they are not here, then I don't have anything [else] to give. So I am going to leave," and got up. Norgyela said, "Oh my [Tib. འོཛི, འོཛི], why are you getting up and leaving? I am telling you as a friend and [there is no need for such action]. It will be good if you hand them in." I said, "I don't have anything to give," and told the old story about running away. So from this time on, relations between Phünwang and I ceased. He was a leader, a buzhang, [and] we were prisoners. Otherwise, we used to know each other well. Later, at Pembar, once again we started having good relations. He had brought his wife and they needed barley flour, meat, and butter, and he said that he was having a hard time. So I assisted [them]. At that time, Phünwang did not say things to me with bad intentions. He had loyalty to the Tibetan race. Even though he was a communist. He had this loyalty a long time ago. So for this reason, I helped. Later, we had good relations. Even in Lhasa, we used to play music. Later—too bad he was arrested. He was ousted because of his strong feelings for the Tibetan race.   

**Q:**  This was in '58, right?   

**A:**  '57-58. Around this time, he went to China and never came back.   

**Q:**  He was labeled a local nationalist [Tib. ས་གནས་མི་རིགས་རིང་ལུགས].   

**A:**  Yes. This is one thing I forgot to mention. Then, you have asked me to relate my story, and so later, even if Mel la is not here, I can gradually [eventually] tell Tsarong. The reason is that whatever I have to say, I would like to tell you two because I feel that it will come out "even after I'm dead". So it's good that you have taken so much interest. If it is published, it will be of benefit to Tibetans and it will not be harmful, right?   

**Q:**  It won't.   

**A:**  From one perspective, it sounds like I have done such great things. It is not my intention to show this at all. We began and the reason it got stronger—this I also mentioned to Paljorla. At Qingdao, all the representatives of the minorities were called to a meeting. Zhou Enlai headed that. I think this was in '53, and Ngabö went as the Tibetan representative. The meeting had decided many points which I don't remember. One point which I clearly remember was that in the future, the minority nationalities were to become of one race and one language. One race meant to become Chinese and one language meant we were going to lose our language. Now, this was extremely frightening. So, in this way, as things became more frightening, our work got a bit stronger and the final fruit of our work, we had only to show in '59.   

**Q:**  This Qing Dao meeting was probably in '57.   

**A:**  Was it '57?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I have this feeling that it was earlier. I keep thinking of '53.   

**Q:**  During this time, the Party policy changed and things became more and more strict.   

**A:**  Now, the meeting that started in '57 was the Rightist Movement [Tib. གཡས་ཕྱོགས་ཤོག་ཁ].   

**Q:**  Right, right.   

**A:**  This was in '57, right? That Mao Zedong said, "Whatever criticisms you have for the Party, say them." At this time, I was in China.   

**Q:**  Yes. Oh really?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time—please stop the tape [laughter].   

**Q:**  You said that you finally took the documents to Lhasa with him and hid them with a pack of tsampa.   

**A:**  There were three or four large leather pouches [Tib. རྐྱལ་པ]. There were documents from a long time ago and loans were given everywhere. This was brought to my house. The Chinese were staying at my house—they would laugh, right? Saying that this guy had kept such things [laughter]. When I got to Lhasa—now, if I were to tell you, Mel-la, straight forwardly, if one were to ask what the situation was like in Tibet at that time—society was not a horrible and brutal one with great hardships, like barbarians—as the Chinese describe it. It was really never such a country. It was sort of a happy society. However, all of our people were preoccupied with religion and we had no politics. To tell you straight forward, in Tibet, we had no politics. One could make the statement that there were no politics at all. It's alright to say that it never existed. However, taxes were collected [and] law was practiced. Other than that, what we should do about the country, how to improve—we had no politics. I swear by the Three Jewels. So once you end up in a country without politics—I cannot show my [work]. It is not religion. If it was religion, then I [would] have something to say. That I have so many volumes of scriptures [laughter], that this was said by the Lord Buddha, that such lama said it—then people would be happy, right? So mine was nothing like this. Mine [my work] had to do with the grain of the Tibetan government that the miser had that should not have been given [away]. Who should I have given this to? To whom? Another question raised—did the Tibetans like the Chinese? No, they didn't. Then, did the government officials like the Chinese and were they attentive? To tell you the truth—they didn't know anything. Even if they didn't like the Chinese, they didn't know how to go about not liking them. Everyone just stayed on alert [Tib. གཟོན] thinking, "Oh, I better just stay properly or else they may shape me up. There is no forum for saying nor showing. Since this is the case, we don't have relations with the important people of the Tibetan government. We cannot make relations. If we do make relations, they would be afraid. All we have to say are things that make people frightened" [laughter]—wasn't that it? Were these people patriotic and sincere? Yes. However, what shall I say, it's difficult to explain—they were sincere, but could not come forward. So they just sat still in fear. Since this was the case, I could not show, and so I locked mine in the house. In my mind, I was still hoping—that in the end, there would be something called Tibet. Things will change and customs will not remain the same. However, the Dalai Lama will grow up and definitely, something will happen. During such a time, if I am not dead, I can say that this is my story and this was what I did. So now all that exists is for me to wait for this hope. Otherwise, it has been a disappointment.= So since this was the case—since we could not make many contacts, our work was very difficult. The higher ranking officials thought, "These guys may be communists. They never ever asked the Tibetan government for jobs" [laughter]. We never did ask. In the traditional government way, they sort of didn't give you a job unless one asked for it.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, no such custom [existed]. One had to ask. But we never asked, right? So they thought, "Oh, these guys may be communists. Looks like they are doing some work" [laughter]. So from the higher ups, from our own people—a suspicion of us developed. The Chinese, they were more clever and they knew. So they were suspecting [us]. They asked us many things and they taught us their constitution. They taught us that the enemy of the communists, the opposition, was the capitalist class and feudalism [Tib. བཀས་བཀོད་རྒྱུད་འཛིང]. Then we asked questions—"Who is the one who gives the order [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད] and who is the one that inherits [Tib. རྒུད་འཛིན] [carries out the order]?" They just could not give an answer [laughter]. We said we really didn't properly understand this, who the one who gives the order and who inherits [it] is. They just said, "Yes, yes, yes," and didn't reply. So in this way, there was a lot of teasing, right? If one asked who the one was who gave the order, one either had to say it was the Dalai Lama or—Now, the Dalai Lama is not feudal, right? Neither were the regents, right? Now, if one says that the people who work under them are feudal, then, they don't have the full authority. So in my mind, I feel that we were not feudal. Not at all.   

**Q:**  It was not [that way].   

**A:**  So in this way, we had a lot of difficulties, if I were to tell you straight forward, the story of our lives.   

**Q:**  Very difficult.   

**A:**  Yes, difficult and without any results. If there was fruit, then it would have been worth the difficulties. It was the difficulty that never bared fruit [laughter].   

**Q:**  Like the songs that you made, do you remember any songs sung in Lhasa around '51-52, songs degrading [Tib. དམའ་འབེབས] and deriding [Tib. ཕྱ་ལད] the Chinese?   

**A:**  They did sing songs like this. What was it now?   

**Q:**  There was one about "What's the use in burning bones when we have firewood, why have liberation when we have the Wishful Precious Stone [Tib. ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ] [Dalai Lama] [Tib. ཤིང་འདི་གཤགས་པ་བཞག་ནས། རུས་གོག་བུད་ལོང་མི་འདུག། ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ་བཞག་ནས། བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་གཏོང་ལོང་མི་འདུག]?"   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I asked somebody, now I don't remember, maybe it was Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ], who that was. There was this man called, 'Nice Shape,' Sobta Yagpo [Tib. བཟོ་ལྟ་ཡག་པོ]. He was a singer/musician. He played his music and crowds gathered, and then he talked politics and sang songs.   

**A:**  These songs, interestingly, just catch on. The reason why they spread was that everyone had a feeling of dislike for the Chinese. So it seems that people said, "Oh, this is good. I want to learn it."   

**Q:**  So, instead of many words, a short song in a book says much more. So even if you don't remember [one] immediately, please note [it] if you remember later.   

**Q:**  Paljor: We have asked many, but it seems that there are no songs like [in] the old days. Earlier, there were many on Reting Taktra. When asked about the '50s, most don't have anything to say.   

**A:**  Perhaps. I wasn't in Lhasa until '51. Then I went to Tsang. Then [in] '53-55, I was working for the road [construction]. However, we did take interest and heard more than others.   

**Q:**  I have a feeling that there may have been songs when the People's Association rose. Then things settled. How was the road construction work done? The general public were the workers and the Chinese paid the money, right? The workers were recruited by the traditional system where certain numbers came from different areas?   

**A:**  Yes. According to the dzong. That from this dzong, send so many people, from that dzong, that many, et cetera.   

**Q:**  During this time, how much was the salary? About 1 dayan? Or was that too much?   

**A:**  No, probably not too much. The Chinese didn't pay per day, but according to the amount of work. . Per square meter [Ch. gong fang]. Each square meter had a rate. If you were doing masonry work, then by the number of bricks. The same with those who were paid fairly well. That was when they first came, right?   

**Q:**  Were they mostly poorer people?   

**A:**  When they were selected from the various dzong, generally it would be the poor who they were recruited. Suppose I had to provide one person, then a poorer person would be sent. Then there were some farmers too. Especially in Kongpo, where the population was low.   

**Q:**  How long did you have to stay working?   

**A:**  The whole summer, moving here and living in tents. [It] started around the second to third Tibetan month and [I] ended work before winter. There was no work in the winter. Otherwise, I was there all the time.   

**Q:**  And food you had to carry your own?   

**A:**  Yes, we had to bring our own. We pitched our own tent, made our fire. The Chinese had their common kitchens (mess halls). Sometimes they called us to eat [there]. They had two mess [halls], the small mess [hall] [Tib. ཐབ་ཆུང] or the canteen for the higher officers, and the large mess [hall] [Tib. ཐབཆེན] for the common officials. The former was better. [It] had fewer people and it was for the higher officers. The latter was for everyone else. Wherever they went, they had this. Officers ate well considering the available produce. Since we were invited to the smaller [better] mess [hall], the food was good. We took our servants and they went to the large mess [halls] [laughter]. Before food was served, a song had to be sung, right? [Laughter]. They didn't know the song, right? So they said that it was very embarrassing. The words of the song were like—"Thanks to the Communist Party, we have things to eat," and that these were for the people. Then one ate after the song. They didn't know the song and they just held onto the plate and said it was very embarrassing, and they did not want to go [laughter]. The Chinese were calling [for] them, but they didn't want to [go]. We in the officers' mess didn't have to sing.   

**Q:**  PT: It was like a prayer, a grace. Before one ate, there was something religious.   

**A:**  But there was no religion.   

**Q:**  PT: It sort of became like religion.   

**A:**  It was to give thanks to the country and to have loyalty to the Party. The Party is very important, right? It's like their life. So they gave thanks to that and there was never an occasion when Mao Zedong was not important, right? All of their military codes were in song. Their 8 Points for Attention. This was made by Deng Xiaoping, this lousy guy. When the [soldiers] were first sent to Tibet, they trained at Ya'an for 2-3 months. The military training was one section and the political training was done by Deng Xiaoping. At that time, he was the General Party Secretary [Ch. zong shu ji], [Tib. སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་དྲུང་ཆེ]. So he went. And he had all [of] these things about it, [like] freedom of religion, respect for local cultures and customs. Not a thread or a needle would be taken from the people. That one must sacrifice one's life for the people. Such beautiful things. And these were in their songs [laughter]. It was Deng Xiaoping who said that one must go on a pilgrimage, that the Tibetans love religion, and prayer flags must be respected. He was very astute.   

**Q:**  Yes, he was. This was Tibet's biggest loss. That there wasn't any plan like that.   

**A:**  What I have mentioned, I would be happy if you gave me a set of cassettes [a copy of the tapes]. I will listen [to them] and if there are any mistakes, I will correct them. Sometimes what I say results in a mistake. This is then in the book and then it becomes incorrect. You will use my name and I said it. Not you. If it is wrong, then I made the mistake and I will take up the issue, wherever it needs to be done, and explain whether it is wrong or not.   

**Q:**  We can do that.   

**A:**  Then what you do becomes good quality and what I have said, I know that there are no mistakes, and so that makes me happy. I don't want to think, "Oh, I said something and maybe there are some mistakes [Tib. ནོར་འཁྲུལ]." You know, among Tibetans, there is a lot of talk. Tibetans love to say a lot, but they don't like to do things [laughter]. Don't you find that the case, Mel-la? There are a lot who talk but few who do things [laughter]. Yes, isn't that it? More than that, the more one works, the more the criticism [one gets] [laughter]. If you don't work and just sleep, they will say, "Oh, he is a good man" [laughter]. These days I'm the better kind [laughter]. Really, it's true. I just sleep. You people are the bad kind since you are working. So they will indeed talk. Talk that can't be taken to any conclusion, just rubbish [Tib. གང་བྱུང་མང་བྱུང]. Now I have a lot of experience with that.   

**Q:**  Last time, you mentioned something which was not clear. You said that you all had connections with Kungö Depön. How did that come about?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth—now, our main aim was the safety of the Dalai Lama. He is like the life of the people. We could see clearly that if the Dalai Lama was not there, then Tibet would be lost. So we needed to mention our situation to him and also get the opinion from up there. So we needed to make a connection. How should we do it? It was very difficult to make relations with our higher ups. The reason was, what did they think of us. They might have thought, "Oh, who are these people?" [laughter]. "Maybe they are communists." It was possible, right? Later, they all knew clearly. Later, sometime in the '50s, Surkhang got a great scolding by the political commissar, Tan [Guansan] [Ch. zheng wei]. At that time, we approached Surkhang and said, "Please don't be disappointed, you did the right thing. We are behind you." Surkhang, what shall I say, he was a very clever man. He said, "What?! Oh, I have already gone to apologize!" It seems that he took a bottle of liquor and said he went to apologize. So we went to see him because if he was disappointed, his spirit would be down, right? At that time, he was the senior kalön, and so the situation was very important. Yeshe Trinley and I went to see him.   

**Q:**  This was in '58?   

**A:**  Yes, '58—right towards the end [of the uprising]. He received a big scolding. He was not there and the scolding was during his absence. He was at the meeting and then left.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that they were going to scold [him about] the Khamba problem. And at that time, Surkhang did not want to stay and just went. The Chinese were going to say the Khambas were no good and that they were fighting. Is that right?   

**A:**  Oh—perhaps that is the case. But I don't remember the reason clearly. What I heard was that they really scolded him.   

**Q:**  Paljor: This was in the Tibet Autonomous Region, right?   

**A:**  No, not the Tibet Autonomous Region. If it was, then it was at the Tibet Military Headquarters.   

**Q:**  Paljor: Did people have meetings at the military headquarters?   

**A:**  At times they would call [meetings]. They had the power, right?   

**Q:**  Paljor: It seems that at this time, many people came. It was said that Grandmother Taring Mola was there, and many more. So it seems like [it was] a big meeting.   

**A:**  Taring Mola was very active in the women's organization [laughter]. At first, she was actively cooperating [Tib. ཧུར་པོ]. Our women's organization was not this one [laughter]. That too I forgot to mention, which I will do so later. You know Künsangla? The one who wrote letters for her, advised her, it was all Cheba Ala. He lived in Künsangla's House. [He] stayed [there in] '58-59 until around the time of the uprising. Posters, others sayings like, "Tibet belongs to Tibetans", "Chinese must go to China"—all of these were made by the Women's Association. Then another very interesting thing, the women's organization rose and revolted against the Chinese. Two days later, all the beggars were to revolt.   

**Q:**  Really!?   

**A:**  I swear by the Three Jewels, it's true! It was finalized. The women's organization [members] were to be the leaders. The ones who were actually to come forward were the ragyaba. Under them [were] all the other beggars. Since they [women's organization members] were all "housewives [Tib. ནང་གི་ཨ་མ]", they had the means to give [money, et cetera]. The housewives were to advise them and all was finalized, to do it after two days. But that day, the shelling began. If one asks what the reason was for the beggars to demonstrate—to have them demonstrate—it was because the Chinese were saying that they were looking after the poor so much and that we sucked the blood of the misers and sucked their serum. This was what they were saying, right? And so now—if the beggars opposed, wouldn't they be ashamed. This was our thinking. At that time, Ala was staying near Künsangla. Later, Künsangla gave [him] one gun and a sword, and Ala ran away from Kündeling via Mön Tawang. [He says Kündeling because Künsangla was married to some Kündeling Dechang [official]. She is also known as Gurteng [Tib. གུར་སྟེང]. Maybe Gurteng is part of Kündeling. She is my father's first cousin [FaFaBrDa]. At Tsöna, she was almost killed. There was a number of Amdos and the Chinese attacked at night. "Let them pass, let them pass," they were saying. I [Ala] took one look, and these people were speaking Chinese. "The Chinese are here, they are here," he whispered aloud. Bad riddance [Tib. ལྟས་ངེན], these guys were happily sleeping and not ready to get up [laughter]. So Ala went into the Chushigandru—Oh, yes, after he fled from Kündeling, he joined the Chushigandru. At that time, he had a very nice Mauser [pistol] that belonged to Künsangla. The Khamba commander took that away and in return, gave Ala one Chinese automatic gun. Now that became very fortunate. So [he] took that and came out. On the outside—it was indeed the Chinese. So he thought that he could not just stay like that. He opened the door and started firing. One of the Chinese said, "Don't shoot! Don't shoot [Ch. bu da bu da]!" The reason [being that] it seems that they heard the sound of the Chinese automatic [guns] firing. Then after some time, they said "fire", and shots were fired, and he said he just ran away towards the snow capped mountains of Tsöna. They [he] ran and ran. The Chinese had flares and one could see clearly. So he said he just laid down, pretending to be shot. Once the flare disappeared, he said he ran again [laughter]. That night, he stayed among the snow. He left the gun in the snow and wore his sword. When we met him, his face was all peeled. He said he cried. He just didn't know which route to take in the snow. He said he had a very good teacher and he prayed to his teacher to show him the way. He said he cried a lot. Now, even if he cried, no one could show [him] the way, right? [Laughter] So he was stuck in the snow that night. He said it was just freezing that night. Oh, then something else happened. When the flares were fired while [he was] running, what he did was take off his clothes and run away with [his] shirt and pants [Tib. དོར་རྐྱང་མ], and [he] left [threw the clothes] into the snow, and the skins also came off. The next morning, he was just barely alive, and whether the Chinese thought he was dead or what, luckily, they had not pursued him. When he got up and descended the pass, he met two nomads driving yaks. One of them had pretty good clothes on. Now listen! This Ala was very funny. He spoke to the nomad, "Hey man [Tib. ཁོ་རེ]!" "Yes," replied the nomad softly. "You take your chupa off!" [laughter]. Funny guy. "You take your chupa off!" Respectfully, the nomad said, "Yes, yes [Tib. ལསོ་ལསོ]." He wore the nomad's clothes and when we met him at Tawang, he was wearing a white woolen nomad's chupa and he sent the nomad with the shirt and pants. It was not a good one and we asked, "What kind of clothes are you wearing?" So he related his story. He robbed it off a nomad and sent the nomad off with [his] shirt and pants [laughter]. So, Mel-la, each person has a story. So in our women's organization, Künsangla became very important. Künsangla's confidant and letter writing helper was Ala. Regarding Cheba Ala, when I was working with the newspaper, I wrote his story. He was an uncommon person, his hard work. However, there was nobody who took care. Whatever you do, no matter how hard you have worked, you have to bear misfortune [Tib. སྡུག་གྱོང་རེད], right? [Laughter].   

**Q:**  You mentioned that he was still at Darjeeling?   

**A:**  He died in Darjeeling. He didn't have any work and so I gave him work at the press. He died there.   

**Q:**  The press in Darjeeling, right? I gave him work in the Freedom Press earlier.   

**Q:**  I heard that in the 1960s, they wrote about Chushigandru in the [Darjeeling] Freedom Press, right?   

**A:**  I was there after 1970 when the Tibetan government managed it. Before that, Gyalo Thondupla took care of it and many different things came out in the newspaper, and different things happened and there were many criticisms. Finally, it was handed over to the government and I was sent [to manage it], and [it] became the official newspaper. Since then, no rubbish things have been published and we have kept all the newspapers.   

**Q:**  I heard that it is hard to collect the ones from the 1960s.   

**A:**  Yes, probably. We collected quite a lot of them. Maybe they are in the press. I am not sure we have them.   

**Q:**  Wherever you go, you can't get a complete set. At that time, the Freedom Protection [Tib. རང་དབང་སྲུང་སྐྱོབ] was set up and also the Freedom Press. There were many people without work, and they fought internally and drank liquor and read Gesar Story in the press. Later, these two were merged together. When I got there, there were 20 people. After that, there were 16 people. The person who wrote rubbish things was Tsidrung Kelsang Kunga [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་ཀུན་དགའ], who was with Ngawang Thöndrub at the National Institute in Beijing, and now he is in Delhi.   

**Q:**  In the meeting for ceasing the Khambas' disturbance, you said that Surkhang was the head of the small group. Was it just the small group or was he the head of all the people?   

**A:**  In the beginning, all the people met and they couldn't collect the results of the discussion. So it was said that we should make small groups, and three to four groups were made, and all the people were divided, including the heads. So Surkhang was in our team.   

**Q:**  Usually, the Kalön would not come to the small team [meetings], right?   

**A:**  Yes, but he came to our team [meeting].   

**Q:**  What did he say?   

**A:**  He gave the speech at the general meeting and said that "We didn't get a good result on the matter of mollifying the Zhongyang et cetera. So you should discuss well and the actions to be taken should be summarized, and all people must frankly give their opinions." So there were different comments and they left alone the topic of mollifying the Zhongyang and ceasing the Khambas' disturbance. [Laughter] And [they] were saying that "These Chinese will never be good to us. We have to do something." Then it was said that we must divide into small groups and discuss.   

**Q:**  Then there were different opinions, right?   

**A:**  Yes, people were in quite a desperate situation.   

**Q:**  Didn't they comment on sending the Khambas back to to Kham?   

**A:**  No, they didn't [laughter].   

**Q:**  I heard that in Lhasa, at that time, on the one hand, the Khambas had the enthusiasm to fight the Chinese and this was good. But, on the other hand, they also suppressed the misers in the local areas and used [raped] the women, and they caused a lot of trouble. So on one side, the misers were angry with them because they thought that they to their place and bullied us.   

**A:**  This was true.   

**Q:**  Did they talk about this at the meeting?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. At that time, the people were too scared of the Chinese and talked only on this point. The Khambas were verbally saying that they wanted horses and guns, but actually, they were opening their trunks and robbing [stealing] things, taking [things] away and using women, and even nuns. But, this kind of became a small matter. So nobody talked about this. The Khambas didn't do good at all. So in the future, books will be published on this because many people have come here who had suffered in their homelands. Poor things! They are talking a lot about this. But, when they didn't get the chance, it was hard for them to do that. When I went to Yarlung, I fled, [and] Ngawang Senge came from Gonggar to get guns, and we stayed together for two days and nights with the Gusung Regiment in Norbulinga. At that time, probably, it was really a sign for him to die because he was crying. When I asked him what happened he said, "Now, really, the Dalai Lama has left. So we can only think about holding the areas on the other side of the river, like Lhoka or Tsöna. We are thinking of collaborating [Tib. རྐུབ་སྦྲེལ] with India if we can hold these places." But, actually, India was not doing that [collaborating] with us and they were not helping us [laughter]. But if we had another country to collaborate [with], we hoped that we would not cease to exist [Tib. རྩ་བརླག]. Lhasa would be lost and we couldn't hold it. So we thought of holding Lhoka and we talked about this. Therefore, he said, "I have people, but I need weapons. But when I came to get the guns, they just gave me some useless guns and several trunks of ammunition. They didn't give me a single machine gun or cannon. No matter how I tried to request them, they didn't trust us." I swear by the Three Jewels that he was crying a lot. Later, I thought this was a sign of his death. Then I told him, "It doesn't matter. You have directly requested for the military headquarters [to help us]. I am among the 70 odd representatives of the meeting selected by the people. So I will comment on this at the meeting. If the meeting agreed and gave the order, they cannot refuse. So it is useless to burst into tears and it is useless to keep the weapons in Lhasa. So we should send them over there." But he said, "If we do that, the leaders will get angry. It is not okay if they get angry. But, now I am trying to find a backer and [am] requesting them [requesting their help]. I have already sent 50 rifles, but if we don't have a machine gun, these 303 English Carbines are not of much use."   

**Q:**  At that time, Gombo Tashi was not there as he had to go to the Shotalhosum area. During his absence, the Khamba leaders didn't have solidarity. Did Ngawang Senge tell you about this, saying that they were internally fighting each other?   

**Q:**  Ngawang Senge didn't meet Gombo Tashi because he had already been separated down there in Pembar. He said, regarding the leaders, "They didn't think about what they were doing. They were just robbing and bullying people. So it is very difficult. Unless we can correct it gradually and slowly—otherwise, what they are doing now is very difficult because they have already made the misers dislike them. If they make the misers dislike them, then what can we get? We don't have anything." He was disappointed about this also. Poor thing! He was crying when he thought all of these things happened everywhere.   

**Q:**  If he was enthusiastic, but couldn't do anything, he would be disappointed. He is not to be blamed.   

**A:**  He was very enthusiastic, but he didn't have power and the strength. On the other side were the Khambas and they wouldn’t listen to us easily.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, they would not even listen to their own chief [Tib. དཔོན].   

**Q:**  This was really troublesome because they liked to steal and they didn't get along well internally. Among the leaders, Gombo Tashi happened to the best. Wherever he went, the misers didn't suffer much. Otherwise, they were just bandits, though I can't say that because it would be shameful on the Chinese side.   

**Q:**  I have heard a lot about this.   

**A:**  It was impossible for us to have achievements.   

**Q:**  But it is hard to write these in the book.   

**A:**  Otherwise, they would cause a lot of trouble. Actually, Mel-la and you people don't need to write this. There are many countryside people who suffered and many of them told me this, saying, "Now, we should write something. They robbed us, but now they are saying that they had brought the Dalai Lama. How could they have brought the Dalai Lama? Because, they were not there, [not] even a single person [was] in Lhasa. Now, we should write whether they had brought the Dalai Lama or [if] they became bandits."   

**Q:**  They should really write these things. Otherwise, the new generation will not know [about this] and they will think that Khambas did great things.   

**A:**  When it comes out in Tibetan, you can translate it into English—and there is nothing. Some people also told me that I should write [it], but it is difficult because they are crazy people who didn't think much.   

**Q:**  The American government told them not to make war right away because they had a plan for 1-2-3-4-5 years to bring people and train them, and then go back. Gradually, the war could be made at an appropriate time. If you make the war too early, it is useless. But, they didn't listen, saying, "We didn't have the thought of gathering a few people," and "We all are going to gather and fight."   

**A:**  It is regretful [Tib. ཙུག་ཙུག་ཙུག], they didn't listen. Many works were done wrong, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, they didn't know how to fight [using] guerrilla warfare because they were just people, like traders, and it is regretful. The Tibetans didn't always follow the correct path when they got the chance.   

**Q:**  Yes, and then the chance was lost. We were unlucky Mel-la, don't you think?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  It was very hard. Now I am just sleeping and I swear by the Three Jewels that I am bored. Unless something were to work out, if this Dalai Lama would do something, otherwise, it is very difficult. I am wondering what would be best to do. The Dalai Lama is saying that he is going to talk, but I think they will not listen. If we say that we will become a part of China, then they will listen. Otherwise, they will not listen because Tibet has such a good product [has good natural resources]. Especially, all the mines are underground and have not been used. The Chinese have a saying, "The Tibetan people are blind and walking on precious stones [Tib. བོད་ཀྱི་མི་འདི་ལོང་བ་རེད། རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྒང་ལ་གོམ་པ་བརྒྱབ་ནས་འགྲོ་གི་ཡོད་རེད]." Now, when they knew [found out] that there really are precious stones [in the mines], they would not go back. I got only one chance to speak and told my opinion a little bit, but no one was attentive. What I thought was, on one hand, the Dalai Lama is a lama and he is in nature, a Bodhisattva [Tib. བྱང་འཆུབ་སེམས་པ]. He would not even harm the life of an ant and he is always thinking about peace. The Chinese are not people who listen to the talks, right? They won't say, "Poor things! They are peaceful and Bodhisattva." Now, they [Tibetans] are taking a method through appealing to the UNO (UN) and from the aspect of human rights, pressing the Chinese and hoping that the Chinese might change their minds. On the other hand, [by] hoping for democracy to rise in China and that their system will change, there might be a chance. I think there will be changes because the so-called "communism" is bankrupt [Tib. བོང་བུ་ཐོན]. Their main teacher, Russia, also became bankrupt. So the pupil will definitely become bankrupt. Therefore, there will be changes from this aspect, but I doubt they will hand over Tibet to the Dalai Lama [laughter].   

**Q:**  I am not sure about this.   

**A:**  Again, a Chinese will come out and say that Tibet is part of China, but they will not kill and beat us as they did before. It will be better because there are laws and freedom. But, it is difficult to hand over Tibet. So I think that the Dalai Lama should be left above [Tib. གོང་ལ་ཕུད]. There might be something to do by the people working under him. This work must be adventurous [Tib. ཡ་ཡུད་ཆེན་པོ]. For example, if someone needs something like sugar, since you have to ask for it, the owner of the sugar will not give you the whole thing. Maybe you have to pay money or he has to divide it. So we must sacrifice quite a lot and probably, we must depend on each other. This must be done secretly by a powerful country that we agree with and who has strength. If we can do that, there might be a hope. Otherwise, they will not listen to the pressure from the UNO. It is very difficult. I was saying that we might have to do something adventurous because six million Tibetans are at gun point. So they couldn't budge. We have only [a couple] hundred thousand people and we have nothing to show. Therefore, we must lean against somebody and step forward, and the country on which we lean against also has to get something, right? But, nobody agreed and they were scared. This what I think. Mel la, am I wrong?   

**Q:**  I swear by the Three Jewels that I don't know these things. But, this is one path to follow.   

**A:**  I can see only this path.   

**Q:**  Yes, the Chinese are very powerful.   

**A:**  Yes, very powerful and they have such a [large] population. So it is difficult.   

**Q:**  Wherever the Chinese go, they say that Tibet is part of China. They say this from the leader to the driver. Actually, people don't know the fact, but when they hear that, they believe in it, and it is troublesome. The best [possibility] is that there would be a democratic change and there would be a disturbance in China.   

**A:**  If this happened, there would be a little chance, but not a complete chance. Anyway, there might be some freedom.   

**Q:**  If the Tibetans could keep an exclusive nationality and preserve the language and the script—after 50 years, there will be a change in the world. But, if you can't keep your nationality and language, then even when you get the chance, your culture will be lost.   

**A:**  Now it has become very dangerous. I am always shouting about the language and the script in the schools and everywhere. If we don't have the language and the script, there will be no nature [Tib. བགོ་བོ] for the nationality to identify. I was saying that it is not that we are ruined because we didn't have culture, language, and script, we are ruined because we didn't have politics. So if we cannot keep our language and the script, you can't say that you have a different face because there are many similar faces. If you don't keep one's own culture and language—in China, they are teaching Chinese, and here all the people are engrossed with English and are not attentive to one's own language and script. So it [has] become like one's own culture is going to lose. I said that last time and I also think so [now].   

**Q:**  In Tibet, the intellectuals are very attentive to the language and the script. They were more worried about this than the political power. But, they have to know Chinese for their livelihoods and here, also English. If someone had a great loyalty to Tibet, but they thought that it would not do if one's children did not know Chinese, they would send their children to school in inland China. They were opposing against the Chinese but had to send their children to school there.   

**A:**  Yes, they don't have any choice but to do that. It is difficult. Mel la, you are an intellectual and know much more than us. So please think about the Tibetans and if you give us some advice and if we get some chance to talk with better people, I will tell them and I don't need to mention your name. Otherwise, we don't have people to seek advice [from] because we need a good person to seek advice [from]. Please give us advice so that Tibetan will not disappear [laughter]. There is a lot of danger that the Tibetans will disappear. During the lifetime of the Dalai Lama, the situation in Dharamsala will remain like this. And then—I think there is not much—and now he is 61 years old. Now it has come to a very dangerous point.   

**Q:**  It is kind of a critical point which is like a three way crossroad. So it would be confirmed on which road to go in 10 years.   

**A:**  [He repeats about Ford's advice regarding bringing all the yaks to above Chamdo.] At that time, we did have hope for the British and the Tibetan people liked the Americans very much. Usually, when someone came from another place, the people who received him would say a greeting which literally means, "Oh! Here you are [Tib. ཕྱག་ཕེབས་གནང་བྱུང]." It is like a welcome and the arriving person would answer, "Yes, I am here. You are staying here [Tib. ལགས་ཡོད་བཞུགས་གདན་འཇགས]?" When the People's Liberation Army came, there was a song in Gyantse with the wording, "Oh! Here you are, the People's Liberation Army. Yes, I am here, the Americans [Tib. ཕྱག་ལ་ཕེབས་སམ་བཅིང་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི་ལགས། ལགས་ལ་ཡོད་དོ་ཨ་མེ་རི་ཀ་ལགས]." The people had to greet the People's Liberation Army's coming and say [something] like "Welcome, you People's Liberation Army." But they continued saying [things] like, "We have Americans here." This was to say that we had [support] from America even [though] they [People's Liberation Army] had come. The Tibetans like the Americans in a natural manner, even people [who] haven't seen them. It has some karmic connection from the early times.   

**Q:**  Yes, they liked them from the early times and in addition to that, the Chinese were always talking about the American imperialists, right? When did they sing this song?   

**A:**  This was very early in 1951, when the Chinese first came.   

**Q:**  We are searching for songs like this, but we cannot [find any]. But, [I] remembered one all of a sudden [laughter].   

**Q:**  Please collect some songs like this.   

**A:**  If I think about it, there may be some more.   

