# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ་ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 66  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya discusses the loss of the territories beyond the Yangtse River, the temporary treaty for that area, and the effect the losses had on the Tibetan border. He describes how the 17-Point Agreement began and the migration of Chinese into Tibet. He also discusses the role of the Dalai Lama as leader of Tibet and the People's Association's endeavor to maintain independence from China. He then concludes with a general discussion of the attitude of the Tibetan people towards the Dalai Lama, especially when there was a fear for the Dalai Lama's life.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_01/H_0039_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Was the Yangtse River regarded as the border [between Tibet and China]?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  The people living beyond the Yangtse River didn't pay taxes [to the Tibetan government], right?   

**A:**  The previous Chinese took the territories beyond the Yangtse River by force, and Khyungram [Tib. ཁྱུང་རམ] was the representative of the Tibetan government [responsible] for signing the temporary treaty [Tib. འཕྲལ་སེལ་ཆིངས་ཡིག]. After that, the areas beyond the Yangtse River became kind of not under the jurisdiction of the Tibetan government. After that, the 13th Dalai Lama also passed away and it [Tibet] became like a household [that] didn't have a father. And the territories [which were] taken forcefully, kind of became permanently Chinese, and the Tibetan government was unable to collect taxes.   

**Q:**  Before that, was there a different kind of border?   

**A:**  It was absolutely different. The territory above Dartsedo was indisputably Tibetan territory. After that, the places like Nyarong [Tib. ཉག་རོང], Horkhok [Tib. ཧོར་ཁོག], and the other side of Yangtse River were lost for a period of time. This was just around the time when the 13th Dalai Lama was about to pass away, or just after that. When former Kalön Ngabö was the Doji or governor of Kham, those territories were lost. At that time, the depön were the late Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད], Khyungram, and Demön [Tib. བདེ་སྨོན]. It was not many years ago when the Chinese forcefully took those areas. After the 13th Dalai Lama passed away, there was no one taking care of the family [the country] because the father was dead , and probably, no one was attentive to the borders.   

**Q:**  In 1951, they kind of had to sign the 17-Point Agreement and after that, they did the work together, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In 1951-52, they talked about working together, but how did the situation deteriorate after that?   

**A:**  In 1951, our delegation, led by Ngabö, went to Beijing, and when they held the talks regarding the peaceful solution, they [Chinese] had already made the 17-Point Agreement. They just told them "This is the 17-Point Agreement and you have to accept it." Since there were many points that we shouldn't accept, they told the Chinese that "We can't accept this. We have to ask our government and they might hold meetings for three to four days." Then the Chinese said, "If you sign the Agreement, the peaceful alternative will be done, but if you don't sign it, it is just a matter of us sending a telegram and we will liberate Tibet through military [force]. If you want the military [to forcefully liberate Tibet], you don't need to sign it, and we also don't need the signature. We can just go ahead and liberate [Tibet] through military [force]." Like this, they were threatened and suppressed by force. As for the Tibetans, the seal was regarded as more important than the signature. So the Tibetan delegation said that they didn't have the Kashag's seal with them, although Ngabö had the seal of the Doji with him. This was because it was unacceptable, and it became like giving an order and listening to the order. So the Chinese said that they could make the seals in Beijing and made wooden seals for the Tibetan delegates to use on the Agreement. They didn't have any choice but to sign and they kept the wooden seals until now in Beijing. So at that time, we didn't have any choice but to accept the document signed by force. In 1951, the Chinese arrived in Tibet and they requested that the Tibetan government help them with food, saying, "You will not need to help us all the time because we will develop [our ability to] produce, and then we [will be able to] serve the Tibetans and the Tibetans [won't] have to serve us." They said kind of pleasant sounding things. In 1951, a large number of Chinese entered Tibet through Kham and the north, and they gathered in Lhasa. So there was a severe hardship with foodstuffs, and the price of food increased day by day and the people had a very hard time. They said that the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] should be established, as it was in that document, but there wasn't enough context to set it up so they didn't insist on saying that we should set it up right away, and the Tibetan government left it like this. The Chinese were just holding some places to stay and the Tibetan government helped them with food. The organization of the Tibetan government was still there. If the Dalai Lama hadn't taken power, it would have been very difficult for us to survive because there would have been no solidarity among the Tibetans. If there wasn't solidarity among the Tibetan, it would have been very difficult for the Tibetan government to exist. By the grace of the Dalai Lama, the organization of the Tibetan government was still there.   

**Q:**  It was also written in the Agreement that the power of the Dalai Lama should remain as before, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it was written that there would be no change in the Dalai Lama's power and that the Tibetan government would remain as before until they would request to do the reform. It was also written that the lamas and tratsang would remain as before and there would be religious freedom. These were all lies and they deceived the people. In 1952, a large number of Chinese soldiers came up and what they had were only their stomachs and their weapons. Everything had to be supplied from Tibet, like a large number of fowls, pigs, and eggs. So the miser had a very hard time and the people didn't like the conduct of the Chinese, and the People's Association was set up during the Water Dragon Year in 1952. So it was called the "Water Dragon Year People's Association."   

**Q:**  Did they face hardships with setting up this association?   

**A:**  Yes, they faced severe hardships.   

**Q:**  At that time, when many Chinese came and built the roads, the traders also made a lot of money, right?   

**A:**  This was later on.   

**Q:**  What was the cause of setting up the People's Association?   

**A:**  Firstly, a large number of Chinese came to Lhasa. Secondly, the Chinese ideology and conduct [Tib. ལྟ་སྤྱོད] was against the Tibetans. Thirdly, they faced hardships with food. The most important was that the people were suspicious that the Chinese would hold the political [power] of Tibet. They thought that if there would have been a hindrance [Tib. དོ་ཕོག] to the power of the Dalai Lama, then we, the people, would not tolerate this. The main cause of the people's solidarity was the Dalai Lama. We don't know who was in the internal circle, but outwardly, the leader was the chandzö of Sera Mey, Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], and those people. They submitted a petition with six points. I forget the points because it has been many years. The contradiction between the Chinese and the Tibetan people started in 1952. Then, the Chinese told the Tibetan government that they should abolish the People's Association, saying, "The imperialists are instigating between the Zhongyang and the Tibetan people." Although the People's Association didn't become particularly effective, it showed [stood as] a disappointment to the Chinese. In 1951, I was resting at my estate.   

**Q:**  At that time, how did the People's Association assemble in Lhasa? Did they lead the people in each area or what?   

**A:**  They had arranged for people to assemble in each neighborhood [Tib. ས་ཁུལ] in Lhasa, but they were unable to spread it to the countryside. I had a nyerpa (steward)called Nyima Gyalpo [Tib. ཉི་མ་རྒྱལ་པོ], and one of my relatives was called Trinley [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས]. They were in the People's Association. At that time, my nyerpa went to the Kashag to submit the petition. I heard that Kadrung Dumra [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར] received the petition. Dumra asked him, "What is your name and where are you from?" He told Dumra, "I am the nyerpa of Maya and my name is Nyima Gyalpo." I had asked for sick leave and I was staying at my estate. The Kashag called the Gyantse [dzong] to check whether I was sick or not, and they sent the clerk called Yügyela [Tib. གཡུལ་རྒྱལ་ལགས] to see whether I was really sick or not. Actually, I was not sick. They were suspicious of me because my nyerpa was there in the People's Association and my relative was also in there. When the clerk came to check whether I was sick, I told him, "I am not sick, but I had a very hard time down there [Kham?] for many years. So my health is not good. So I am resting. Please tell them that I am sick." He reported that I was sick. But, it didn't work out and after a few days, I was told to go to the Kashag as soon as possible, and so I had to go down. The Kashag didn't say a word to me and the Chinese also didn't say anything, and I didn't have any work to do. One of the pupils of Thamjö Sonam is now in Dharamsala.   

**Q:**  I heard that people were just talking in the streets that the sitsab were also in the People's Association. What were they saying? Did all of the people know about that?   

**A:**  Probably, the sitsab were kind of in the People's Association. The people's representatives also kind of had courage, thinking that the sitsab were in their association. But it was inconvenient for them to say that clearly, and they also didn't say that. I heard that when the representatives held the meeting in the area for the first time, they served tea and droma dresi. So I asked him [my nyerpa], "Who was the Association doing these things for?" He said, "Who knows?" I asked him who served the tea and the rice. He said, "I don't know." They probably told the people attending the meeting that they were not allowed to say that [to say who]. But they [people] suspected the two sitsab and most people believed that the two sitsab were there.   

**Q:**  It was in 1952, when the People's Association was held, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What happened in the year 1954? At that time, the sitsab already resigned, right?   

**A:**  They accused the sitsab of being spies for foreign countries.   

**Q:**  What happened in 1953?   

**A:**  There weren't any big events in that year.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese came up, many people made a lot of money, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So the traders might not have thought much of joining the People's Association because they made a lot of money, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were there different people in the People's Association?   

**A:**  Yes, there were. At that time, the people of Lhasa were kind of strange. They were not politically educated and they didn't have any special rights. But, normally they were very attentive to political matters, and they would even meddle with the appointments of government officials. They couldn't make any change, but they would make remarks right away. They didn't have the chance to report in the newspaper, so they sang songs to express their remarks or criticisms. The words of the songs were really meaningful. So the people in Lhasa became naturally attentive to politics, though they were not specifically taught politics. Therefore, the majority of the members of the People's Association in 1952 were people of Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How did trade progress at that time?   

**A:**  That was probably when the road building [project] was started.   

**Q:**  In what year did they start building roads?   

**A:**  This was probably in 1956.   

**Q:**  Do you mean in the Lhasa area?   

**A:**  In Lhasa area, it was started in 1955, and they spent a lot of money building the roads in 1956.   

**Q:**  Were there many people working on that?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a great number of people working on that because the workers were conscripted by the dzong as a tax. But, they paid them wages. They spent a lot of money because there were many people, and it also took a long time. The Chinese were saying, "If we spend one yuan, we will get back 10 yuan." From the beginning, they had plotted to eat [occupy] everything. The Chinese were very suspicious that the dayan silver coins would go to India. Since the money would remain in Tibet, they were sure that the money would belong to them [in the end].   

**Q:**  The Chinese also sent people to India to buy goods, right?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, the road to China was not good, so they ordered the traders to buy things from India. Because of this, the traders had a good business.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrival, did most of the people think that the 17-Point Agreement was signed so the system would remain as before, or had they already given up [their hopes] to some extent [Tib. འགའ་ཆེན]?   

**A:**  Most of the people knew that the Chinese would become more powerful and the system would not remain as before. But just a few people were thinking that by the grace of the Three Jewels, the situation would be okay. Most of the people were thinking the situation would not be good. And the Chinese conduct also became [more] harsh [Tib. རྩུབ] year by year. The Chinese used harsh words and made the Dalai Lama become very inconvenienced, and the sitsab had to resign. The Chinese bullied people all the time, and they didn't think much about the relations between a human being and another human being. This might have been because their customs were militant.   

**Q:**  After that, the situation became worse, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it became worse and the contradictions between the Chinese and the Tibetans became more severe and became kind of tense, and the Chinese conduct was also harsh. When the Dalai Lama was invited to China in 1954, people were very disappointed.   

**Q:**  Did the people then request the Dalai Lama not to go to China?   

**A:**  Sometimes when the Chinese invited the Dalai Lama to the Tibet Autonomous Region [building], saying that he was a leader [Tib. དབུ་འཛིན], the Chinese regarded him as an ordinary person, while we regarded the Dalai Lama highly as a precious jewel. So people said that he should not attend the meetings. Normally, the people were kind of always protecting or keeping watch [Tib. སྲུང] [over] the Dalai Lama. Usually, there were the bodyguards, but the number of people [protecting him] was more than that. At that time, the Tibetan government probably didn't know that the people were protecting the Dalai Lama and it was very hard for them to know that. Wherever the Dalai Lama would go, there were people going secretly [with him], and the Chinese would wonder what those people were up to. From when the People's Association was set up, they were very attentive to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  At that time, when people were observing from foreign countries, it seemed that Tibet was under the Chinese constitution when the Dalai Lama attended the National People's Congress in China. Did the people in Tibet think in that way?   

**A:**  It was very rare to find a person who knew international law in Tibet, but when they heard that the Dalai Lama was going to China, 99 percent of the Tibetan people disagreed with that. When he was invited to India in 1956, people were naturally extremely glad, and they wore new clothes and sang songs. When the Dalai Lama went to China, many people cried and I also heard that some people jumped into the river. Actually, I can say there was nobody who knew about the law and said that the Chinese were wrong according to the law. But they had a clear understanding that the Chinese were our enemy. So 99 percent of the people were thinking that it was wrong for the Dalai Lama to go to the enemy.   

**Q:**  Didn't the government officials know about the law?   

**A:**  Probably not because there were just a few among the government officials who knew a foreign language and who were attentive to the world system. So they kind of didn't know about the law. If someone were to ask me, "Why does Tibet remain in such a strange situation?", this was made by the Chinese in the early times. Some of the Chinese emperors had a real religious faith, and they could only get their lama or priest from Tibet. So Tibetans became the priests and the Chinese became the pupils, and it became a priest-patron relationship, and they had a kind of affection [Tib. བརྩེ་གདུང] for one another. After that, when the situation in China changed, they didn't have the sense of the priest and pupil, and they got the sense that Tibet belonged to China. If the Tibetans were to make relations with foreign countries, then they would wake up and there would be a danger that Tibet might separate from us [from China]. So they had the thought of occupying Tibet, and there were many Chinese monks and Mongols in the three great monasteries.   

