# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.09 : Tape 9  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya discusses being imprisoned in Chamdo and recalls changing the words of the Chinese song, "The East is Red". He talks about being appointed as the Pembar Dzongpön after his release from prison, the secret group of seven people, as well as their ideas and posters. He also discusses his understanding of the People's Association and of the Sitsab. Finally, he describes Ngawang Senge's work with the Youth League in Beijing, his role in Tashilhunpo, his trip to India, as well as various other details.   

---  
### Tape 9  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_09/H_0039_09.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Well, I don't really have much to say.   

**Q:**  So, Kungö, how did it all begin?   

**A:**  In 1950, Chamdo was lost, right? Since the Chinese captured us, we were in prison. Once the peaceful discussions began, for the time being, things were much easier for us. When the discussions were almost settled, they said that "Now you have graduated from school," that it was not a prison. "You all say that it is a prison, but it's not. We only gave you an education and you have now graduated from school. Now you can return to Tibet or stay here, whatever you want." The head of the people who released us from prison was Wu Sizhang. Later, after we were released, he had to go down . The reason being that the Korean War had started and he had to go there. He was a very important person. So he said that "Some say that this is a prison, but it is not. It's a school," [laughter], "and you have graduated and can now go wherever you want." Since the peaceful agreement was reached, we were released. Otherwise, we were to be killed. People like our kind could not escape. While we were in the prison, there were people who talked and taught us songs daily. In the tradition of the communists, one has to change one's brain, right? . This is their main custom - to put something in the brain. They have very beautiful ways to say it, just like our religion. That one goes from here, then there, and finally, when one gets to communism, then everything is good, like being enlightened. That there will then be no law, no army. There is no "I" and "you". Nothing becomes depleted, [there's] plenty to eat and [to] wear. So like a religion, they taught this to us every day. They really taught us their real ways. Then they taught us songs. What they taught us was this. In Chinese, it goes: dong fang hong. It is translated as: The East is Red, the sun has arisen, in China, Mao Zedong was born. He is the benefactor and the savior of the people. Everybody give their hearts and minds to him. [Tib. ཤར་ཕྱོགས་དམར། ཉི་མ་ཤར། ཀྲུང་གོའི་ནང་ལ་མཨོ་ཙེ་ཏུང་འཁྲུངས། ཁོང་གིས་མི་དམངས་ལ་བྱམས་སྐྱོང་གནང། ཐམས་ཅད་བློ་སེམས་ཁོང་ལ་གཏོད]. They sing this song. Today on the radio, in Tibetan, they play the same tune. It's the same and has not changed. At that time, they were teaching [us] this song. We were divided into groups of ten. We were [I was] in the second one. They locked us up in the old Tibetan military camp. So judging from what they were teaching and telling us, one could examine [know] the invaders' ways. Though they were speaking sweet words, in the final analysis, one could clearly tell that they were taking [over] power. They said sweet things like, "We are the servants of the people," and that "To date, the imperialist countries have kept you down and the people have not been able to rise up. Right now, we have come and kicked the imperialist people out from your country." We didn't have even one person from an imperialist country. Forget about imperialist countries, not [even] one person [from an imperialist country] was there. So from these [things], we know. Without any people [here], they said that "You people are living under foreign imperialist domination [Tib. བཙན་གནོན]." That "Under the foreign imperialists, the Tibetan people have suffered." They had many things to say. There was not even one person who was a foreign imperialist dominator. We had not even seen [one] with our eyes. Earlier, Heinrich Harrer came. However, he came as a runaway. Earlier, there were one or two [who] may have come for sightseeing and [as] representatives to Dekyilingka. Otherwise, I did not see many foreign people. So that was their way of talking. So it sticks to one's mind, thinking, "Oh, there is not one foreign imperialist dominator." And so from whichever way you looked at their words—what should one say, sort of wiped something. Now, the general populace would become befuddled [Tib. འཐོམས], right? Thinking, "Oh, it seems like they are going to help us." That we would be happy and good [laughter]. They would think that, right? Since they said such sweet things. However, in what they said, you can see a lot that there were lies and that they were deceitful [Tib. གཡོ་སྒྱུ]. For example, from the religious side, they said that there is freedom of religion. However, they said that religion is the main tool of the power class to fool the people and prevent the people from rising up. So they were saying that, right? So based on these things, we began thinking a lot, about religion, the country, whether there were foreign imperialist dominating or not. There were so many contradictions. On the one hand, they were saying that there was freedom of religion. That there was protection for religion and lamas. On the other hand, [they were saying] that religion is the tool of the power class, to fool the people. So when they said so many things, we knew that in the final analysis, it was no good. So, anyway, it does seem that I am probably a person who can't just stay still. I was young anyway, around 22-23 years old. In prison, our group had to sing "The East is Red" every morning. I used to smoke, and on a Number 10 brand cigarette package, I just wrote something. For "The East is Red", I wrote: "In the snow land of Tibet, we have the lotus flower holder who is the only savior of all the sentient beings. The sun and the moon of the [Buddhist] religion and politics shine [over] the world. Everybody give their hearts and minds to him. May Tenzin Gyatso live for hundreds of eons. In order not to end the existence of Buddhism and politics, we must manage our own race [Tib. གངས་ཅན་ལྗོངས། པད་དཀར་འཆང། རང་ཅག་སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་ཀུན་གྱི་སྐྱབ་གཅིག་པུ། ཆོས་སྲིད་ཉི་ཟླས་འཛམ་གླིང་གསལ། ཐམས་ཅད་བློ་སེམས་ཁོང་ལ་གཏོད། བསྟན་འཛིན་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་སྐུ་ཚད་ནི། བསྐལ་བརྒའི་བར་དུ་མི་འགྱུར་བརྟན་པ་ཤོག། རྒྱལ་བསྟན་ཆབ་སྲིད་མི་ནུབ་པའི། རང་རིགས་རང་གིས་འཛིན་སྐྱོང་བྱེད]." So I wrote that and showed it to the others. They said it was good and asked if it was alright to sing this. Then we said that we would learn this and sing [it], and see what they would say. So we memorized the words—these words still stay with me so much. So we memorized and just sang it. For, "The East is Red", we sang "The snow land of Tibet". They didn't notice for a few days. Then they began to investigate. They asked our group who changed the words of the song. Nobody owned up [to it]. They said that this was a national song and not just any old song. That it was not permitted to be change and [asked] who did it. I said I wrote it. Then they took me everywhere and interrogated me many times, asking, "What was your thinking in writing this? Who told you to write [this]? Who else is with you in this?" They gave me a hard time for many days. I replied that the reason I wrote it was that "For all of us Tibetans, we recognize the Dalai Lama as Avalokiteshvara. There is not one Tibetan who does not pray to Avalokiteshvara. And you all have also said that there is freedom of religion. That there is protection for religion. So it seemed that it was alright. That the Dalai Lama is our lama, and so I wrote it and there was nobody helping me." He pondered [what I said] and said, "You speak truthfully." At first, he was very angry, but since I said it straight [as it was], it sort of helped. He said, "Yes, there is freedom of religion. However, changing the words to a national song is not permitted. Who gave the order to change the words?" I said that I did it on my own. He said that "This is your first mistake, and now you have to think about not making any others. You cannot sing these words." So, it first began with the song. [It = his thinking and activities against the Chinese.] That was in 1950. So in this way, we did not sing the song. Later, the most surprising thing was that when I got to Lhasa in '51, they were singing these words. The one [song] I wrote in prison, people were singing in Lhasa. So I just said, "Whoever wrote the words, it's very nice." People said that Ngabö wrote it in Chamdo. That Ngabö wrote it and people liked it. So I kept quiet because it didn't look nice if I said, "No, it was I who wrote it." So the start of my work was something like that. From here on. They were saying, "Turn your hearts and mind to Mao Zedong," while I wrote, "Turn to the Dalai Lama." So from these words, it became clear what my mind was like. Let's stop here as sort of a first chapter. Then in '51, the peaceful talks began, though [they did] not conclude [then]. At that time, in Tibet, there was no modern transportation and letters were sent by horse couriers called adrung. Since it was a war situation, the country was quite lawless. Sometimes the courier was robbed and letters [were] stolen. So in the prison, there were quite a lot of us younger government officials, and Ngabö called us to Sidogthang. He said that "There aren't any officers in the various dzong and estates since they have all fled. Even though the People's Liberation Army has held power in the dzong and the estates and it's not a situation where they were unable to do it—Wang Qimei told me that they came to help the people and didn't come to act like a chief [Tib. དཔོན་པོ]. So you can send your officers to hold [oversee] the various dzong." At that time, Wang Qimei was one of the biggest [powers] in Chamdo. Therefore, Ngabö continued, "I have made certain appointments and if you are able to go, then it's very good. Until [up to] now, you have worked hard and we are at the concluding [final] stage. So if you can work at the dzong, it won't be a long time and I think it would be very good." So when the appointments were made, some of the dzong included: Sangan Dzong, Dzogang Dzong—the tsidrung of the latter dzong, sort of out of fear, committed suicide. Then there were some dzong in Sangachöling, then Lho Dzong [and] Pembar. All the officials had fled. So I was told to go to Pembar at Tar Dzong. So Ngabö said, "You all discuss and give me a reply, and then we will sort of finalize [everything]." So we all discussed and they said, "Until now, we have served the government. However, [lately,] we have not been able to serve. The reason why we have not been able to serve is that we have lost our country. Since this is the case, even if we worked as dzong officials, we wouldn't be able to get work done. It also seems difficult for the people to listen, right? So since this is the case, we are going to return to Lhasa." This was sort of the outcome of the meeting. I thought about it for a while and concluded that there was no use in going to Lhasa, nothing could be achieved. Since my appointment was for Pembar, I said I would go. I didn't have anything. Everything was taken away. [I was] as good as a beggar. You know, [there is a stage one reaches] where one ceases thinking, "Whether they want to kill or cut, just do it. Who cares?" Now in a situation where one has some wealth and power, and parents and relatives, then one worries, "Oh, if I get killed, then what will happen?" There is fear. We didn't have that. It's really true, when people become desperate, then there is no fear at all. If they beat you, it's going to hurt, right? But the fear is gone because the person is desperate and has nothing. So I said, "I'm going." The others said they didn't want to. So we said, "Let's go report to Ngabö." They told him that they wished to go to Lhasa and that their services would be useless there, and so to give them leave. I said that I was asked to go to Pembar and so give me instructions on what I had to do. I said, "It doesn't matter where I go, I will go." Ngabö said, "It's very good that you are going," and he was very happy. He said, "The reason is that Pembar is a very important place and it's on the main route where letters and messengers regarding the peace talk are sent." I recall something like one or two soldiers who were delivering letters were killed by the people. The letters were lost. So staying at Pembar would protect the letters and people traveling, and so Ngabö said that it was very good that I was going. So I went to Pembar. Earlier, I used to work in the Pembar and Lho Dzong area and I used to be very friendly with the people there. I had never given the people there difficulties and eaten [taken] money. I liked the people there and they also liked me very much. So when I got there, they helped me and never hindered me.   

**Q:**  Yes, I met one of them in Lhasa. An old man who used to work for you. I've forgotten his name.   

**A:**  Oh, Bu Dündül.   

**Q:**  Yes, he mentioned about your coming.   

**A:**  Yes, and I stayed there until Ngabö came up after the peace agreement. Then Ngabö came there and we made all the accommodation arrangements. During this period, no difficulties arose. Then I told Ngabö, "Please give me leave now. I cannot stay. It's no help for me to stay any longer." At that time, Bu Dündül and the Chinese were close. Quite close. Later, he was very strongly against them, right? That's the way the Chinese operate. For example, if there are the two of you, they will immediately try and turn one against the other. This is their custom. It is. They will tell you that he is not good and tell him that you are not good. This is their way. Therefore, between Bu Dündül and me, he was the clerk of the dzong and I was sent as the dzongpön. So it was like they were treating him better and suspecting me. The Chinese have strange ways of doing things. So I took leave. Ngabö said, "Yes. Until now, there has not been even one official who has stayed as the dzong officer, and you have remained until now. This is very good and things have gone on well [during your tenure]. All of this, the good work that has been done and those who have not done [good work], when I get to Lhasa, I will mention this clearly at a meeting. Until now, all of our work has been 'hidden by a curtain [Tib. ཡོལ་བ་བཏང]' and it was like [sometimes] visible and [sometimes] invisible. It's all fuzzy and I am going to tear the curtain and speak [about things] clearly." So I thanked him and his party left. I followed three to four days later and then arrived in Lhasa. The Chinese had already arrived in Lhasa, and I also knew quite a lot of Chinese from when I was at Pembar. Yes, I was the dzongpön there [laughter]. It really makes one laugh. I was a prisoner paraded in line by soldiers among the people. On the platform, they kept some people there and the Chinese were there too. We were down there [on the ground] and we had to take the scolding, right? Now, this just happened, right? Then I became a dzongpön [laughter]. Like a movie actor [laughter], makes you laugh. The whole thing is a farce. They called me dzongpön. The reason being is that they needed meat, butter, eggs, fodder, peas, and barley. The people at Pembar were very strong, not to be taken lightly at all. They did not easily give their minds to the Chinese. Later, they revolted twice, poor things. If the dzongpön said something, the people did respond. Of course, they were giving money. So, therefore, they came to me saying, "Dzongpön, Dzongpön." They brought some pork tins and [laughter] biscuits [laughter]. So that was the reason they came. In their hearts, they did not like me. But they had no choice. They needed things, right? So we sort of helped them. That's the way I stayed at Pembar. In '51, I got to Lhasa. I was physically weak and my mind was tired. I had no urge to serve the government and wanted to rest for the time being. The manner of our service to the government and the way the Chinese came and did things were poles apart, right? There was no way to reconcile the two. It was most strange. So, I remained with the difficulties of a troubled mind. Then in 1952, when we first began, we had seven people. Among those who died, there was Lobsang Yeshe, Yeshe Trinley [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་འཕྲིན་ལས], [and] Cheba Ala.   

**Q:**  Were they tsidrung or?   

**A:**  Lobsang Yeshe was a tsidrung. Yeshe Trinley was a tsidrung. Cheba Ala was a Drepung Trülku, a learned [educated] person, an Amdowa. Then there was Chushul Kendrong [Tib. ?]. Then—now I can't recall. Anyway, there were seven of us. So we met at my house and asked what the best [thing] to do was. I said that this was what happened in Chamdo. I told [them] about how I stayed in prison and about what the Chinese said, did, advised, and how they educated us. "So, judging from all of this, in the final analysis, it seems that our Tibet is going to be put under the Chinese, and they are not going to make us happy and fat. Especially, from the religious viewpoint, they do not consider our religion good at all. From their mouths they talked about freedom of religion, but, on the other hand, they say that religion is a tool to fool the people." Whatever experiences I had down there, I told them, right?   

**Q:**  Had the two Sitsab been dismissed as yet?   

**A:**  Not yet. [That was] yet to come.   

**Q:**  How did you get the people together?   

**A:**  Lobsang Yeshe and Yeshe Trinley, we were friends even before I went down to Kham. Cheba Ala was my pecha (religious text) teacher. He was an Amdowa. Chushul Kendrong, what should I say, was brought by Yeshe Trinley. The two of them [Lobsang Yeshe and Yeshe Trinley] were my friends from a long time ago. They were very young, like me. How we first became friends was due to mahjong [laughter]. Playing mahjong and drinking chang [laughter], to tell you straight-forwardly. We were young and used to say, "Come on now. Come, let's have a session. Look, the weather is so lousy anyway. Let's play mahjong." So we had some chang, played music—That's how we became friends. My pecha teacher, Ala Cheba, passed away recently. I related my experiences to them. When they heard that I had come, they brought chang and bread and said, "You must have had a most difficult time." They came to console me, right? So in this way, I said that we should get together, that I had things to tell them. First, they came to give tea and chang. Later, we made time and when we got together, we had only seven people. I was the one they questioned, right? "What happened? How?" So I related everything. Finally, it was said, "The Chinese say from their mouths that they have come to serve the Tibetan people. That Tibet has lagged behind, that they are going to improve Tibet and all kinds of things. Therefore, since this is the case, it is very important for us to examine whether this sweet talk will actually be put into practice or not. So, the most important thing for us to find out is what the Chinese plan is and to think for Tibet's future. Therefore, if this question is important, then we have to also go to China." And "Schools are also starting and we must become teachers in the schools. If possible, we must also join the Party." [laughter]—"Otherwise, we will not be able to find [things] out." There was something someone said that was most interesting [Tib. སྣན་པོ]. At first, somebody said something about—"Oh, it won't work by trying to infiltrate the Chinese," et cetera, et cetera. There would be a lot of talk, right? Then someone said something very astute [Tib. སྐད་ཆ་ཟབ་པོ]. I felt it was really true. In Tibet, we only had wells to get water from, right? This person said, "Poison has entered the wells from which water is drawn. If we just say that there is poison and just shy away, one day we will not have water to drink and we will die. We must enter the well and check the amount of poison- see what means we can use to get rid of the poison and make the water useful. Unless one enters the well—just saying that there is poison and running away, then one will die." I have never forgotten this talk. I thought his thinking was most astute—don't you think?   

**Q:**  Yes. Just as you have said.   

**A:**  So everyone kept that in mind and said it was really true. And so the reason for Lobsang Yeshe going to China began from this time on.   

**Q:**  Lobsang Yeshe? [Paljor: Ngawang Senge] Same person?   

**A:**  Yes. Two names. But one could not just go like that. In '52, there were a lot of Tibetan students who went to study at the minority schools in Beijing. So sort of like teachers, and [they were] also saying that they wanted to study. There were two or three monk officials who one day gave their petitions to the Yigtsang and went [to Beijing]. Among the three there were only two who I had relations with. Ngawang Senge and Dorje Dramdrü (though I have forgotten his tsidrung name) [he must have been Yeshe Yönden]. He was short in stature. Their two companions, I had no connection with. . They spoke among themselves and gave a petition which was granted. They went, made some documents [Tib. ཡི་གེ], a flag, and said that they were going to do great things—However, they wished that the brains of the students would not be spoiled—[they] would not become Chinese and [would] remain Tibetan. The most important thing was to really examine what the true plans of the Chinese were for Tibet. Just then, they were saying really sweet things, right? Now, the question was whether these sweet things really existed or not. This was the main responsibility of the two. So the two were to go to China.   

**Q:**  Did Ngawang Senge say this thing about getting into the well?   

**A:**  That I really don't recall.   

**Q:**  [It] doesn't matter.   

**A:**  Maybe it was Cheba Ala. Maybe. It wasn't me. Nor Ngawang Senge. Maybe Cheba Ala. This was really on my mind.   

**Q:**  Yes. He said it just right.   

**A:**  So going to China was decided. All of this was pre-'52. Now, post-'52, the Chinese started a school at Muru [Linga] [Tib. རྨེ་རུ་གླིན་ག]. The first school was Seshing Labdra [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ]. After that, they started one at Muru something. At this [school], Cheba Ala became a teacher. On the one hand, he was a monk. Secondly, [he was] an outspoken Amdo. He was audacious enough to teach Tibetan history. In addition to that, he printed and distributed copies of the "Code of ten virtuous deeds and the sixteen virtuous ethical principles [Tib. ལྷ་ཆོས་དགེ་བ་བཅུ་དང་མི་ཆོས་གཙང་མ་བཅུ་དྲུག]." The Chinese came out with eight or nine crimes against him [laughter] and kicked him out [laughter]. He was lucky he was not arrested. Some joined the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. I joined it, though it was also the case that the government sent us. However, I wanted to join. When the Youth League first started, we had people in it. Even, if we joined it, we could not really manage [Tib. ཁུངས་འཁྱོལ]—we could not do things in the manner the members did.   

**Q:**  How was the Youth League when it first started?   

**A:**  The Chinese first started the Youth and Women's Associations. Though that's what they were called, the actual aim was to gather people and change their thinking. They staged dances, showed movies and at times, had night meetings where they just had people sing songs and dance. During these times, they educated one's mind. During one of their educating sessions, Cheba Ala was there and it was so funny. To tell you sort of a story—the head of the Youth [Association] at that time was a Chinese—but I don't recall his name. Later, when we ran away, he was in Kalimpong. I was coming from the 10th mile and there was a man standing there but I didn't notice [him]. At close quarters, it was him! He said, "Oh! It's Mayala!" and he shook my hand. I said, "Don't shake my hand, don't ever. The time for making relations is all over, so don't." He was sort of ashamed and angry. I just left. His name was Wu Zong. Now, they could not exercise the mind if they didn't get people together, right? There was no other education except to work on one's thinking. This is what he said [Wu Zong]. He said that "There is no karma and the reason why there is no karma is that if one just says, 'It's karma,' and just stays like that [does nothing], then nothing will be achieved. For example, there is a person coming along on a bicycle and he falls into the cesspool near Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱང་དཀྱིལ]. Now, if this person just thinks that it is his karma and just stays there, then he will die. But it has got nothing to do with karma. If he tries to find the means to get out, he will not die. So there is no such thing as karma." So, Cheba Ala said, "Now I have a question to ask on this. Just now you mentioned that there is no karma, and so this is probably true. If this is the case, then we know that the food of the owl is brought by the marmot. Now, the latter is much stronger and the owl cannot bully the marmot. We cannot say that it is for reasons of strength. So if this is not out of karma, then what is it?" This is what he asked [laughter]. So Wu Zong said, "Oh, you are talking about religion. Don't bring religion into this. We are talking about politics and you are talking about religion." So Ala said, "No, no, I'm not talking about religion. I'm talking about karma since you said that there is no such thing as karma. So I was just wondering what causes [such behavior]. It is not out of domination and so I was just wondering why the marmot has to take food to the owl." This was like a short anecdote and there were a lot of these small things taking place. So whatever it was, things just didn't work out for us. We said that we were youth members and went. However, my mindset was different and [I] could not become like them. So I eventually left. [I] could not stay in the Youth [Association]. So even from among our people in the Youth, they were not like us. At that time, our Youth sort of had novelty, or asar [Tib. ཨ་གསར].   

**Q:**  Asar means?   

**A:**  What should I say? [Paljor: novelty]. When one sees a new item, one does not know how good it is. However, people say, "Oh, how beautiful," and they like it. So at that time, the Chinese were saying something new and they all liked it. So we could not merge with the group very well—invariably standing a bit to the side. They did not like us and it was not only the Chinese.   

**Q:**  [Did] the Youth [Association] have a lot of different members—traders, sons, et cetera?   

**A:**  Yes, from everywhere. Sons of officials, traders, Wobaling and Kashmir Muslims, all kinds. So they didn't like us. It didn't matter if the Chinese didn't like us, [right]? But if your own people don't, then one is not happy. So this [was] how things first began. We considered the most important thing to be to see what the Chinese plans were for the future. So wherever there were responsible institutions, we would enter [them], and wherever there were important people, we made contacts and made them our friends. This was our work. At that time, our group had no name. The seven of us just met. Each was to find one's own friends and listen to each one's story. Each one was to check the character of the person and bring [them] to our side. That's how we first began.   

**Q:**  It had not risen?   

**A:**  No, they had not. We were the earliest. The Water Dragon People's Association was later, in '52. We had our people leave for China already. The reason why the Water Dragon People's Association began was that since so many Chinese soldiers came to Tibet all of a sudden, the price of food commodities increased drastically. It probably increased 10 fold [1000%]. What cost 1 ngüsang became 10 ngüsang. So the people were having difficulties, right? One's income had not increased but [the price of] purchases had, right? So [there were] great difficulties. Secondly—it's good if I mention this. In the 17-Point Agreement, there is mention of the Military Administrative Committee. If this was to be established, then it would be the head both politically and militarily, right? So it became quite clear that there was, in Tibet, an immediate difficulty. The Chinese were insisting on this and a lot of meetings were taking place at the Kashag. The two Sitsab were there and the Chinese were also pestering them. Whenever the two Sitsab met with the Chinese, they ended [up] in an argument [laughter]. The Kashag was also caught in the middle in difficulty since the Chinese and the two Sitsab always ended up fighting. Lukhangwa was a person who was very unusual for his time. This man, really, all he ever thought about was the Tibetan government, and [he] never thought about his own personal interests. He had an extraordinary loyalty to the government and never thought about his own welfare. Though he was a Sitsab, financially, the family was poor. They were not extremely poor, but for a Sitsab, one should be quite well off, but they were among the poorer. That's how his thinking was. However, he was not the type to listen to others' ideas very much, except [only] his own. Since that was the case, he also did not consult with the Kashag. So one day, the Kashag felt it was necessary to say that every time the Sitsab met with the Chinese, there was an argument and they felt uncomfortable [being] caught in the middle. So before any discussions, it would be a good idea for the Kashag and the Sitsab to consult and then each could speak where necessary. The Kashag gave this suggestion, and sincerely too because when the Sitsab were arguing with the Chinese, it seemed like the kalön were watching the entertainment [Tib. ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ་མཁན]. This was not from the Kashag as a whole, but the three lay kalön said this. So Lukhangwa replied, "I will never ever consult the Kashag. If I say something, the Chinese will know of it immediately." [Laughter] "I will never discuss [with the Kashag]." So there was no consultation and on every occasion, the fighting continued. Likewise, the Chinese wanted foodstuffs. In the 17-Point Agreement, it was written that the Local Government shall sell the foodstuffs and the Chinese will pay the money. Since there was a very large number of Chinese, they needed a lot of foodstuffs. So the Sitsab said, "We don't have a large number of products. We just have enough barely for our people and we don't have foodstuffs to be given to other people. You don't need to have so many soldiers to stay in Tibet. A few representatives of China and ten some bodyguards can stay if it is necessary. But if such a number of people stay in Tibet [as now]—the price of the foodstuffs has increased and in addition to that, the people are also facing severe hardships and we don't have foodstuffs to give to you." The so-called production could not increase all of a sudden. So they always got into fights and arguments, and it was very bothersome because, on one hand, they wanted the foodstuffs. And on the other hand, they want to hoist the [Chinese] flag on the Potala and [were] also saying they wanted to set up the Military Administrative Committee. So the Chinese always pestered [Tib. འཕུར་འཕུར་བཏང་ས] the Kashag and the Sitsab, and we and the ordinary people didn't even know that, and they wouldn't tell us that the Chinese were doing that. Like this, there was a severe internal contradiction, especially between the Chinese and the Sitsab. When the price of the food rapidly increased, the Water Dragon Year People's Association rose and submitted the petition with several articles. I don't remember the details [of the] articles, but it was mainly written that the owner of the [Buddhist] religion and the politics of Tibet is the Dalai Lama. "It is said that they will not change his power. Definitely, it must not be changed. Secondly, the price of food has increased very much. So the people are facing severe hardships. So except some representatives of China, please withdraw the soldiers from Tibet because we don't have such amount of products to give, and now there is famine in the country." If we didn't submit the petition in the name of the people (mimang)—the Chinese were always talking about the people. So it was not okay to do it by other people. Therefore—there was probably Sera Mey Chandzö, Thamjö Sonam, among the ones who set up the People's Association, but I don't know the root of the matter. But, I guess that some knowledgeable people had agitated [Tib. སྐུལ་མ་བཏང] them. In that association, I had two people; my nyerpa (steward), Nyima Gyelpo, and Trinley, who is my relative. [Talks about being a teacher of the Tibetan officials in Mussoorie in 1960, and how he learned English and became a math teacher also in the school. Not translated.]. Since there was an unprecedented famine in Tibet, the People's Association said that the people could not tolerate this. So they requested [for] the Chinese to withdraw and said that "We, the people, definitely [need to] advocate [for] the religious and political power of the Dalai Lama forever, and there will be no changes to this." They did this in a lawful manner and submitted the petition, and they didn't shout slogans and hold the demonstration and opposition. But they [the Chinese] blamed the Sitsab [for] being the hidden instigators [Tib. ཕུགས] of this saying they had relations with America. [laughter]. They were saying very strange things and the two Sitsab became Americans. Actually, they didn't know where America was located. They just heard the name because the Tibetans liked America, but they didn't know where it was located. But the Chinese said that the Sitsab were the ones who made the contradiction between the Zhongyang [and the Tibetan government]. So if they were working, it would not do. Like this, the Chinese caused a lot of trouble and almost implied that they were going to use force. They made it so the People's Association were not allowed to meet. Then it started the Sitsab's trouble, saying that this was made by the Sitsab. But, I think the Sitsab were not demoted in 1952. I remember that when the later People's Association rose, led by Alo Chöndze, Lhabju and Bumtang Trunyi, [they] were demoted in 1954. The Sitsab were demoted [then], I think. Then the Dalai Lama went to China in 1954. If the Sitsab were there, they wouldn't have let the Dalai Lama go and they wouldn't have accepted this. The Chinese were verbally saying that they were working for the people, but in reality, when the people submitted the petition, let alone taking care of it, they said that they were not allowed to meet in the future. And they said that the Americans did that to the Sitsab, and that the Sitsab were in the internal circle of the People's Association and were acting like American spies. When the Water Dragon Year People's Association submitted the petition, I was in Tsang. My home is in Gyantse Kharka Maya [Tib. མཁར་ཁ་རྨ་བྱ]. [He repeats again about his nyerpa submitting the petition to the Kashag. So he was called by the Kashag]. After I came to Lhasa, I asked my nyerpa, "After setting up the People's Association, what were you going to do?" He said, "We didn't have much to do, but we just submitted the petition because there is a famine in the country. We thought it would benefit the famine [improve conditions] a little bit. But, there isn't any response to the petition and they gave us orders saying that we are not allowed to meet in the future." I asked him who the leader of the association was and where they met. He didn't have anything to say about the leader [laughter]. He said, "Who knows?! We were given tea and droma dresi, but I didn't know who the sponsor was." Looking at this, there might have been [other] people making the plans. Although, the people would not have known the Chinese would treat them poorly, but, they had a very hard time with food because there was the famine. At that time, the Sitsab were there.   

**Q:**  Did they imprison a few people?   

**A:**  No, they didn't arrest them in 1952. They just issued the order that they were not allowed to meet.   

**Q:**  So you don't know who was backing and pushing the People's Association, right?   

**A:**  I don't know clearly [for sure], but looking at the way they served the tea and droma dresi, I think there were some important government officials behind them [the People's Association]. This might have been done by a person who knew something. Otherwise, poor things, the people didn't know the way to do it, though they disliked the Chinese. I can't tell you the names of the persons who were behind them.   

**Q:**  I heard that some said that they had connections with Namseling.   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about this person. It is possible that Drönyerchemmo and those people were there because Phala was one of the officials who had great loyalty to Tibet [Tib. བོད་ཞེན་ཆེན་པོ].   

**Q:**  What did you do in 1953-54-55-56 after you set up the group?   

**A:**  Please leave it here [at this] because I have to tell you up to 1959, like going to China and holding meetings with the Chinese beer bar called Dongan Shitang [Ch. dong an shi chang]. It was good that I could get through here. Otherwise, I would have gotten skinned, though I couldn't do anything beneficial for the Tibetans.   

**Q:**  I heard that some tsidrung opposed things in Beijing, is this true?   

**A:**  I don't have anything to tell you about the opposition in Beijing. Ngawang Senge and those people set up a Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་ཚོགས་པ] there.   

**Q:**  You mean among the Tibetans?   

**A:**  Yes, but later, they didn't get along well with one tsidrung internally, and there was quite a lot of trouble and Ngawang Senge had a very had time. We had a very hard time not being able to get him out of China. After coming back, he told me all about this. If I tell you about this, it is about the internal trouble. [Laughter] The people who caused the trouble are still alive now.   

**Q:**  Now, you just told me about seven people in your group. When shall we ask you about what this group did?   

**A:**  Then we kind of continued it, and after I was called to Lhasa in 1952, I was sent to work on the road building. [He repeats from earlier interviews about going for road building]. At that time, Tsarong Sawangchemmo told me, "It is good. Go ahead and build the road, and put stone and earth on the road. They [Chinese] will pay the money and a road is being built in our country. During the 13th Dalai Lama, there was a plan to build a road, but we were not lucky. Now, go ahead and build it well." [Laughter] Tsarong is a person who spoke short and precise [sentences]. In '53-54-55, I built the road.   

**Q:**  You spent most of your time down there, right?   

**A:**  I stayed in Metrogongkar and Kongpo, et cetera.   

**Q:**  You set up the group and you were to do whatever one could do, but you had to go everywhere to work. So how did you do [this]?   

**A:**  There were only three to four people who gathered [came] together. As for our ideology and aim, it was passed through [from] one person to another person [Tib. གཅིག་རྒྱུད]. For example, you will pass it to the people you know and Mel la will also pass it to the people he knows, and I also would do the same. Since it was secret, if you didn't do it in that way, then it would become conspicuous. The ideology and the way of doing this were the same. But we didn't have particular people to gather together. For example, if I was arrested, I don't have many people to tell. If you are arrested, you also don't have much to say. If all the members knew each other, then it would be dangerous. This was the way we worked. There were members in the great monasteries, the Tibetan regiments, and [among the] Khambas and Amdos.   

**Q:**  How did you hold the meetings?   

**A:**  There weren't many people to hold the meetings.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there anything saying this is the number 1 and this is number 2?   

**A:**  We all had different names. For example, Ngawang Senge was called Böga [Tib. བོད་དགའ] and I was called Mama, and there was also Yeshe Targye. We also had different scripts, or letters [Tib. ཡི་གེ]. Under the Chinese, it was not at all easy because it made people think that the Chinese might have sent a person after each of us. The Chinese would boast and say that, "We even know what the couples talk [about]." [Laughter] It was really like this in the beginning when he was lucky and when Mao Zedong's merit was flourishing [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱས]. It was really kind of scary. If they sent one soldier with a horse and a gun, he would do whatever he was asked. He would never bully a single person and would not enter a single household. Later, gradually, they got wrecked [Tib. སྦོ་ལུག]. In the beginning, it was really dangerous. Until 1959, I don't know about the general situation of the work our group did, but it was said that [our movement] had spread very well and that all of the posters or the leaflets in Lhasa were stuck by our group. During the Mönlam, when many people gathered, we had to educate people by sticking posters. We didn't even know each other. In 1959, the Tibetan people were enthusiastic and when they rose, they had solidarity. The situation was so chaotic, and the Tibetan people were acting without understanding the things [Tib. རྫ་ཟི་རྫུ་ཟི] [that were happening], but the secret was not leaked out at all. If the secret had been leaked out, the Dalai Lama would not have been able to leave. After the Chinese shelled and took over Norbulinga, I heard that the Chinese were shouting, "Dalai Lama, Dalai Lama." This was because they were befuddled [Tib. འཐོམ], and then they said that the Dalai Lama was kidnapped from his bed by the reactionaries. The Tibetans had such solidarity then. Actually, during that chaotic situation, the Chinese spies could have intruded, but fortunately, they couldn't [didn't]. And this was the best thing to show, that the Dalai Lama could leave. Otherwise, we didn't have anything to show and we had to bear the misfortune for the work we did.   

**Q:**  When did Ngawang Senge come back from Beijing?   

**A:**  It was at the end of 1955.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, he went to find out the goals of the Chinese, right? So what did he say when he came back?   

**A:**  He said, "The only thing I found was that the Chinese are going to destroy us completely [Tib. ཏག་ཏག་བཟོ]." [Laughter.]   

**Q:**  What did he mean by destroy completely? Did he mean the government or the religion?   

**A:**  He said that they were going to make us like a province in China, a region [Tib. ལུང་པ] which is the same as China, and saw that they didn't have any plans to make Tibet have any kind of specialty [Tib. དམིགས་བསལ]. So he was more scared than before. He had a hard time because they didn't let him come up and there were many historical events in between that, and he had to find some people to help [Tib. མགོ་འདྲེན]. Then he came up to Shigatse and in 1956, when the Dalai Lama went to India, he was in India and he was to make relations with the Dedön Tsogpa. But they didn't have a good relationship. I heard from Jayangkyil [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དཀྱིལ] Khenjung that the reason was that some said he went to China to study. So they would have to suspect him. When they said that Lobsang Yeshe came, they would say, "Don't talk [to him]. Bring out mahjong and let's play mahjong." We deemed clearly [Tib. ངོས་འཛིན་གསལ་པོ] that Lobsang Yeshe had a Chinese ideology. Later, we knew [found out] that he was not like that. The way Lobsang Yeshe talked also seemed not to be right. In the beginning, he had a great hope and talked with them, but they didn't trust him at all. He said something that implied he was a Communist, saying, "Our so-called Marxism is like a horse without any horse tack. If the horse doesn't have tack, it will graze wherever it wants and will drink wherever the water tastes good." So he said that and they became worse [became more wary of him]. Of course, they would, right? So then he came back to Tibet. After that, he didn't have a place to stay in his home. So one night he stayed in my house and [he] stayed in another house another night because the Chinese were after him all the time and they were very suspicious of him, saying that he was an American spy though he didn't even see [never went to] America.   

**Q:**  Did he run away from Beijing?   

**A:**  He didn't. The Chinese would not let him go. [So] we requested the Tashilhunpo Dzasa, Che Jigme [Tib. ཅེ་འཇིགས་མེད], to help him. Otherwise, they wouldn't let him go because he set up the Youth League and didn't get along well internally, and there was a little bit of an investigation. So they had to burn all the documents and the flag. The short tsidrung burned them. So when they searched, nothing came out. The Chinese accused him of severe crimes. When the Dalai Lama went to China in 1954, we asked Surkhang and Phüntso Wangyal for help, but they didn't let him go. At that time, Phüntso Wangyal told him, "You don't need to be disappointed. Your work is not wrong." At the end of 1955, when Che Jigme came to Beijing and when he came to the Nationality Institute for the tour, Lobsang Yeshe was there and he asked him in a secret manner for permission to meet him, saying that he was from Shigatse and asked where Che Jigme was staying. He was born in Shigatse. Then Che Jigme gave him his address and gave a time to see him. Then he went and he also kind of deceived Che Jigme a little bit and accepted to serve Tashilhunpo, and he would be given the fourth rank. He then took him back and he left for India.   

**Q:**  He couldn't make the connection in India and came back, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he came back to Lhasa and had to run away hither and thither. It was the time when Chushigandru was started and he joined them. Later, the Chinese killed him at the river bank. He was at Gonggar on the other side of the river to receive the Dalai Lama when he left. Then he came to Norbulinga to get weapons, and he got 50 rifles and some trunks of ammunition, and he could send them. Then he asked for Bren-guns and cannons and when he didn't get them, the Chinese suppressed them. He gathered some Bren-guns and loaded them onto his horse and went to the river bank. Usually, Amdo soldiers were stationed on the hill located on the other side of the river. When he was crossing the river, they happened to not be there, and some of the Khambas in Norbulinga said that they would guard that hill. Lobsang Yeshe was sure that the Amdos were there, and I heard that from that side, they were shooting a lot. So Lobsang Yeshe waved his handkerchief as a sign not to shoot. He was shot in his mouth and the bullet came out from here. His partner, Tsidrung Gyentsen Tashi [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཀྲ་ཤིས], was also killed there.   

**Q:**  You said the Khambas went there, were they false Khambas?   

**A:**  They were not false Khamba, but the Khambas went there and the Chinese were also there. So the Khambas couldn't hold the place and it was seized by the Chinese. They were the Khambas who fled from Norbulinga and they probably didn't have much thought to fight because they were too scared of the cannons. The cannon was really amazing! This beggar! When they fired the cannon in line with nine shells at once [Tib. དགུ་ཤོག], the earth was also trembling. At that time, I was at Shöl and there wasn't any place to shoot back. The Chinese had already prepared for the war.   

