# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this short interview, Maya discusses the attempt by Tibetans in Lhasa to demonstrate on the 12th [of the Tibetan calendar or 22 March], but how at dawn, the Chinese began firing. He also discusses how Ala fled from Kündeling.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_07/H_0039_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  It was decided [for Tibetans in Lhasa] to demonstrate on the 12th day of the Tibetan lunar calendar, and the preparations were done and the messages were sent on the 11th. We also gave <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> to all the beggars led by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རགས་རྒྱབ་པ] An untouchable social stratum (caste) in Lhasa that took corpses to the sky burial site.">ragyaba</a>, the people who take the corpses of the beggars to the sky burial [site]. However, at dawn on the 12th, canons were shot [by the Chinese], so they didn't get the chance to demonstrate. Then Ala ran away from Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང], and he tried to take Künsang La [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་ལགས], though Künsang La didn't have thoughts of running away. She said, "It is not alright to run away. Even if I were killed [if I stayed], this is my karmic fate. I am not going to run away." Then Ala ran away. That's what happened until 1959. Then I ran away through Mön Tawang [Tib. རྟ་དབང] and stayed in Missamari in India. After that, I stayed in Kalimpong and made my own living for a month. After that, when the Dalai Lama came to Mussoorie, I was granted a third audience with the Dalai Lama. Since then [after that], I was told to stay in Mussoorie. My first work was to write down what the Chinese said on the radio and report it to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  What happened to Künsang la later on?   

**A:**  I have a tape about that. I will make a copy of it. Give me two blank tapes.   

