# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.11 : Tape 11  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya Tsewang Gyurme discusses Lhalu's five point proclamation for reducing the horse corvée taxes in Kham and its political repercussions. He describes militia fighting in Denkhog, political maneuvering in Chamdo and details on the attitude of the Khambas in reference to allegiance with China and Tibet. He finishes by discussing the death of Geda Lama and the Chinese representatives in the Chamdo Monastery.   

---  
### Tape 11  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_11/H_0039_11.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  [Note: This tape is badly recorded with a noise from beginning to end.] Please tell us about the kinds of preparations and events that Lhalu did in Chamdo.   

**A:**  Basically, it was according to the tradition of the previous doji and Chamdo policy that didn't change much between Lhalu and Ngabö. However, Lhalu had pronounced a five point proclamation to all the areas under his control. It was stated that the traveling [officials] were not allowed to make the misers prepare their accommodations. Similarly, they should not use limitless horses and carrying corvée taxes. Therefore, the Kham misers had fewer hardships. During that period, people seemed to like Lhalu. People were quite happy that with this new doji [meaning Lhalu], people received better treatment and they were quite happy. But after a few years had passed, though I didn't know what the idea of the Doji himself was, but due to the actions of his junior officers and servants, [their] behaviors' caused quite a lot of hardships for the misers. So the people gradually lost their faith in the five point proclamation issued by the new Doji. Thus, the popularity and hope of the people faded, but I do not know the details of what the junior officers and servants did to create this. Because of this, the people didn't like Lhalu very much by the end of his term. Then the dangers of various border areas were rising year after year. Thus, the Doji realized that it was necessary to have fresh training for those who had training in the past, as well as for those who had no previous training. So he made an appeal to Lhasa for assistance with this. And as requested by the Doji, Rupön Sotre [Tib. བསོད་བཀྲས] of the Gusung Regiment et cetera—a group of people came to Chamdo and they started training the various regiments in Chamdo itself. Thereafter, the danger to the border continued and the government of Tibet dispatched a group of people from Lhasa, led by Fox, who would use wireless sets. They arrived in Chamdo— Fox, several Tibetans working under him, and some Indians from Kalimpong (who looked like Tibetan people). Fox, himself, stayed stationed in Chamdo and the others were divided up and sent to other places.   

**Q:**  Where had they been sent to?   

**A:**  One was sent to Denkhog. And the others, I don't remember very clearly, but I have a feeling that they were sent to Ba, near the border, but I am not very sure. It was [to] a post as the salt tax collector, tshasho. After that, suddenly, from the Jyekundo side, a group of Chinese came. They came over to our wireless operators at night and took away all of our equipment. They gave us a beautiful talk, but didn't harm our people. Then we received an emergency message on horseback. And in that, they gave us detailed information, [like] how the equipment was lost. Also, the message said that there were large numbers of Chinese soldiers, but they had not yet come into Tibetan territory. However, it seemed as if they would come very soon. Then the Doji made arrangements for the militias. He raised these militias from Shotalhosum. They appointed one leader from among themselves. I think the number of soldiers in that group was about 500. There was a normal system whenever there was an emergency. Then there was a system to raise a local militia from these three areas. It was almost the same as the Central Tibetan system—i.e. according to the land held. Similarly, he also raised over 100 soldiers (militia) from the three dzongs of the Powo area. Potö, Pomey. [This number must be a mistake because Maya said that he himself went to the three dzong of Powo to collect soldiers. Most soldiers came from Upper Powo.] They raised 488 soldiers. This was the system that was established by the famous Tsögo earlier. They had their own flag in which there was the mark of Jadang since under Tsögo, when they fought earlier, they were the Jadang Regiment at the time of the Water Mouse Year Chinese War [Tib. ཆུ་བྱི་རྒྱ་དམག]. It was during the 13th Dalai Lama's period that Tsögo established their custom of [forming a] militia during emergencies. They had their own military equipment, like the trumpet and drums et cetera. These were sent to the place called Thamka [Tib. ?], in Nangchen [Tib. ནང་ཆེན], at the border of Jyekundo. The soldiers from Shotalhosum were dispatched to Denkhog. Similarly, the soldiers collected from Traya, Markham, and Gonjo were, I think, dispatched to the Shugla area on the Dzayul [Tib. རྫ་ཡུལ] border. Under our control, the local militias were collected from four different areas.   

**Q:**  What was the total?   

**A:**  In total, they probably amounted to 2-3,000. But I don't know how many soldiers they collected from Mandzogosum [Tib. སྨར་མཛོ་གོ་གསུམ]; Markham, Dzogang, and Gonjo. In short, if the Chinese attacked us, whether or not we could defend ourselves, it was definitely planned that we would fight and defend ourselves. After we lost the wireless set, then we had a meeting in Chamdo at night. The purpose of this meeting was to raise these local militias. The officials were divided and sent to different places to raise the militia. I was sent to the Powo area. In between that, [after that and up to the invasion,] we didn't cross our border and the Chinese didn't come to our side. So for a long time, there was no contact. After that, we decided to send the Gadang Regiment to Denkhog, and to back them up, we added the local militia unit from Shotalhosum. The Gadang [Regiment] was divided into two sections of 500 each. One was kept in Derge Jomda [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ]. The other was sent with their Depön Muja to the Denkhog area. It was 1950. I don't know the Western month, but it was the 5th Tibetan month when they were dispatched to Denkhog. When they reached Denkhog, they were welcomed by the Den Chöngor [Tib. ལྡན་ཆོས་འཁོར] Monastery and its local lay people. They served them tea, chang et cetera. Everything. They asked the locals whether the Chinese had reached the Denkhog area and these people told them "So far, the Chinese have not reached [the area]. But they may be coming tomorrow or the day after. Any moment [now]." Since they had informed them that there were no Chinese there, the [officers] sent the soldiers by the normal main road. However, as a precautionary matter, the Depön himself, with another group of soldiers and the Khamba militia, went over the mountains from the mountain side. That is, they divided their force into two groups. One [traveled] along the main route with machinery, arms and ammunition, and the other via the mountains. The group on the straight road was led by the famous Rupön Bügangla, the father and son. This is how they went after the welcome party. While going on the main road, they had to pass a narrow gorge that passes between two mountains. By that time, the Chinese had been hiding on the right and left sides of the mountain in the forests. The Tibetan troops were not expecting any Chinese because the Chöngor Monastery monastic officials and the local people had told them that there were no Chinese, so they didn't expect them. But all of a sudden, the Chinese attacked them from both sides with machine guns. So they couldn't pass through. Then Drongdrag suddenly took some young people in his group who could use machine guns, and among them, one was known as Shengo Lolo [Tib. བློ་བློ]. Even when they told the Rupön that there were many Chinese, he was still shooting with his right hand. And after his right hand was wounded, he was shooting with his left hand. After this, Lolo started shouting that Rupönla was lost. Rupönla was lost. And then all the Tibetan soldiers fighting on the main road ran away. I have heard that in this fight, the moment they lost their leader, they were completely demoralized and they withdrew. However, although most of them ran away, there was a Gyagpön called Drongdrag [Tib. འབྲོང་ར་བ]. He said he was not going to run, but rather, he was going to go wherever there were Chinese strongholds and fight with them in hand to hand combat. He crawled over to the Chinese side and some others followed him. They could not reach where the Chinese strongholds were. I don't know how many Chinese they were able to kill, but we lost Drongdrag and his son, and quite a number of soldiers, there. They lost three top soldiers and thus, had no chance to stand up against the Chinese. So they withdrew. However, at the same time, the group going the mountain route started fighting with the Chinese. They were led by Muja Depön himself. There was a tough battle going on there on the mountain side. Muja wasn't wounded, but somehow he fell from a higher place to a lower place, and he became unconscious for awhile. This helped him for otherwise, he would have been captured or dead [killed]. Because of this fall, it became easy for him to withdraw. So whatever may have happened, this fighting was very good and the Chinese completely withdrew their soldiers one day's journey from Denkhog. So then the Tibetans also withdrew one day's journey [away]. The Chinese didn't even stay in the Den Chöngor Monastery. They went beyond [that]. Later, I came to know through the Khambas that the Chinese, after this, had a meeting and there they said, "These Tibetans have quite good weapons and machinery. They are very powerful. So the plan that we already have to attack Tibet will not be adequate to conquer Tibet." So they said, "We have to redouble our efforts." This I came to know from some Khambas from the local area who later told me about this. For the next two months after this (5th-7th), there was no fighting—it was like normal. So, during this period, the Chamdo authorities demoted Lolo from the rank of Shengo because it was he who shouted to the soldiers that they had lost Rupön Bügangla, and therefore, the soldiers withdrew. This was the first fight. The next event, I don't remember the date exactly, but it was in the 8th month of the Tibetan calendar. But I don't remember if it was in the beginning or the end. Suddenly, we were informed by the then Doji Lhalu that he had been relieved and Ngabö would be coming and would be taking over shortly. Then Ngabö came. But he came with very few people [a small retinue]. His wife was not there, and of his staff members, only one kadrung and one kandrön accompanied him. No other staff came. Normally, the Doji bought a large [number of] staff who were selected accordance with the wishes of the Doji himself. But this time, he came with only one kadrung and the kandrön. [ Mr. Maya told me off tape. He thinks it was Taktra who was close to Lhalu who wanted Lhalu to be withdrawn from the troubled area immediately. At the same time, he appointed Ngabö as a new shape unwillingly in the sense that Ngabö never asked to be shape. Normally, a lot of people would ask, but this time, nobody wanted to take the job. Maya thinks that they had simply given Ngabö up—i.e. if he died or was captured, they didn't care.] Then it was time for Lhalu to leave, but since Ngabö had no staff, the rest of Lhalu's staff [except his kadrung and kandrön, and his own brother] would remain in Chamdo. Within that very month, Lhalu left for Lhasa and Ngabö took over.   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any talk that Lhalu and Ngabö were to stay together? [This the Dalai Lama said in his book.]   

**A:**  No, they were together for a very short period. Lhalu just handed over the records et cetera, and then Ngabö took over. The moment the handing over was finished, Lhalu left. One reason for this was that if there were two doji in Chamdo at the same time, there would be many hardships for the local people. For example, providing firewood, kitchen help, looking after the horses, et cetera. If both stayed, it would have been an unnecessary hardship for the local people. This was the talk in Chamdo. Ngabö did not object to any of this. Lhalu wanted to leave as soon as possible and they agreed, and Lhalu left. Then Ngabö was alone in command. Then the situation became very, very tense. We received the news that the Chinese had crossed the Gamtog Drukha ferry site, and we also received news that the Chinese were about to cross Gamtog Drukha. Every day we were receiving such information. Similarly, we were also getting news that the Chinese were coming via Shugla. Similarly, we receiving news that the Chinese had crossed the border in Nangchen. We also received news that the Chinese were coming from the Ba area. Also, [we got a] message that they were coming from Dzayul. Ngabö received such messages day after day, and they all said that the Chinese were coming, or that they had come or they were about to take over et cetera. At that time, in Chamdo, there were no additional[reserve[ soldiers who could be sent anywhere [else] to support other troops. All the regular troops and all the militia were posted in different border areas and not a single soldier had arrived from the capital.   

**Q:**  When Lhalu raised these militias, who fed and paid them?   

**A:**  It came from the grain storehouse and from the Grain Interest office, Drukhe [the post which Maya himself held]. That post dealt with the grain which was lent out as interest. These two officers provided the supplies. While all of this bad news was coming, we held a meeting of all the staff except Ngabö. In that meeting, we reached a unanimous decision, and so we made an appeal to Ngabö. "Now we are receiving news of the Chinese coming to various places and the borders are lost. And at this very moment, if we keep on staying here, it will be very difficult, especially when the route that comes from the north is cut off. It will be very difficult for us to have contact with Lhasa. And also from Lhasa, if they want to put [send out] some strong army [forces] to fight the Chinese, then it will be very difficult for them to do so if we are caught and held as hostages. Also, if there is any reason, we shall not hesitate to even give up our lives, but it will cause a lot of trouble for Lhasa if we are held as hostages. So it would be good to move the capital to Lhodzong because it is a very strategically important site because the road is very narrow in between the mountains there. It is also important for the government, who has arms stored there." So they appealed to the doji through the Kandrön to which Ngabö replied to us via his kadrung. "As far as the land and place [means the land and people and their villages], [they] have been handed over to me as my own responsibility. So as far as I am concerned, whatever the situation may be, I cannot be shifted [moved]. But if any one or all of you would like to go back to Lhasa, I have no objections." So then we decided that if the doji could not go, then we as individuals could not go. This was what we decided. Finally, we decided that whatever the situation may be, good or bad, we shall not move from Chamdo. At about this time, they also contacted Lhala through the wireless concerning this matter. Also at this time, Lhasa was having second thoughts, saying that Ngabö should take responsibility in Chamdo and that as far as Lhalu was concerned, wherever he might have reached, he should stay there, and both of the doji should discuss the matter and decide what would be best. In actuality, they should be very careful not to lose any matter. They should see [to it] that their duty was fulfilled. Such an order, I believe, had been issued. Thus, Lhalu couldn't reach Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Wasn't Lhalu at Lhodzong.?   

**A:**  Yes, he was there for a short while, and then he reached Kongpo Giamda and he stayed there. So around this time, we had no additional soldiers or anything that we could send for. We had no people now [other than those already deployed] in Chamdo. We had no other alternative but just to stay on. Then I talked to Ford. Now, what did I hear? Did we have anybody who could help us? Ford first told me that there was hope that England may help. Later, however, he said, "Now there is no hope. Nobody will help us. It would be better if we empty [abandon] the whole territory of Chamdo, and we should go and sit in the mountains, and carry all the weapons and food and things, and leave no food in Chamdo and sit in the mountains. And when the Chinese enter, then we will attack them from time to time." This was the best [thing to do], he thought. That is what he said. About this time, we were certain that we would be captured by the Chinese because all we knew—we heard that we had lost Markham and the Tadang Regiment had surrendered to the Chinese, and the dzongpön of Markham had already run away.   

**Q:**  Who was the Markham Dzongpön?   

**A:**  It was my elder brother. When the Chinese came, he had already run away to Chamdo. Then at Dzogang Dzong, the dzongpön tsidrung committed suicide. I don't know his name. Similarly, all the other dzongpön were running toward Chamdo every day. Every day, we received messages saying we lost this territory [or] that territory. [We were] only getting these bad messages of lost, lost. We kept receiving these messages and then we held a meeting. "What action should we take now?" We found that no action was feasible since no soldiers were at our disposal. So we could do nothing. But sitting in Chamdo was not advisable. At the same time, we had already made one appeal to the governor which he found difficult [to accept]. Then we made a second appeal to him saying to please send a message to Lhasa either by wireless or telegram to get permission to shift the capital of Kham from Chamdo to Lhodzong. According to our appeal, Ngabö again instructed his kadrung to take all the staff into confidence. The kadrung told us that they had already sent three telegrams using a secret code to Lhasa informing [them] about the whole situation that was taking place in Chamdo. However, Lhasa had not replied at all to any of these three urgent, emergency telegrams. We contacted Lhasa by means of wireless. The person who was talking from Chamdo was Tsögo, the kadrung to the Chamdo Governor Ngabö. The person who was receiving the message in Lhasa was Kadrung Dumra. Tsögo told Dumra, "Look, we have sent three urgent, emergency messages by means of telegrams and we have not received a reply. As far as we are concerned, we are caught. Every second, every moment of breath is important to us. If you are not going to reply, we don't know what to do here." This is what he told Dumra. Dumra replied from Lhasa, "Right now it is picnic time for the Kashag. It is [time for] the summer picnic and they are all picnicking. All of your telegrams will be translated and then we will give you a reply." The kadrung here, Tsögo, was very angry and told him, "What a shit-picnic you are having. We are blocked here. The nation is threatened and every moment, every single breath we are taking is very important, and you are enjoying your shit-picnic." So they cut off the wireless. He said, "We have no instructions from the capital, what should we do?" Now, we couldn't do anything. What could we say, what could we do? We had no instructions from Lhasa and Ngabö, the governor, refused to go. We could not go. It would have been very odd to leave the Doji and go. But in order to fight the Chinese—we had no people.   

**Q:**  What happened to the soldiers and what happened to the local militia units they had collected?   

**A:**  They were all lost. According to the messages we received, they were all lost. They had gone home after losing to the Chinese. We had nothing. We have a saying in Tibet, "Even [if] one is carried by the current, he thinks as if he is swimming [Tib. ཆུས་འཁྱེར་ན་ཡང་རྐྱལ]." According to this, we remained in Chamdo, watching and waiting, and thinking that we were swimming. That we were swimming rather than being carried by the current. We had no people in Chamdo except for one small division of Laya Charigpa's [Tib. bla ya ? bya rigs pa] soldiers, about 100 of the Ngadang Regiment. That was all we had in Chamdo. Furthermore, we had nobody.   

**Q:**  What happened to the militia?   

**A:**  They had all gone and were divided up, as I told you earlier. They were sent to the various borders and they lost. We had nobody in Chamdo. We had no Khamba militia in Chamdo at all. In the ninth month, at midnight of the seventh day (October 17th), we again had a meeting and we said, "Now, if we don't go, all the areas are lost. Riwoche has fallen." We had this meeting. It was midnight on the seventh day or the eighth morning or whatever. Then we said, "The latest message is saying all the border territories have fallen into Chinese hands. Riwoche has fallen and if they go directly from Riwoche to Lagong Ngamda, then we are totally blocked, both from the mountain route as well as from the straight road—the main road—we will be blocked. Staying here is serving no purpose whatsoever and we should leave immediately." We decided to leave early that morning and set fire to the armory. As far as the others were concerned, not a single order from Lhasa was received, not one word, nothing. We just had to do that. The talk in Lhasa was the shit-picnic. That was the last we heard. That was probably on the fifth or sixth of the Tibetan calendar (October 15th). Until the seventh at midnight or the morning of the eighth, we waited and there was no contact from Lhasa at all. The morning of the eighth, we all left, including Ngabö. We left all of our property, everything. We rode on horses carrying arms and we were not sure whether we could cross Lagong Ngamda or not. That is how we left Chamdo. It was very easy for the Chinese to block us because the moment they came up from Riwoche to Lagong Ngamda, they could cut us [off]. We were blocked by the main road and the mountain road. Both routes were blocked. When we were planning to cross towards Lagong Ngamda, the first party, which consisted of some servants and some horsemen of Khowang Nangpa, returned. They told us that the Chinese had already blocked the road, so there was no way for us to go. When they covered (occupied) Riwoche they cut off the northern route. When they covered Riwoche up to Lagong Ngenda, they cut off the main road also. It was very easy for the Chinese to cut this [off]. As far as I know, some of the horsemen and the muleteers of Khowang Nangpa, some had returned saying that there was no way to go. Either Lagong Ngenda or Riwoche, both had been blocked by the Chinese. The Doji decided to go towards Drugugön. This was how he made the decision to go to Drugugön. Some of us did not obey and did not agree with this decision, and were still hoping that we might have been able to cross. So some of us kept on going, still towards Lagong Ngamda. A few of us—two, three of us with our servants—we had no desire to fight, only the simple hope that we may have been able to escape in between some place. The moment I crossed the mountain pass towards Lagong Ngamda from Chamdo, I met the Chinese. The moment we crossed, I saw that the Chinese were coming. They were coming in three lines. One line from the right side, one from the left side and one from the center. I was so scared. I didn't know the valley was full of Chinese from all three directions—center, right and left. I met with the centreline. We could not return now, we just went on. Then suddenly, they came near and they arrested us. They took all of our weapons and we were sent back to Chamdo. We were taken to Chamdo. They took all of our property, the horses, our arms, and these were just sent to Chamdo. We were locked up in the jail of Chamdo and two or three days after we were locked in, they brought Ngabö also. So we met again in Chamdo.   

**Q:**  When you met the Chinese, what did they say?   

**A:**  There is no use to talk about that here, they were very sweet and very nice. They said, "We have come to help you, to serve you, to serve the Tibetan people, but not to force or harm them. We have to render our services to you. There is no use for you to go back up now, you better go back to Chamdo." Then they sent us back to Chamdo. As I said earlier, the Chinese took all of our weapons, horses, and mules. That is what they needed. Luckily, they gave us each a horse or mule to ride, and we were sent back to Chamdo. After reaching Chamdo, they locked us up in the jail and two or three days later, Ngabö reached Chamdo too.   

**Q:**  I am wondering whether Ngabö had any horse to ride?   

**A:**  I was informed that Ngabö had a horse to ride. Ngabö and Simpön Khembo, all of these people had come from Drugugön. When Ngabö and Simpön Khembo went towards Drugugön, we were informed that our way was blocked. Even then I was not very sure whether our way was really blocked. So I tried to go through, to cut across the Chinese and go to Lagong Ngamda, until I suddenly found out and realized, "There is no way. There is no way to go. There is no path. There is really no place to go."   

**Q:**  Were there many Chinese?   

**A:**  There were a lot of Chinese. Maybe we thought that because we were scared, but I found a lot of Chinese, it was sort of full of [them]. As I said earlier, there were three lines. One was the centreline, one on the right and one on the left. It was full [of them]. Maybe I was scared, but I saw that it was full, but again, maybe it was my fear. We had a lot of fear at that time, but I noticed that they were all over the place, sort of covered, everywhere. Most of the Chinese were on foot. A few of their leaders were on horseback. It was night when we left Chamdo and before the sun was rising in the morning. I already counted the Chinese that night.   

**Q:**  Don't you think that if Ngabö, with some soldiers, had tried to cut across to Lagong Ngenda—would they have succeeded?   

**A:**  No, there was no way. I tried and I was unable to do it. All of our people, the doji, and the others were stopped. Every one of us was now locked up. They were locked in the jail at Sidogthang. The junior ones (and I) were locked in Chamdo in the Tibetan military unit's house. In that way, we were locked in. We were also divided into groups of ten. We were all locked in now. We were put in jail. Our orders were to be in groups of ten—maybe a little more than ten. The first man I met, he was a regimental commander, Wang [Ch. tuan zhan]. Fortunately, I haven't forgotten his name. He had a little beard. As I said earlier, there is no use to talk about what he said. He said, "I am very happy to meet you. We have come here to serve the Tibetan people, not to boss and bully them, not to drug them. We are very happy to meet you and there is no use for you to go to Lagong Ngamda, but you should go to Chamdo." Very nice, very, very sweet-talking. "You need no weapons. The weapons were given to you by the foreign imperialist powers. They have given you the weapons to fight against us. And as you know, there is no use. Also, you do not need horses and mules. What is the use for you [to have them]?" With such a very sweet talk, very nice, he took away all of our horses, our arms, and ammunition.   

**Q:**  When Ngabö left, wasn't there talk that certain government officers, like, for example, Khenjung Dawala [Tib. མཁན་ཆུང་ཟླ་བ་ལགས], that all of these local units should be taken with Ngabö, especially the Khamba soldiers? But there were no horses available?   

**A:**  The question of whether to take the Khamba soldiers with us did not arise because there were about 100 soldiers of the Tibetan Army who were under Depön Laya Jarig, who also failed to bring those soldiers with Ngabö because there were no horses available. Normally, the horses were divided when the doji moved around by a form of horse corvée, but this time, the Sherdag [Tib. ?]—the officers of Chamdo who were the Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] Labrang [and from "Tau"] officers—they didn't bother to provide a horse to the Doji when the Doji was running away. When the Doji was going to run away, we requested for Chamdo to provide a horse, as normal. But we received no reply whatsoever. They didn't say either yes to give horses, nor did they say no. Time was running [out], so we had no alternative [other] than to presume that they were unwilling to cooperate with us. Since the Doji was running away, we considered the Doji to be losing his power, so it was up to them whether they cooperated or not. Since they had not provided a single horse—therefore, Ngabö was also without servants. Ngabö was alone with his staff members. He couldn't take many of his servants also. This was the true situation. The question of the availability of the horse corvée from the Khambas—they were not for the Khambas, but for the staff and soldiers which Laya Jarig had with him to go to Ngabö. But he could not because there were no horses.   

**Q:**  What happened to the property of the staff members of the Doji of Chamdo, and the government properties they had in Chamdo?   

**A:**  Nothing was left.   

**Q:**  When you ran away from the Chinese in the middle of the night, you left with cloth, weapons and a horse, but all of your valuables, your own old valuables and whatever moveable and immovable properties you may have had, they were all in Chamdo? What happened to them?   

**A:**  There was nothing left.   

**Q:**  What do you mean, "There was nothing left."?   

**A:**  When we left, I do not know whether it was taken by the local people or by the Chinese, or by anyone else. I was arrested behind the mountain and sent to Chamdo and put in jail. When they released us from jail, we had nothing. Not only did we have nothing, but we didn't even have a place to go. Because everything of ours, like the place where I use to stay, was full of Chinese soldiers, there was no place for me to go. Nothing was left, that is the truth. Even for the doji; everybody had no property left whatsoever. Everything [Everyone] had become like beggars, nothing was there.   

**Q:**  You might have heard what had happened and who took it? Whether it was the Chinese or the Khambas?   

**A:**  What I have heard is that the local people probably took it before the Chinese reached [there] or while the Chinese were coming. I don't know for sure, but I have heard that probably the local people took it. Afterwards, there was not even a place for us to ask what had happened because all of our news was upsetting, you could not ask anyone what happened to our properties.   

**Q:**  While you were in jail, all of your food was provided by the Chinese, but what about the clothing and the bedding?   

**A:**  As far as bedding was concerned, one of my servants gave me a quilt. I don't know where he got it from, but it was a good one. Otherwise, [there was] nothing. The food the Chinese gave was mostly Beijing tsamba. It was tsamba like what all the Tibetans ate—barley flour—but it contained pork and flavors. It was mixed. This was what they gave us. We ate Beijing tsamba all the time. That was the food they gave to us.   

**Q:**  Did Mr. Kündeling come to visit you during that period?   

**A:**  He definitely came and he gave us tsamba, barley flour and dry meat, cheese and butter; he gave a good gift to everybody. But it was just after we had been released from jail.   

**Q:**  When you were released from jail, were the junior officers released before the Doji was?   

**A:**  The Doji was not locked up.   

**Q:**  I heard that the Doji was locked up in the Customs House [Tib. ཤོ་ཁང] under the office of the Doji, Sidokthang, isn't that right?   

**A:**  That is right but then Wang Qimei came and they were released and put in the important rooms, the Doji's old rooms on the higher stories of the building by Wang Qimei.   

**Q:**  Was it done by Wang Siling or was it done by Phünwang Buzhang?   

**A:**  It was Wang Qimei.   

**Q:**  Are you sure it was not Phünwang Bhutan?   

**A:**  No, definitely Wang Qimei. The first time in Chamdo when we were put in jail, it was by Wu Sizhang. After Wu Sizhang, Wang Qimei came. He was the Army commander (Ch. Junzhang). It was above Sizhang [Regiment commander).   

**Q:**  What is Junzhang and Sizhang?   

**A:**  I don't know. It was a Chinese system, but it was big anyway. The moment Wang Qimei came he cried and said, "Due to the imperialist policies, we created a separation among our brothers—senior and junior brothers." They gave [us] some guns and we started shooting guns at each other. That was very sad. He started crying, actually pouring liquid by means of tears.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese started attacking the borders, did they really shoot guns or did they empty tins? What is true?   

**A:**  They shot guns, but the Chinese told us that they did not try to shoot guns but to beat empty tins. But that was not true. They really shot a lot of guns, so quite a lot of people were wounded and killed. So they started losing, but it was not true that they were beating empty tins. One important thing at that point, something you have to remember—ordinary, local people in the village were thinking that when the Chinese came, they could not think that they were going to suffer. Neither were they thinking that they would lose their nation and their country. At that time, the local people did not consider that "The government is lost and the country is lost." They did not consider that [to be the case]. But they were thinking "The Tibetan government is on one side and the Chinese are on the other side, and they are making war. [It is] as if two big families are fighting and you are watching." And they didn't consider that the government belonged to us and that the country belonged to us. This was the attitude of the local people. That was not only so in Chamdo, but you found that same attitude in almost all of the areas at that time.   

**Q:**  Do you think that attitude was throughout Tibet, including in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Lhasa may have been a little different, but otherwise, it was almost the same. In the Kham area, definitely. Even in the Lhasa area it was almost the same, but in the Kham area, definitely. They were talking, "The Tibetan government is fighting with the Chinese and the Chinese are attacking the Tibetan government's soldiers." They were not saying, "The Chinese are attacking our territory." They said, "The Chinese are attacking the Tibetan government's soldiers. The Chinese are killing the Tibetan government's men, or the Tibetan government is running," that is what they always said. They never said, "They are attacking our country, they are attacking our territory, they are attacking my government." This type of attitude—so I don't want to elaborate any more about what happened in Lhasa. I do not need to. On top of this, the Chinese would speak very well and before the Chinese came, a lot of their talks had come, and a lot of their propaganda talks had come saying, "The stone hat on your head and the shackles on your legs will be removed." That is what the Chinese were saying. "We are here to give you a new happiness. We are here to give you the best valuables in the world. We are here to serve the people of Tibet. The Tibetans could not raise their heads because of the pressure from the foreign imperialist powers. Now we are here to liberate Tibet, and Tibet will prosper and become most important. And Tibet will become the best nation. We are going to make it fantastic." That is what they were talking [about] all the time. When the Tibetan soldiers and the local militia met at the border with the Chinese, they started to take the guns from them and gave them three dayan in return. They told them, "You go straight home." In accordance with this warning, the militia soldiers and the regiment soldiers, whatever they might have been, all started going straight home. Rather than going to Chamdo or any other headquarters, they went straight home [right] away. The soldiers didn't contact any of the officers, not even at the borders. They left them behind, just surrendered their guns, and went straight home. Straight to their respective areas—Tsang, Ü or Shotalhosum, Markham, Traya, wherever they belong to. They took the money and just went. It was due to the fact that, in general, our people have no understanding or education on the political system. And what also is important, is that loyalty is directed towards your own land etcetera. So people were not aware. They had never been taught. By themselves, without teaching, to gain an understanding of the importance of our own land, our own territory, our own motherland, was very rare. On top of this, the Chinese suddenly came and gave very strong propaganda, so our masses lost their heads, especially in Kham. People had no interest.   

**Q:**  Do you mean when you say that that people had no interest, that they didn't care?   

**A:**  People didn't care [about] whatever was happening. Only the leaders [were the ones] who knew something. The leaders thought that the fight was going on between the Tibetans and the Chinese—it was like between two other families. And they didn't really realize that it affected all the people. It was sort of a fight between the Tibetans and the Chinese, but they were not involved. Their position was like that of an observer. To watch who was going to win, it was like watching a movie.   

**Q:**  During World War II, the airlines requested [for] the Tibetan government to give their territory as passage for moving weapons, arms and ammunition towards China. Tibet thought that if they did so, they would lose their status of being a neutral country. Similarly, do you think that the Sherdags of Chamdo thought that if they gave their horses to Doji Ngabö when he was running away, that they would loose their position of neutrality between the fight of the Chinese and the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  Possibly, that may not be but...   

**A:**  As the Chamdo Sherdags, or rather, Phagpalha Labrang's officers, heard that the Doji—the governor of Chamdo—was running away and he was loosing his power, then what was the use for us to give him a horse or to give him help? This very attitude was taken by all other concerned local leaders, local lamas, and local officers. They took the same attitude throughout the Kham area. This is a true statement. No other areas in Kham had collaborated with the Tibetan government at all, this is true. Their attitude was always one from watching; watching the show of the fight between the Tibetan government and the Chinese. Their main aim was just to watch the show of the fight between the Tibetan government and the Chinese, that was all. Because of this situation, what could we really do? We were in a hopeless situation.   

**Q:**  Did you ever hear that the Pandatsang, or rather, the Markham leaders including Pandatsang, were trying to gain [make] some bargain with the Tibetan government? They said that they were willing to fight the Chinese provided that the Tibetan government guaranteed local autonomy or something like that.   

**A:**  As far as Pandatsang is concerned, I know Abo Rabga definitely came to Chamdo. I saw that, but I never heard that he put forward such a demand. But what I heard is that [when] Abo Raga came, his mission was to start negotiations between China and Tibet. Ngabö used him and sent him along with the Tashi Targye [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དར་རྒྱས] to China to negotiate. But they were put in jail and the matter of negotiations did not rise at all. Ultimately, they were released on the grounds that they were Tibetans and minorities. Besides that, I heard nothing else.   

**Q:**  What did the Tibetans feel about Ford, what was their attitude toward him and how long had they been with this man?   

**A:**  Ford came with Wallishead [a wireless set] and he stayed in Jangkar House. [Lhalu stayed at the monastery at first, but later, he stayed at Sidokthang.] People liked him. The Tibetan government considered him as one of our staff members. No one had any suspicions that he was a foreign agent. Everybody considered him as one of us, no one doubted his integrity at all. As far as I am concerned, I was quite a close friend to him, and we used to drink a lot. He was very fond of chang. He spoke Tibetan very well.   

**Q:**  Please give me some detail about Muja Depön. After all, he is a hero, so can you give me some more details [on him]?   

**A:**  You can call Muja Depön a hero because he was involved in the fighting in the Denkhog and the Chöngor Monastery area, on the mountainside. He fought very strongly. He was doing very well. He went on with fighting. He was not scared. He was very strong and he could fight. He was also able to provide leadership to the local militia which was collected from Shotalhosum. They were able to fight very well and these local militias also fought. They were not like the others who ran away. They really fought quite strongly. To tell you Riwoche, please do listen now, as far as the other militia is concerned, I never heard that anyone actually fought.   

**Q:**  The militia was okay, but what about our own soldiers, our regimental soldiers?   

**A:**  They were also in almost the same position. As far as the soldiers were concerned, including the local militia, the moment they met the Chinese, they surrendered. When they surrendered their guns, straight away they got three dayan. They said, "Now you go. You are free. You [can] go anywhere you want to. Later you can become a businessman, a trader, a government officer or you can become a farmer in the village. Whatever you want to do, you can become [it]. Now you are free. You go wherever you want to." This was the way the Chinese talked to them. The moment they gave their guns to them, they gave them three dayan and sent them away.   

**Q:**  What about their food and all other arrangements?   

**A:**  The soldiers were very happy that they were able to return home. So they just started walking, that was all. One more thing I must add—it was not so that they didn't fight at all and just surrendered. They all fought a little bit everywhere. The regimental armies, they really did fight. But with the number of soldiers, [there] was a huge difference. We were with a few thousands. They were with hundreds of thousands.   

**Q:**  Was there any talk that both doji had to stay there together to manage the affairs?   

**A:**  I don't know [about this] in detail, not really deeply. But it is common knowledge that when Ngabö came, Lhalu wanted to go. And Ngabö didn't insist that Lhalu should stay and he also agreed that Ngabö [Lhalu] should leave because when there were two dojis in one place, it caused a lot of hardships for the people. Ngabö said that he had no objection for Lhalu to go. Lhalu also left very quickly.   

**Q:**  Who killed Geda Lama?   

**A:**  I don't know who really killed him.   

**Q:**  Who was Geda [Tib. དགེ་སྟག] Lama?   

**A:**  Geda Lama was a lama from the Ganzi area and he was a TrIu Khamba.   

**Q:**  Why did he become so important?   

**A:**  This story goes back to the long march of the CommunistS. When they were having the long March, they went to Siling (Qinghai) and in Siling, Ma Bufang beat him up so badly that they had to run. When they ran, they ran towards Ganzi, the Triu area, the Kangtse side. While in Ganzi, they had nothing to eat and nothing to wear. So Geda Lama gave them food, clothes and a lot of wool. It was not only Geda Trülku. Jagö Tomden was involved too. These two very rich, very well known families, had given [to the people]. They had given whatever they had. Food, clothes, everything, in a large quantity to the Communist rebels during the long march. It was lead by Marshal Zhu De. Marshal Zhu De gave a letter to both Geda Trülku and Jagö Tomden. They seemed to be important.   

**Q:**  I have heard that Jagö Tomden had a letter written by Marshal Zhu De. Then Marshal Zhu De bite his own finger and used the blood to write on the paper. I hear that Jagö Tomden got that, but did Geda also get the same thing?   

**A:**  They were in the same position and they got the same thing. Because when they got this letter, they became very close to the Chinese Communists. At that time, I am quite sure that they knew nothing about the bad things of the Chinese. They simply knew—and I am sure that at the time, the Chinese Communists were very poor—[had] no clothes to wear, nothing to eat; many of them [were like this]. They gave mostly out of compassion, I am quite sure about this. That is my personal feeling. After the Guomindang lost power in China and the Communists came into power, Geda Trülku's letter and Jagö Tomden's letter had now become very important documents. My feeling is that the Chinese Communists gave Geda Trülku a responsibility. That responsibility was to convince the Tibetans that there was no point in fighting. They could not fight. It seems to me—my understanding now is that the Chinese wanted to show the world that the Tibetans had welcomed the Communists without any resistance. That they said that they wanted that. They used Geda Lama as an instrument to be able to convince the Tibetans. I think that was the responsibility given to him. Why I say this is because he had come to Chamdo and said that there was no use in fighting. "You cannot fight. In case you fight with guns, let alone the fact that you will lose the lives of the people, but it will lead to the total destruction of Buddhism. You will also lose the monasteries and their credibility, and the tratsang will also be lost. Because of this and because of the loyalty with Buddhism, my belief forces me to do this. Therefore, I came here to negotiate. To try to convince the Tibetan government." He was simply saying that—he didn't say that he was sent by the Chinese at all.   

**Q:**  When did Geda arrive?   

**A:**  Geda arrived during the [time of] Lhalu, long before Ngabö came. He also died before Ngabö came, before the first war in Denkhog. When Geda came, he said, "There is going to be fighting. Tibet will definitely lose. This is a big challenge to Buddhism. So since I am one of the Tibetans who has quite some loyalty, therefore, I came here to convince the Tibetan government not to take arms and I will also negotiate with the Chinese myself." What he wanted—he wanted to go up to Lhasa and negotiate. There was quite a number of people with him and one of the men that he trusted was the Khor Lama of Traya. He hoped that he would go to Lhasa to start negotiations.   

**Q:**  Was he a lama?   

**A:**  He was not a lama at all. He was just a businessman, but his name was Lama. Geda Trülku was definitely an incarnate lama and also a monk from the Geda Monastery of Triu. When he reached Chamdo, he said that he was going to Lhasa. Lhalu sent a form of communication. At that time, there was no wireless, he could only communicate by letter. Lhalu sent this letter to Lhasa saying that Geda had come. This was his speech. "What he wants is to go to Lhasa. Shall I send him up or what shall I do?" Lhasa replied to Lhalu, "You are not allowed to send Geda Trülku to Lhasa, neither are you allowed to send him back. So you have to kill him in Chamdo." Because of this, Geda Trülku was kept in a house called Chamdo Jangkar [Tib. ལྕགས་མཁར], which was the picnic area of the doji. Geda Trülku was kept on one side, and in one corner, food was kept. He died there. This is the story of Geda Trülku. When the Chinese reached [Chamdo], Geda Trülku had already died during Lhalu's period. Afterward, Ngabö came. Then the Chinese came. Everything was over. When the Chinese came, they started raising the question of what had happened to Geda Trülku. They also said that Geda Trülku died when drinking coffee that somebody had poisoned him. The Chinese said that Geda Trülku was a very important person who had done so much. His service was really appreciated and recognized by the Chinese authorities, his killing was a great mistake. They wanted to make further inquiries and they had many meetings. The meetings were held in Chamdo Monastery itself. At that time, one of the most important speakers and the most powerful one was the Chandzö Rindor [Tib. རིན་རྡོར] of Chamdo. He was the strongest person in the monasteries of Chamdo. He got up and said, "From the Chinese side, they say that Geda Trülku died by drinking coffee. That indicates that you are saying we poisoned him. We cannot accept this because the cause of his death is very uncertain. Sometimes we say, 'This morning I overate meat and that caused my illness, I got ill and died.' Then when you are walking, you fall over and die. You fall from the step et cetera, and you die. Whatever it may be. It was time for him to die and he died. As far as what the Chinese are thinking, there is nowhere in the history of this religious system, in this religious land—no one has been killed by being given poison. As far as Geda Trülku's death is concerned, even if the Chinese told us that we have killed him, we would never accept this. The Chinese have said, 'We have reached Chamdo and we have liberated the people.' But as far as I am concerned, and as far as we are concerned, we are part and a parcel of Tibet. Our main capital is Lhasa. Whether they accept this or not, I do not know. Moreover, the Chinese are claiming that they are liberating the people, human beings. This is nothing to be surprised about. But if we speak from the religious point of view, we are trying to liberate all sentient beings. Liberating a few people is nothing surprising. If they say that they are going to liberate a few people, the Tibetans will not be surprised because we are talking about liberating all of the sentient beings, not a few people." This was his speech. It was the strongest speech any one of them gave at all. So the Chinese told Chamdo Monastery that he could not be selected as their representative. The Chinese told Chamdo Monastery that this man was causing a lot of misunderstanding and trouble between the Tibetans and the Chinese, so they should change their representatives and bring in new people. This they told to the Chamdo Monastery a number of times. The monastery also told the Chinese, "We have no person better than the Chandzö Rindor. If you do not accept him as our representative, it is all right. Otherwise, we have no other representative to send." They had exchanged [communications] a number of times between Chamdo Monastery and the Chinese. As far as Rindor himself was concerned, his friend told him that it would be better if he resigned from being a representative of Chamdo Monastery and gave his attention to the administration of the affairs of this land. He said, "As far as [Only if] the monastery tells me, I will resign. Otherwise, even if they kill me, I am not going to." This Rindor had been acting very strongly [as an] anti-Chinese during that period. And even when we were leaving towards Lhasa, Rindor was very strong there. He had been the representative of the Chamdo Monastery for the Chinese in the Chamdo Uyön Lhengang (Chamdo COmmittee) even when I was leaving. Later, I don't know what happened to him. Persons like him, there are quite a few of them from the Kham area. Very strong, anti-Chinese, and proud, but they have come a bit upwards [unclear clause].   

**Q:**  Wasn't there any communication between you when you were imprisoned by the Chinese in Chamdo and the capital, Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes, after the Dalai Lama had taken over the temporal leadership of Tibet, he addressed a letter to all of us and a gift. Not very many gifts, after all, everybody was now a sort of beggar. The wordings of the letter and the gift were very touching—very emotional feelings. The gift was also very sufficient at that time. Because of the wording of the letter, Ngabö somehow got permission to come from his own jail to our jail, and then we all sat together under Chinese observation. Ngabö said, "The Dalai Lama has now taken over the temporal leadership of Tibet. Here is his letter and here are the gifts." In one way, we were suffering a lot. All of our property was lost. Secondly, we were in jail and in a very bad position. In that sad period when we heard such news and got such a gift, and we heard that the Dalai Lama had taken over the temporal leadership of Tibet, that gave us new hope. A new happiness. It was something we could not forget for the rest of our lives. [This is not on the Tibetan tape. [Afterward, Mr. Maya said, "I will stop talking here and even when you question me, I won't be able to answer. I have done this much, but since I am writing my own book, if I keep on answering you, I will have nothing to write. This much I hope will satisfy you.]   

