# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0039.08 : Tape 8  
##  : with Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib.. rma bya, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Maya, Tsewang Gyurme [Tib. རྨ་བྱ, ཚེ་དབང་འགྱུར་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 70  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Maya was an aristocratic government official who was active in the anti-Chinese resistance. In this interview, Maya begins by discussing Chinese policies on political dissent and nationalities. He also discusses the reforms in Kham, the revolts, the Volunteer Army to Defend Religion, and Chushigandru. He also mentions a few incidents where Gyantse soldiers and Trapchi soldiers were killed by the Chinese for trivial reasons. And he describes his role in Tibetan politics, and the Tibetan Women's Association's plan for a demonstration on the 12th of March. He discussed his work guarding the West Gate of Norbulinga, and his work as a representative of the lay officials. And he talks in detail about what the representatives were saying. Finally, he discusses the start of the artillery shelling and when he escaped..   

---  
### Tape 8  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0039_08/H_0039_08.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  When I was in Gangtok, I was able to ask you [about things] up until 1957. So now, in 1956, the Dalai Lama had gone to India and then returned in 1957. At that time, where were you and what was the situation like in Tibet?   

**A:**  In '57, I went for a tour in China. However, our tour was a bit different from the others since the Chinese were very alert and suspicious. The reason for this was that in the lower regions of Tibet [Kham], the revolt [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ] had begun. In Litang, a revolt had begun there with Yönrupön [Tib. གཡོན་རུ་དཔོན] taking the lead. In Derge, Chime Gombo [Tib. འཆི་མེད་མགོན་པོ] was leading the revolt. Prior to that, there were small revolts, but, anyway, such was the case. After this, in Triu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར], there was a person called Trülok [Tib. སྤྲུལ་ལོག]. I think he was a trülku who lost his celibacy. He and a friend were leading the revolt. In the Amdo area, even though there were revolts there earlier, the more famous one was [lead by] Nangrapön Wangchen [Tib.. snang ra? dpon dbang chen], though there were others as well. So, therefore, after 1957, since their policy had become quite tense [Tib. ཛ་དྲག་ཏུ], the revolts in various places across Tibet also increased. So since this was the case, our tour was not quite like the earlier ones, but more controlled and dangerous. So when we came to Lhasa, in Lhasa, the first opposition [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ] was the Water Dragon Year's People's Association in '52. This was the first peaceful opposition [against the Chinese]. Then in 1954, there was another. And so like a seed, since we were in Lhasa, and though it was not conspicuous, people everywhere did not like the Chinese and knew that in the end, the Chinese aim was not good. At this time, the situation was like paddling a coracle on the choppy waves of a flood. [Tib. ཆུ་ལོག་གེ་སྒང་ལ་ཀོ་བ་བཏང་བ]. When one paddles on large waves, at times it feels like it's [the boat is] going to capsize, [or like it's] going where it's not supposed to, and so people in the boat are in this alarmed state, fearful and unhappy. So at this time , the time for this was beginning. Even in China, in '57, it was the time of the Anti-Rightist Movement, and a lot of commotion and suppression [was going on]. At first, they said that one could criticize the Party. They announced that there would be no repercussions, but when they did criticize [the Communist Party], they were arrested. Later, they said it was like the proverb, "Throw a long line to catch a big fish [Tib. སྐུད་རིང་བཏང་ནས་ཉ་ཆེན་འཛིན་པ]." They were saying this was like doing evil deeds and boasting of them [Tib. ངན་བྱས་ངོ་ཁྱེར]. It was like they let the line out and caught the fish [laughter]. So when it was such a time, and all over Tibet there was fear, and especially in Lhasa, it was an uncomfortable period.   

**Q:**  In 1957, were there certain organizations?   

**A:**  The secret organizations were always there. The leftovers of the 1952 [People's Association] was still there. However, it was [things were] done in an inconspicuous manner. Particularly, at that time, what woke the Tibetans from their slumber was that in '52-53 [sic 1957-58], Zhou Enlai headed actions in which representatives from all the minority nationalities were gathered, and a meeting took place in Qingdao [note: this was actually in July 1957]. At that time, the main representative from Tibet was Sawang Ngabö. The final resolution [Tib. གྲོས་ཆོད] of the meeting - now I can't remember all the points. However, the resolution was publicized and in one of the points, it said that all the nationalities of China, whether minority or not, would become one language and one race [Tib. སྐད་ཡིག་གཅིག་གྱུར་དང་མི་རིགས་གཅིག་གྱུར]. This was decided. So this caused a great fear. If all were to become [to use] one language, then it would be spoken and written Chinese. It is impossible for a minority nationality's language to become the one all over China. One race meant that all were to become like the Chinese, and the special privileges of the minorities would not then exist. So this caused great fear among Tibetans because, in the long run, the Tibetan language would become Chinese and the people [would] too. So from this, it was clear that it would be the end for Tibet. So such news was adding to the strength of the 1952 peaceful opposition [People's Association]. Strength was gradually increasing, like increasing [from] 10 people up to 20 people. And it was felt that if we could not stop and halt this Chinese thought, it was clear that our Tibetan religion and politics, culture and race, would cease to exist [Tib. རྩ་བརླགས་འགྲོ]. Especially, in the lower regions [Kham and Amdo], there was the very beautiful phrase of "democratic reforms." However, if one looks at it realistically, the government became the robbers and they needed to rob the individuals. Since they needed to rob the individuals, they had to give a name to them. Otherwise, they just could not rob [them] like that. So they made many [social] classes and gave various names [to these classes]. The aim was to rob all [the people] and make them beggars. So in order for the government to become robbers and rob the people, [they] called this the democratic reforms. So since this was a tense and alarming situation, from the lower regions [Kham and Amdo], people gradually came to the central area [Central Tibet] since that was the only place to flee to. In this central place, a Tibetan government still somewhat existed, and the Dalai Lama was there. Here, there was a place to cling on to, and there was also something called the 17-Point Agreement, so they thought that they might have something to rely on. Anyway, the people from the lower regions, the Khambas and the Amdos - their numbers gradually increased. So if I were to give you an example of what the 1957 situation was like, then it was like paddling a coracle on the choppy water of a flood. In the minds of the people who were in the coracle, they were wondering whether they would capsize or make it to the other side. So as time passed and we come to 1958, around June, Chushigandru, the Volunteer Army to Defend the Religion [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླངས་དམག], started at Drigutang. In this organization, it was not a question of just people from one province, but from all three provinces [Tib. ཆོལ་ཁ]. However, the Chinese had to point their finger somewhere, and it was [at] the Kashag. They said that the Kashag was the one who made this problem. That since the Kashag created this, the Kashag must get rid of the problem. If they didn't, the final blame would fall on them. So the Chinese were squeezing the Kashag. Now, the Kashag had to come up with something to avoid this, right? What the Kashag said was that "This is a problem that we did not create because, in our lower regions, the situation was at an emergency level [Tib. ཛ་དྲག་པོ], and so they [the people] fled up [to Lhasa]. So when they came up, there was no place for them to set up [to stay], to eat, and that is why they rose up. So it is not that the Kashag instigated it, nor [is it] something that the Kashag had any connection [with]." Since the Kashag was saying this, they had to give them a name. Until now, it was called the Volunteer Army to Defend the Religion, and if they left it at that, then all the people from all three Tibetan regions were included. So when all three provinces were included, all placing their hopes and leaning on the Tibetan government - which the Chinese called the Local Government, then the name was changed to Chushigandru. This then [made it] seem that Ütsang was practically not in it. So since the Tibetan government was in Ütsang, the name was changed to Chushigandru just to make it appear that the government was not involved. This is what I think. [Note: This is incorrect, Chushigandru was the original name. Then it wasa changed to the 'volunteer army to defend religion'] So the name was given, though, in actuality, it operated as Tensung Tanglang Magar. They moved to Drigutang and all people from all three provinces were there. Their aim was the same and they revolted together for the sake of one's country, religion and culture, and the safety and power of the Dalai Lama. As I mentioned to you, the Chinese were squeezing the Kashag. The government did not have any other means other than to quell the Khamba danger, and at this time, the Chinese were very suspicious of us, so we needed to alleviate their anger, [and show] we were not involved in it and we did not create it [Chushigandru]. This was the reason why the Assembly meeting began. The Chinese said that "You have started a group called Dedön Tshogpa in Kalimpong to shout to the outside world [to publicize the issue]. You have also created Chushigandru to revolt inside. The Kashag is the one who is being diplomatic as the Local Government, though in actuality, you are all in it together. Since this is the case, there is only one place to squeeze," as if the Tibetan government committed the crime. When they did this, there was no other alternative since they were more powerful, had greater arms and soldiers, [and] we couldn't fight them - and so - it was said that we needed to quell the Khamba revolt and apologize to China. So there was a need to do this in a big way, and so the Assembly was called and [this was] publicized because the Chinese wouldn't count on what a few people did. In addition to that, those who were in Kalimpong, Jenkhentsisum, [since the Chinese said it was installed by the governments on the outside], they were not permitted to be involved in Tibetan matters. When the meeting began, nothing substantive came out, like opinions or implementation. If one asks what was the reason, then it was that most of the people did not like the Chinese nor [did they] want them. Since that was the case, there was nobody to sincerely talk about quelling the Khambas and apologizing to the Chinese. The leaders of the meeting obviously presented the agenda, but there was no one to give their opinions to pass a resolution. Since that was the case - the meeting first began at Shabden Lhagang in Norbulinga, I think. Nothing substantial came out of that, like results or decisions. So the meeting continued at the Legjö Legung [Reform Office], in the Tsuglagang. There were various representatives and in addition to that, additional ones were called. I was among the additional ones. Smaller groups were made and we met for many days. However, [laughter] even in these meetings, nothing came out of them which could make them [Kashag] convenient. The reason being that all had a heavy grudge [Tib. ན་ཚ་ཆེན་པོ] and they saw the situation as dangerous, and there was no one to, what should I say, to say [things] sincerely since everyone said something showing loyalty towards Tibet. It was very rare to find people who wanted to fix the matter. So nothing came out of it and I don't know what the Kashag told the Chinese, but [they] must have said something sweet-sounding [Tib. སྙན་པོ]. They had to have said that something concrete came out of the meeting. They had no choice.   

**Q:**  When the meetings first began, were both Ngabö and Surkhang there?   

**A:**  When they first met at Shabden Lhagang, all the Kalön were there, as well as the Trunyichemmo and Tsipön. Everyone was there. I have a feeling that Ngabö spoke, and likewise, other Kalön would have had to say something, right?   

**Q:**  Usually, the senior Kalön would talk first, right?   

**A:**  Ngabö talked first, I think. And the other Kalön would have had to assist him, right?   

**Q:**  Some say that only Sawang Surkhang was there, and so he said that the agenda was for alleviating the anger of China and quelling the Khambas, and that there should be no deviation from this. However, he said something good - something to the effect that the situation was not good and that it was also time that the [common] people took an interest. So this pushed the matter to the discussions in the various groups.   

**A:**  This was in the second meeting. The first one, in Norbulinga Shabden Lhagang, there everybody met. Things were said and nothing much came out. Now, something had to be finalized, right? A reply must be given to the Chinese, right? So this finalization took place in the Legjö Legung. At that time, only Sawang Surkhang was there. He was in our small group and was the head of the group. There were three to four smaller groups.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for only Surkhang to come?   

**A:**  Well, that I really don't know much [about].   

**Q:**  Was he the main kalön [the kalön tripa] then?   

**A:**  Yes, he was.   

**Q:**  So did he come because he was the kalön tripa or....?   

**A:**  I wonder if that was the case. It is difficult to say or even to give you an opinion [on this]. Surkhang came alone at the second meeting. The second meeting was not just for one day. It continued. It was at the Legjö and although there was the Working Committee [sub-group], representatives were chosen from the various workers [Tib. ལས་རིགས].   

**Q:**  So at first, everybody came. Then [they] all met again for a second time?   

**A:**  Yes, for the summary, it was said that we would all do it at the Legjö Legung.   

**Q:**  So at the first one, no representatives were chosen?   

**A:**  No. There is a general procedure for the tsondu gyendzom. There you don't have to choose representatives since it's all set. The second one at the Legjö Legung, there were representatives from the officials, the monasteries, and the military. The Trungtsi were there and in addition to that, extra [Tib.. 'phar ma] members were voted in. Each category of workers chose [representatives]. For example, I was [chosen] from the common lay officials, and though we did not vote with ballots, we considered the majority opinion. Likewise, the same with the 4th rank, dzasa, senampa, et cetera. So I was there as a representative. In the first meeting, something general was said, but nothing [was] concluded. The reason why they said that they were going to continue with the meeting at the Legjö Legung was that at the Legjö, they had all the representatives. So in addition to that, extra representatives were called. It was something like two or three members from each category.   

**Q:**  So now there was a number of smaller groups. Then they went and met in different rooms?   

**A:**  Yes, some in the corner of the room, some outside. Our leader was Kalön Surkhang, and so we met in the inner room. I remember one person clearly, Bartso [laughter].   

**Q:**  So there was yourself, Sawang Surkhang, Bartso and then who else?   

**A:**  They were all there, but I can't remember [who else] now.   

**Q:**  Yes, it has been many years. What were the discussions about? For example, that one had to apologize to the Chinese, but that they created the problem and things like that?   

**A:**  Yes, [things] like that. No matter what the Chinese wanted to say or do from their side [their aims], in the final analysis, they were going to make Tibet like China. So it was said that there should not be any thinking that it might not be so bad, that if one acted diplomatically, we might be able to do something. That no matter what you want to say publicly, internally, we want to be one united force. So this we said very forcefully. That internally we must be one united force, and we were ready to sign, to pledge, because it was very clear that the Chinese were going to kill Tibet by its roots. So what one wanted to say to the outside, was a different matter. But internally, we needed to be united because by just saying it might be alright, there was no way we could get by. This is what most were saying. I don't know what they told the Chinese. They may have said something diplomatic. But regarding internal matters, people were saying very forcefully that there was no choice but to be united. All the small groups said that.   

**Q:**  So after the smaller sub-groups were concluded, the minutes of the meetings were taken and everyone met together again at the Legjö?   

**A:**  Yes, [we] all met again at the Legjö Legung and the various minutes were handed over to Surkhang.   

**Q:**  And so what was said?   

**A:**  It was said that the first group thought this and that, and the same was done for the others. However, it was not possible to come out with a conclusion because all the talk was a secret type of talk. Nothing conclusive [was said]. However, since everyone expressed strong opinions, they [higher ups] would have had to consider them, right? So there wasn't anything like saying that we were going to do this and that regarding the Khambas or apologizing to the Chinese, [or that we should do this].   

**Q:**  I [think I] remember something? Some were saying that now we were going to take it all the way [Tib.. mtha' skyel btang] [use force]. Some were saying that "Oh, that may not be so wise since the Dalai Lama is still here. If there is a commotion [disturbance], then there is danger to his life."   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, that took place - saying that it may be too strong . There is no doubt that some people were very sincere and dedicated. However, it was not sure that this sincerity would actually be helpful, and [that it] may even be damaging. Some said that they were going to do this and that, and that those who were at the meeting would finalize [things] and those who were not at the meeting, it would be decided that from that day on, [they] would not have any faith in them. Things like that. Then there were others who said that such actions should be carefully, steadily and stably considered [Tib. བབ་བརླིངས་བརྟན་གསུམ]. That if one was not careful, then, it would become something like the saying, "Fighting with the enemy which one cannot defeat [Tib. མི་ཐུབ་དགྲ་ལ་འཛིང་པ]." So it was a situation where everyone was sincere. However, the two sides differed in the degree of action. There were some who said things very forcefully.   

**Q:**  For example, Barshi Jedrungla seems to have said very forceful things.   

**A:**  That's right. He was the most forceful. I was one who argued with him, and together with me, was Garpön Pasang Wangdü.   

**Q:**  It seems that Barshila wanted what was torn to be fully tattered [laughter].   

**A:**  Yes. Basically, he was saying [things] from an enthusiastic perspective. However, what should I say, he was not thinking along the lines of what could be accomplished [Tib. སྒྲུབ་ཚོད་ཐུབ་ཚོད], but that he would do whatever needed to be done. So I and Garpönla did not agree with him, and the meeting almost ended up [with us split] into two factions. What he was saying was that, "We want to be united and we are going to sign [a pledge]. Those who don't want to do this, we are not going to have faith in you." Yes, things like that. So we were saying that this was not quite acceptable and that we must do things steadily, stably and carefully. That this was not a small matter, but a big one, and so we could not be sure whether we would gain or lose by immediately taking such forceful action. This was one thing. The other thing that was said was that, "As long as we are all Tibetans, it is not at all acceptable to break up into two factions." That we had to think of united Tibetans and it was not acceptable to say that those who came and signed were united and that those who didn't were going to be kicked out. So Garpönla and I got most of the support. We just managed not splitting us up. Later, Garpönla, poor guy, he must be just about to die now- but he came to thank me, saying that my ideas were good, otherwise, we would have had a big split.   

**Q:**  Where does Garpönla live these days?   

**A:**  In Lhasa. A very nice man, poor fellow.   

**Q:**  I remember something about the meeting, that later they secretly met, and since the Kungös were not there, they decided to call them, and the Trungchi [Tib. དྲུང་ཆེ] and the Khenjung were not there. Later, the Yigtsang and the Tsikhang said that from this day on, they could not meet. How did this happen?   

**A:**  Yes [laughter]. It was said that the meeting was called, but some of us did not get the message.   

**Q:**  The meeting took place with the various small groups at the Legjö and that was over. Now, some message was sent.   

**A:**  I don't know how that was done because I didn't get the message. It seems that Garpönla got the message. He said that they met and he thought it was a real meeting, but it was not since, in between, some message was sent. Most probably, he said that it was [Barshi] Jedrungla. Now, Jedrungla was very enthusiastic and that was a fault [of his]. Everybody has faults and one cannot say that he was bad. He was very enthusiastic, but a bit excessive. But if one went that way, then one would be nicely fixed up. I [laughter], I think it was Jedrungla. At least that is what I heard later.   

**Q:**  Later, wasn't it said that the Chinese wanted to send the Tibetan Army, but if this happened, it was said that one could not guarantee that they would not join the Khambas and turn on us?   

**A:**  Yes. It was said that the arms should be provided by the Chinese. However, if they became one [with Chushigandru], then we would not take that responsibility. So it is said that that was what was said. Anyway, it does seem that they rubbed the Kashag a lot, but we didn't hear everything in detail.   

**Q:**  Yes, yes. So the question of Namseling and Samjola going to talk - some say that they were told by the Kashag. Others say that the Chinese themselves told Namseling that "You, especially, must go because you are the one who created this whole Khamba problem."   

**A:**  I don't think that was the case. What I heard was that it was the Kashag's order. The Chinese would probably not have said that, especially to someone whom they had suspicions of.   

**Q:**  This was told to me by a servant of Namseling. The one who died recently. Dündül [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ]. He said he [Namseling] was so happy to go to Lhoka.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes. I think it was probably the Kashag [who told them to go]. It was said the Kashag sent them at that time. So I don't think this was the case [the Chinese sending him], especially for someone they suspected. He could have just had a conversation with [Dündül] and said that the Chinese told him to go, and so he thought that was the truth.   

**Q:**  Now, after the meeting, wasn't it pretty soon that the uprising rose up.   

**A:**  Yes, [this happened] pretty soon [after]. Then at Kuru Bridge, the Dalai Lama's stableman went for some business and the Chinese killed him for no real reason. Then in the winter of 1958, during the festival of Shri Devi, [the] meeting [of] the deity Trip Dzongtsen [Tib. grib rdzong mtsan], and on the 15th of the 10th month, at the Pele Ridra [Tib. དཔལ་ལྷའི་རི་གྲ] ceremony, servants used to ask for some money called Pele Dünchang [Tib. དཔལ་ལྷའི་བདུན་ཆང]. That night, some Gyantse soldiers were going home and since it was a ceremonial night, they had drunk some chang. About three of them were killed. Likewise, there was some story about some Trapchi soldier who was arrested and shot at while returning home. Something like that. So, you know, at this time, the Chinese mood [Tib. རྣམ་འགྱུར] and actions had taken a turn. They were sort of militant. So since this was the case, the question of improvement was not there.   

**Q:**  So everyone was just staying around like that, right? One could not fight the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes, there wasn't anything that we could do. Everyone was ill at ease, with fear and alarm [Tib. འཇིགས་སྣང་དངངས་སྐྲག].   

**Q:**  So just before the uprising and at the time of the uprising, where were you?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What work were you doing?   

**A:**  None. I had no government work.   

**Q:**  So when it was said that the Dalai Lama was going to the show, that night, you must have gotten some message.   

**A:**  In the first Tibetan month, day 30. I went to see Depön [Taklha] in Norbulinga. We did hear something unclear and we also did take notice about where the Dalai Lama was going and all of that. So when I met him, he told me all about the situation. So I was scared further. Under the desperate situation, the next day was the uprising. The people couldn't fight, and so they did what they could by demonstrating, which was kind [of] timely [Tib. སྐབས་སུ་བབ་པ]. That night, there was this tsidrung called Chömpela [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་ལགས], who was from the household of the head clerk or Chadrung [Tib. ཕྱག་དྲུང], who had not slept that whole night. Now, I really don't know if it is alright to tell you this, and so [I] better leave it like this. He went to call the people to incite [Tib. འབོད་སྐུལ] them to take action.   

**Q:**  Yes, what shall I say? We know from documents from the Library that the low-level workers who patrolled and delivered messages, the korchagpa [Tib. སྐོར་འཕྱག་པ] and all, were sent to give the message that the people should come to Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  That night, even we didn't get any sleep. One strange thing that happened that night was that at about 1-2 in the morning, one woman was yelling. We listened from the rooftop and it seemed like it was coming from the bridge that went to your house [Tsarong]. Then it also seemed that the yell was coming from another side. She was yelling, though there appeared to be no words in her cry. This was very strange.   

**Q:**  When the uprising started, you were in Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Yes, then that morning, I went to Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  How long were you in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was at Norbulinga, and then I stayed in Shöl and then fled from Tse.   

**Q:**  Yes. So that morning, Chamdo Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] was killed, and the Kalön came and Sambo was stoned.   

**A:**  Yes, the Kalön, poor fellow, came, and Sambo was indeed stoned. I was at Norbulinga. Then I was kept at Norbulinga's West Gate as a sentry. Everyone [else there] was from Amdo, and so I stayed leading the Amdowas for a while. Then our people had a meeting with selected representatives. One can't say it was the people or the officials or monks, but there were 75 or so representatives chosen by the people. I was chosen as one. So I could not stay as sentry at the West Gate. So at the Shabden Lhagang, the meeting took place, and it was said that the meeting had to move since the Dalai Lama was there, and so it was not good [there]. So the meeting moved to the Temple of Yamantaka in Shöl Jigje Lhagang [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད་ལྷ་ཁང], and I moved there, and our Tsarong Sawangchemmo was also there as a representative.   

**Q:**  At Shöl Parkhang, the meeting met. What was the reason for this?   

**A:**  The idea was suppose to not have [initiate] militant action, but to discuss things peacefully.   

**Q:**  Was this the order of the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  That I don't know. Nothing was said about this. Just the people's representatives. One main point was that it would not do to take the Dalai Lama to China. At this time, the Chinese were talking about the show and all [of] this, but they wanted to take him down [to China]. Every three or four years, the Dalai Lama had to go down, right? His name was given, right? So it seems it was because of this.   

**Q:**  Yes, there was this meeting in China and so from our side, they were saying that it would not do for the Dalai Lama to go down.   

**A:**  Yes, it was said that it would not do to take the Dalai Lama. From the Chinese side, they were saying that the Dalai Lama had to go because if he didn't go, it would look funny. However, under the pretext of the show, it seems that they were going to take the Dalai Lama down, although it is not certain what would have happened to his life safety [if this were to occur]. Unusual instructions were given saying that one could not bring the military and that the people could not come past the bridge and things like that. So they thought that the people would not let them take the Dalai Lama. If the people stayed still, then it was alright. If not, then they were going to suppress [them] [Tib.. drag gnon]. It seems that was their plan. It was not only in Lhasa, but in all the various areas.   

**Q:**  Let me ask you from this point- It was said that the Dalai Lama was going to the show at the Chinese military barracks. The next day, a lot of the people went down to Norbulinga. So if you can, start from that, and tell me where you were at that time and then what happened.   

**A:**  Alright. In 1959, it was March 9th. At that time, I was at Norbulinga and had to go down there to see Kungö Depön. I spoke about certain situations and it was said that unlike usual, it was said that bodyguards could not be taken, that servants could not go past the bridge, and things like that. He said that they were going to invite the Dalai Lama to the show, but they were giving unusual instructions. He told me in detail about what the Chinese told him. I can't remember all [of it]. However, it is all in the documents.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for you to go and see Depön?   

**A:**  He was in with us [in the secret group]. One had to meet quite often and we used to meet often with him. At that time, he was Gusung Depön and we had to meet often regarding our relations. This is what Depön was saying, and as the news spread, the people were becoming alarmed that the safety of the Dalai Lama was at stake and that looking at what the Chinese were saying and wherever one looked, it was clear that things were not good at all. Particularly, the show could have been staged anywhere, like Norbulinga. However, without any talk of staging at some other hall, it was said that it was to take place at the military barracks. And then prior to this, in '58, the Chinese made a lot of battlements and that too [was done] in haste, day and night. So when this was happening, it was clear that the safety of the Dalai Lama was in danger. So the Tibetan people, without any consideration for their lives, and to protect him, said that they had no choice but to stop him from going, and that they could not bear that he was being taken to the military barracks. So everyone was in such a state of alarm that on the morning of the 10th, people went to Norbulinga and requested the Dalai Lama not to go and stopped him. Now, regarding the way the people rose [up], and what they did and what they heard - let me not go into detail here. When they went to stop the Dalai Lama, at that time, it was bad luck that Chamdo Khenjung, who seemed to have come to the Trungja that morning in robes, had changed to a lay chupa and wore the white Chinese mask over his mouth. The way we saw things, I don't think that he was suspected of being a spy and things like that. We cannot say with any certainty that he was a spy. However, I don't know how the people heard about it, like a misunderstanding [Tib. སྒྲ་འཁྲོག], it was said that he was a Chinese spy. They sort of suspected, I guess, because he came in monks robes and then changed to a layman's chupa with a gun. So at Norbulinga, he was stoned and killed. They dragged his body to Barkor Street and people shouted that day that Tibet was for Tibetans and the Chinese must return to China, and stuck posters to that effect. His body was given to the ragyaba. This was considered bad since the body was not fed to the vultures and [was] burnt. Then when Sambo Sawangchemmo came - he had the rank of Sawang as well as Magji. So the Chinese had given him bodyguards. When he came in the car, the Chinese were in the car also. Sawangchemmo came unsuspectingly and the people started saying "There are Chinese [in] there. There are Chinese [in] there!" And so the people stoned it [the car] and instead of hitting the Chinese, Sawangchemmo was hit on the head and he was taken to the Dekyilingka [Tib. བདེ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་ག] hospital. I had already arrived at Norbulinga much before Chamdo Khenjung was killed. Anyway, the people refused to leave and said that unless they got a favorable assurance [Tib. བཀའ་བཞེས་བཟང་པོ], they would not leave. Then the Kalön gradually came to Norbulinga. They set up a loudspeaker and said that "You people should not be so agitated [Tib. སེམས་འཚབ]. The Dalai Lama was indeed invited to the show, and since you, the people, said that he should not go, the Dalai Lama will not be going. It is better for you to return and it's not good for you to stay in this chaotic state." This is what the senior Sawang Surkhang said. But the people refused to leave. Since they did not return, Surkhang, Shasur, and Liushar, I think, went to the Chinese military headquarters [Ch. jun qu]. Ngabö did not come to Norbulinga. They told the Chinese that the Dalai Lama could not come to the show. "The people insisted that he not go. We told them not to stay. However, even now they are there and will not leave. We apologize that the Dalai Lama cannot come." At that time, Tan Guansan was the main military officer. He got up and scolded them, and stomped around saying that they were the ones who had created all of this. That they [were] putting the blame on the people when, in fact, they had created all of this. He was furious. So the Kalön spoke diplomatically and tried to calm the Chinese. However, it was not possible and after some time, they refused to talk and began written communication. Since that was the case, it had reached a dangerous point. Whether they were going to arrest [people] or do something was not known. It was possible that they were at the point of arresting them. So the Kalön spoke very diplomatically, saying that "It is possible that one or two evil people created this, but it is not something that we, the Kashag, have done. However, we will investigate and will hand over the culprits. So don't be angry and suspicious of us." It seems that they said things in a very diplomatic way. So when they said that they were going to hand over the culprits, the Chinese seem to have relaxed. So, as the Kalön had said, they said that the culprits must be handed over and that it was not acceptable that the people stay at Norbulinga. That they must be sent back. They said [that the work] was [at] the hand of the foreign imperialists and the reactionary Guomindang government. This was just their style and way of speaking, and it really didn't mean that there were actually such things. So the Kalöns returned and they said, "We went to the barracks and spoke with the Chinese. They said that the Dalai Lama need not go and that it is not good for the people to stay outside Norbulinga. The Dalai Lama is here and it is not good for you to hang around here. So please go back." This is what the Kalön advised, but the people did not return. They said that they were going to stay as bodyguards and whether the Chinese were going to do it peacefully or militantly, there was great danger that they would take the Dalai Lama. The people never returned. Since the people did not return, the work was broken, like pouring hot water into a glass [Tib. ཚ་གས་ཕྱིན]. So since there was a need to join what was broken, it was said that the people should send representatives. Whether they were from the people or from the officials, representatives should be appointed and should meet and discuss things as go betweens. So the people choose the representatives, right there at the gates of Norbulinga. About 70 odd representatives were chosen. There were officials there and people from all three provinces. Likewise, [there were] representatives from the monasteries, about 70-80. At first, the meeting took place at Shabden Lhagang, right?   

**Q:**  When the meeting took place at Shabden Lhagang, who were the ones who spoke and what was said?   

**A:**  The ones who headed [Tib. དབུ་བཞུགས] the meetings were our Tsarong Sawangchemmo and Künsangtse Dzasa. These two I remember very clearly. Now it has been so many years, I have forgotten. The kungö head and [?] made the summary [Tib. སྡོམ] [of the meeting], right? The two were sort of chairpersons [Tib. ཚོགས་གཙོ].   

**Q:**  The Kalön didn't come, right?   

**A:**  No, they were not there. The members at these meetings were chosen by the people, and so none of the Kalön were there. There were abbots and other representatives from the monasteries. So while we were staying like that, the people were divided into groups to stay at the four gates of Norbulinga. I was at the West Gate and I was the head of that section, which was composed of all Amdos. And so there was not much to do except to build bunkers.   

**Q:**  Around this time, there was the Command Center [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང] and the Emergency Military Headquarters [Tib. ཛ་དྲག་དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང], [right]?   

**A:**  These were to come later. The meeting took place and the situation was not looking good since the people refused to leave. On the one hand, there was the need to discuss things, and on the other hand, one had to make preparations, right? So a command center was started. Their job was to handle and distribute the arms. It was like the magji. In this, I think, Kungö Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས] was there and Shakabpa Depön. Then there was a new Reting Dzasa, right? I think he was there. Among the monk officials, Tseja Gyentsenla [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས] was possibly there. I wonder if Bumtang Trunyichemmo was there or not?   

**Q:**  So their work was to do with arms?   

**A:**  Yes, to handle the arms, i.e. to see who should be given arms [and] where to send the people. So they were like doing military preparations. So their work was to give the military commands [Tib. བཀོད་ཇུས]. We, the people's representatives, were to peacefully discuss [things]. So the idea was to have both a peaceful and a military strategy.   

**Q:**  So the idea of starting a command center was a result of the meeting?   

**A:**  No, this was from the Kashag itself.   

**Q:**  So while talks were to go on with the Chinese, on the other hand, there were military preparations.   

**A:**  Yes, now their back was shown [to the Chinese] [Tib. རྒྱབ་བསྟན་ཚར་པ་རེད].   

**Q:**  So the Kashag was in there or Phala?   

**A:**  Both, including Gadrang. So at that time, Phala and Gadrang were considered two of the more capable [individuals]. Gadrang was also the jigyab khembo, and so they met with the Kashag, and the Kalöns were also there, right? So from them came the idea of starting the command center, while the people discussed a peaceful process, [and] the Kashag began [to distribute] the arms and [make the] military preparations.   

**Q:**  Then I heard the meeting moved somewhere else?   

**A:**  The meeting at Shabden Lhagang went on for one or two days. Also at the meeting, there was a lot of shouting right? People were unhappy, angry and at the same time, could not do much. So they took out their anger [Tib. ཡུད་ཤོད] at the higher ranking ones. So there was a lot of commotion and one day the Dalai Lama called all the members to his chamber and gave some advice saying that, "Whatever work we have to do, do it. But [let it] be done in a peaceful way. And it would not be good if things were done excessively [Tib. ཐལ་ཆ]." Then it was moved to the Jigje Lhagang in Shöl. It was said that people meeting where the Dalai Lama was staying would not look good to the Chinese and the Dalai Lama, so the meeting should convene at a place further away. So it was moved to Shöl. Like I mentioned last time, I was at the meeting when a team was made saying that we needed to have a statement [Tib. ཚིག་ཐོ] for the Chinese. That this was not possible from the larger meeting since there were too many people. This smaller meeting was headed by Tsarong Sawangchemmo and there were quite a few of us [there]. I too was selected for this meeting and we met in another room of the Jigje Lhagang. We began by making a statement which began with the way the Chinese first came and what they said. All there was [to do] was to examine what the Chinese said, and there was not much to talk about [regarding] independence and all of that since the 17-Point Agreement was implemented. So it was done from a peaceful perspective. The statement began by saying that "Such a situation has arisen and the reason is that the Tibetan people consider the Dalai Lama like their life, and in the first instance [first of all], his life is in danger. Secondly, it will not do for him to be taken to China. Now, the situation has come to a head [point] where we, the Tibetan people, have to express our concerns to Zhongyang, and whatever Zhongyang needs to say, we need to discuss peacefully. Whatever requests we the people have, we will express." So we were saying that discussions needed to take place peacefully. That was our plan and a draft was made. The letter was handed over and it was said that they didn't take it. Now I don't remember clearly. When the letter was given to the guard of the Chinese military headquarters, it was said that the guard didn't take it and that it was thrown back. I remember something like that. Anyway, we did not immediately say that we should be militant. We wanted to talk. I'm quite sure it was said that the Chinese didn't take it. So since the Chinese did not take the letter, there was no scope for discussions. However, we were still hoping, and the meeting still continued and we had made the statement. One needs something written for discussions, right? And regarding the people's request, quite a lot of preparations were made. So the people rose on the second Tibetan month, day 1. Day 1 and 2, the meeting took place at Norbulinga. Then from the 3rd onwards, I think, we met at the Jigje Lhagang. We met continuously and we tried for peaceful discussions. Most of the people stayed as guards at Norbulinga and never returned. On the sixth to seventh night, the Chinese fired a cannon and it landed some distance from the northern gate of Norbulinga, and I don't know if it exploded or not.   

**Q:**  So, were you there at Norbulinga at that time?   

**A:**  I was at Shöl since I was a representative. So when the cannon was fired, the state of alarm increased. Some vehicles came and it seemed that they were measuring the range [of the cannon]. Then on the either the 5th, 6th, or 7th, such a huge convoy of Chinese vehicles left. Maybe 100 to 200 vehicles. They were all covered and may have been armed. All war vehicles. Huge trucks. All went to the military headquarters. Then what they announced on the loudspeaker was, "Right now, we are preparing to serve you a meal. However, one or two vegetables are not yet ready. Once they are ready, then we will serve you the meal." So they were boasting, saying that they were going to destroy [Tib. གཏོར] us.   

**Q:**  They were announcing that?   

**A:**  Yes, through the loud speakers. There was no wish for discussions, only that they were going to beat us. So there was nothing [sign of peace] to hold on to. If there was, then we would have had some hope, right? Saying that they had said such things on the loudspeaker and so we were going to act like this. So nothing was said, only that they were going to beat us up [Tib. གཏོར]. They used examples like, "We are about to serve you food, but at this moment, a few vegetables are not ready." Sort of saying that they were going to serve us when it was ready.   

**Q:**  They must have gotten the order from higher up by then.   

**A:**  [It] seems so. It's said that all the orders were given by Zhou Enlai. That's what I heard. That's what was said. The lower ones could not give the orders, right? So, on the night of the 8th, the Dalai Lama left for India. Probably around 11-12 or 1. That night, I was staying with the Norbulinga Regiment. It was supposed to be very secretive. However, the way the soldiers were hurrying and the horses [were] moving about, it seemed pretty clear. However, at that time, all Tibetans were of one mind and heart, and it appears that not one spy got in. It went so well, you know. The next morning, on the 9th, I went to the meeting. Since the Dalai Lama had left, one was more at ease. A few representatives knew that the Dalai Lama had left. So some said that the Dalai Lama had left, and we were sitting and meeting, and if the Chinese attacked, then the Norbulinga and Potala areas would be destroyed. So instead, if we announced that the Dalai Lama had left, then those who wished to catch up with the Dalai Lama's party could do so, and those who wished to go home could do so. [We thought that] this would have probably made the situation more peaceful. It was said that this would not do at all since the Dalai Lama was going on horseback and the Chinese would either go in cars or planes. So "If you let this secret out, then the Dalai Lama's life would be in danger. Until the Dalai Lama has left, even if he is not here, we have to pretend that he is. The secret cannot be let out." So some of us were quite daring.   

**Q:**  So all of this was being discussed at the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, people were so united.   

**Q:**  So since it was discussed at the meeting, everyone there knew [the Dalai Lama had left]?   

**A:**  Yes, 70 odd people. Everyone was of one mind and heart. All the hard work we did, from '52 onwards, bore fruit. People were now aware, right? Otherwise, how could people like us ever have been chosen as representatives? So that's the way I got in. [He means into his secret work]. Anyway, now it seems like I have told you everything [laughter]. Since it's you.   

**Q:**  [Laughter] It doesn't matter. We don't have to use your name.   

**A:**  It's so funny. I permitted myself to be close with you.   

**Q:**  [Laughter] Thank you.   

**A:**  So that's what happened, and then some opinions were stated. It was said that "The Dalai Lama has left and we don't know whether [or not] he even has good bedding to take with him. He is going to another people's country and since this is the case, he does not even have someone who speaks that country's language. There is no one better than Tsarong Sawangchemmo, who has connections abroad, especially [with] India. So it would be good if he goes." Now, there was no hope to be placed on this meeting, right? What we wanted, we already got. The Dalai Lama left, right? So that was our aim and we did not think that we could manage the Chinese militarily. Not at all. The reason we were so secretive was that we knew we could not challenge the Chinese, right? So like a jewel, the jewel from the sea had already been taken out. Our work was done and we were happy, relaxed. So we were not placing hope on our assembly. So we said he must leave [Tsarong] and serve to his utmost. If Sawangchemmo wanted a reliable assistant, whoever he wanted, he could name the person. That's what people like us said. Sawangchemmo himself said that he knew that he could serve the Dalai Lama, and so, "What you all have said, I will accept. I am ready to leave whenever you say. I am ready to leave immediately." Now, there was opposition to this. Oh, it was sinful. It was sinful, it was Künsangtse. Otherwise, Sawangchemmo would have been able to make it out.   

**Q:**  So they were saying that he should not go?   

**A:**  They were saying that "He is the only leader who has experience in warfare, and so if Tsarong Sawangchemmo does not stay here, then we don't know how to go about things. Along with the Dalai Lama, there is the Kashag. So it is not a case where he does not have people to serve him. Now, here, we don't have anybody to lead except Tsarong Sawangchemmo. So it will not do for him to go." A section of the people thought that this was correct. Their thinking was not out of ill will. So the majority prevailed and we lost out. So the Dalai Lama left on the 8th, [and] on the 9th, such talks took place. That same evening, the women rose up. There is a lot of [back]story to this too. The ones who wrote Künsangla letters and stayed there were our people. She needed a secretary, right? We had connections everywhere, but this was not known. It's kind of strange in a way. When the women demonstrated, there were so many that one got the feeling that there were no women in Lhasa [staying home]. At first, they burned incense and offered prayers [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ]. Then [they] demonstrated. When they did that, it was not peaceful. They shouted, "Chinese must go to China, Tibet is for Tibetans." These words were the main ones. That was on the 10th. On the 11th, the plan was for all the beggars to demonstrate. It was to be a demonstration led by the ragyabas and it was already told. The women's organization was to call the beggars for action [Tib. འབོད་སྐུལ] and give donations/gifts [Tib. རྔན་པ] to them. So if the "mother of the house" [woman] took responsibility, then it was very good, right? They [beggars] had accepted to do it. That was to be done on the 12th. Then the Chinese were saying that they were doing [things] for the poor and [doing] so many things. And then the beggars were to demonstrate. [The] interesting thing [is] that we did it, but we did not have the "power [Tib. ནུས་པ]." Nobody taught us anything nor did anyone do anything, but we just based our plans on what the Chinese themselves said. One had to do a lot of opposite things, right? The Chinese were saying that they were looking after the poor and doing such great things. So if the poor rose up against them, then it seemed very interesting. The women's wish was to head that and advise them. The beggars were to demonstrate, led by the ragyaba. It was finalized for the 12th. The women demonstrated on the 10th, the beggars were to do it on the 12th. However, on the 11th night, around 12 p.m. or 1 a.m., the Chinese started shelling [laughter], where the location for the demonstration was to be. Norbulinga was heavily shelled, and the Potala too. We were staying at Shöl and the shells landing was like an earthquake. They fired from Shugtri Lingka [Tib. བཞུགས་ཁྲི་གླིང་ག], which was close by. The manner of their shelling, rapid firing, [was] like a machine gun, one [shot] following the other. It was like an earthquake and everything was [in] a cloud of dust - not knowing [being able to see] anything. The shelling was so frightening that one got the feeling that guns were nothing. It did not even occur to me then, that a machine gun can kill a person. The shelling was so overwhelming that one forgot that a bullet can kill a person. I stayed the night of the 11th [and] took all the shelling of [the] 12th day. There was nothing to do. Then on the 12th night, around midnight, [I] climbed up the Potala and took the back side route over to Phembo and fled.   

