# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0014.01  
##  : with Ribur Rimpoche [Tib. རི་སྦུར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Darjeeling, India  
**Date of Interview:** 1989  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gelek Rimpoche  
**Name:** Ribur Rimpoche [Tib. རི་སྦུར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ]e  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 66  
**Date of Birth:** 1923  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ribur Rimpoche was a well known incarnate lama from Drepung's Loseling College. In this interview, he discusses aspects of how his monastery was organized, including the relationships beween the tratsung and the khmatsen, and about Drepung's history.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0014_01/M_0014_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  American Professor Dr. Goldstein and I are trying to learn about Drepung's social life and I am helping him. You were an experienced person and well educated and you were also very attentive on history. If you remember the situation in Drepung when you were there please tell us. I am not going to ask you about how to hold the classes, and how did they do teaching because those were usual thing. I like to ask in general about religious activity, about the condition of incarnate lamas, about the condition of the ordinary monks, bout the condition of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་མཛད] The title of monks who made a payment or gave gifts to secure exemption from the normal &quot;young monk&quot; work obligations. There were tratsang chöndze and khamtsen chöndze.">chöndze</a> monks, and the condition about <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤག་ཚང] 1. The household or family of a monk that consisted of multiple monks. 2. The apartment of a monk household.">shagtsang</a> (monk's households). I also would like to ask about monastic estates and the story of famous scholars, for example, you wrote about the Triu Kyorpon [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར་སྐྱོར་དཔོན]. As long as we live in the society there were many things that happened. Like how did the monastic discipline officer, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</a>, make decision and how did the laji make decisions. Please tell me about these things?   

**A:**  I don't have much things to tell you.   

**Q:**  I am sorry for asking such a long question.   

**A:**  Drepung is a very famous monastery. The main monastery of the Yellow Hat sect, the Riwo Gandenpa [Tib. རི་བོ་དགའ་ལྡན་པ], is Ganden Nampar Gyalweling [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བའི་གླིང]. Under that, is Sera and Drepung. We were saying that there were three great monasteries or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདན་ས] A &quot;Monastic Seat,&quot; usually refers to the three Monastic Seats: Drepung, Sera and Ganden Monasteries.">densa</a> [Tib. འདན་ས] (seats). But the real densa is only Ganden Monastery. Sera and Drepung were monasteries or chöde [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ]. Sera and Drepung were not densa. Ganden monastery is the monastery of Tsongkhapa and his disciples. We would call Sera as Chöde Chembo Sera Thegpa Chembö Ling [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ་སེ་ར་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་གླིང]. For Drepung, it is called Chöde Chembo Palden Drekar Pungpa [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ་དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲས་དཀར་སྤུང་པ]. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> was called Chöde Chembo Tashilhunpo [Tib. ཆོས་སྡེ་ཆེན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤི་ལྷུན་པོ]. As I said, Drepung Monastery is tremendous and there were more monks in it than in Sera and Ganden. The founder of Drepung Monastery wss Jamyang Chöje [Tib. འཇམ་དབང་ཆོས་རྗེ]. Since then, the number of the monks was increasing. At the time when the Dalai Lama took his Geshe Exam [in 1959], in Drepung there were more then 10,000 monks. It was said that in Drepung there were 7700 monks, but when they offered alms they learned that there were more then 10,000 monks. Therefore, Drepung was the biggest monastery among the three great monasteries which had been holding the debate and meditation [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲུབ] tradition of the Gelugpa sect. The founder of Drepung Monastery was the pupil of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙོང་ཁ་པ] The name of the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Tsongkapa</a> Jamyang Chöje Tashi. He was a very well educated Lama. When he gave teachings, he would open 100 texts at the same time and give the teaching. Among the pupils of Tsongkapa, Jamyang Chöje Palden was very famous. At that time, there was only one prayer assembly hall, the Tsogchen [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན]. Later, his pupilS set up many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> (colleges) and Drepung came to have 7 tratsang.   

**Q:**  What is the reason for calling these <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>?   

**A:**  That means a monk's section [Tib. ཚན་པ]. So there were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and mitsen.   

**Q:**  Why were they calling one unit as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and one as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and one as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a>?   

**A:**  Tratsang means one group of monks. Among that group there were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and among the khamtsen there were mitsen.   

**Q:**  This is the way of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and mitsen. Were there any reasons, for example why did they put khamtsen under the tratsang and why didn't they put the khamtsen before the tratsang?   

**A:**  This is because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> is the part of the tratsang.   

**Q:**  There was no other main reason?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  At first, there was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> and then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> was set up and became part the tratsang, right?   

**A:**  Probably it was just like that.   

**Q:**  The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a> is set up according to where the people belonged [Tib. མི་ཁུངས], although the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> also had the system of where people belonged to?   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. As I said Jamyang Chöje have many pupils and these pupils gave their teachings to groups (of monks). Therefore, the groups of monks became the tratsang.   

**Q:**  Who was the founder of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>?   

**A:**  I don't remember.   

**Q:**  Do you remember who set up <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>? Was the first text of Loseling made by Jamyang Gewai Lodrö [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་དགེ་བའི་བློ་གྲོས]?   

**A:**  In the text called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Chönjung [Tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད་ཆོས་འབྱུང] written by Jamyang Shepa [Tib. འཇམ་དབང་བཞད་པ], at the end of the text, there is a list of the Drepung Tripa [Tib. ཁྲི་པ] called Trirab [Tib. ཁྲི་རབས] and in that text I remember that it explained about how the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> were sit up. But I haven't read that text for a long time.   

**Q:**  Don't worry, this interview won't go outside. This is just between Mel la and me. In case somebody said that this is absolutely wrong then we might need it to prove it.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you see any thing else beside the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འཇིགས་བྱེད] The Yamantaka text.">Jigje</a> Chonjung which wrote about the Drepung Monastery. I saw the book written by Drogmi [Tib. འབྲོག་མི] [a lama].   

**A:**  That was a simple one, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, it was very simple.   

**A:**  I am thinking of writing the history of the three great monasteries. When I am making that history, I should make Drepung's history with the trirab, the list of the Drepung's Tripa and Sera's history with Sera's trirab and Ganden's history with Ganden's trirab. People don't know about the trirab of Drepung and Sera. They know only the trirab of Ganden. I could find the documents up to the 66th Ganden Tripa. From the 66th-96th, there were 30 tripa, and among that, only 2 tripa have biographies; one was Trichen Jangchup Chönpel [ti. khri chen byang chup chos phel] and the other was Trichen Ngawang Chönpel [Tib. ཁྲི་ཆེན་ངག་དབང་ཆོས་འཕེལ]. We don't know who was 28th tripa and it is kind of pointless. But I found the 28th tripa's biography.   

**Q:**  You didn't tell me about that. Were there biographies?   

**A:**  I have every document on that. There are not many biographies, but there was a system of having double thrones. I think I have published the date of birth and death with the text called Bindurya Serpo. Do you have those that tell what he studied and how did he study?   

**Q:**  Yes, I have those.   

**A:**  I am trying to write in detail that among the tripa, some of them were tutors of the Dalai Lama and some of them gave many teachings and some them built many statues. The 15th Tripa Panchen Sonam Dragpa [Tib. བསོད་ནམས་གྲགས་པ] wrote 5 volumes of text and also wrote many texts on tantras. The 22nd Tripa Gendun Tenpa Dargye [Tib. དགེ་འདུན་བསྟན་པ་དར་རྒྱས] who wrote the text on Sera Mey. So some of the tripa wrote many texts. I wrote until the 96th Tripa in Tibet but I didn't publish it in Tibet and I took it to India. I reported this to the Dalai Lama and he said, "You should add the biography of Ling Rimpoche and the present Ganden Tripa." It is very easy to add the biography of the Ling Rimpoche because he wrote his life story. So I could add that. For the life story of the present tripa, I interviewed him and I have his life story, so only thing I have to do is proofread the ms. I tried to do that, but I had many things to do so I couldn't finish it yet. There is a complete name list of the Drepung Tripa written by Kunkyen Jamyang Shepa Ngawang Thöndub.   

**Q:**  He was the first Jamyang Shepa right?   

**A:**  He wrote completely about the Drepung tripa.   

**Q:**  He wrote up to him?   

**A:**  He didn't write about himself because he was not a tripa. He wrote until the 5th Dalai Lama. It is easy to make the tripa's list of Sera and Drepung. For example, for Drepung you can write from Jamyang Chöje to the 5th Dalai Lama. After the 5th Dalai Lama, the tripa was done by the later Dalai Lamas. The Sera Tripa started from Jamchen Chöje [Tib. བྱམས་ཆེན་ཆོས་རྗེ] to 5th Dalai Lama. From the 5th Dalai Lama, the tripa of the Sera were the later Dalai Lamas.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama was considered as the tripa of Drepung and Sera, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Drepung has a separate abbot tripa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. In Sera, they also have a so called Abbot Tripa. That means the Senior Abbot known as the Khembo Tripa. That was not necessarily the senior abbot. What they did was they would change the abbot and a new abbot would come. I remember that the Gyepa [Tib. རྒྱས་པ] abbot was the tripa when I first came to monastery and then after that he resigned, Jungnela [Tib. འབྱུང་གནས་ལགས] became the tripa.   

**Q:**  What is the reason that the Dalai Lamas was the Drepung Tripa?   

**A:**  The reason is eplained in Jamyang Shepa's text. It was written clearly.   

**Q:**  But not the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a>?   

**A:**  In Ganden, they have a separate tripa. That was started from Lama Tsongkhapa. The first tripa was Je Rimpoche [Tib. རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] after that was Gyaltsab [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཚབ] Rimpoche. The next was Khedrub [Tib. མཁས་གྲུབ] Rimpoche and then was Shaluwa Legpa Gyentsen [Tib. ཞ་ལུ་བ་ལེགས་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན], Jamyang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Gyunchö [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱང་གཙང་པ [?]. You should write the history of Sera and Drepung.   

**Q:**  I don't know if I would be able to write Sera's history, but I will write the history of Drepung while I am studying it. I will write it in Tibetan and I will send it to you and you can make the correction for that, right?   

**A:**  About the list of the tripa of Sera, the Sera Trirab, we have to collect it from other documents. In some of the trirab, we can find where were they born and when they died, but I didn't get the detailed history of some the tripa. For example, after Jamchen Chöje went to China, for his replacement, Chöje Dargye Sangpo [Tib. ཆོས་རྗེ་དར་རྒྱས་བཟང་པོ] and I didn't find his history. After that the tripa is Gongru Gyentsen Sangpo [Tib. གུང་རུ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཟང་པོ] and his life story is common. Sera Jetsunpa's [Tib. སེ་ར་རྗེ་བཙུན་པ] life story is easy to find. I couldn't find some of the tripa's life story.   

**Q:**  At first give me the materials of the writing.   

**A:**  As I said, Drepung is a very well known monastery and later it became very large. And there were also many monks.   

**Q:**  After you came to Tibet, when did you join Drepung?   

**A:**  At first I got admitted in Sera, and then I went to visit Drepung and Ganden.   

**Q:**  You went to Drepung and Ganden for pilgrimage right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you remember at that time?   

**A:**  I remember a little.   

**Q:**  Where did you go in Drepung?   

**A:**  Actually, I was to belong to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Your <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> is <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚ་བ་ཁང་ཚན] One of the main residential units (khamtsen) in Drepung Monastery.">Tsha Khamtsen</a> right?   

**A:**  Yes, I belonged to Tsha and Drakpa [Tib. གྲགས་པ].   

**Q:**  So you belonged to both Tsha and Drakpa both?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You belonged to Drakpa because you were from Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས], right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How did you belong to Tsha?   

**A:**  Some of the monks from Markham belonged to Tsha and some of them belonged to Drakpa. I belonged to both Tsha and Drakpa.   

**Q:**  That could happen?   

**A:**  Drakpa Khamtsen is quite small, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚ་བ་ཁང་ཚན] One of the main residential units (khamtsen) in Drepung Monastery.">Tsha Khamtsen</a> is big.   

**Q:**  There were not many monks right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚ་བ་ཁང་ཚན] One of the main residential units (khamtsen) in Drepung Monastery.">Tsha Khamtsen</a> was one of the big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. It belonged to the big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> category, but the quality of the assembly hall was not that good. When they get alms, they had to go by lines or shakhag [Tib. བཤར་བཀག] and it was kind of imposing and they were chanting their prayers actively [Tib. འུར་པོ].   

**Q:**  That was because they were a big <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>?   

**A:**  If the monks from Markham went to Ganden they belonged to Pukhang Khamtsen and Tsha.   

**Q:**  The monks from Markham belonged to two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> and one is Tsha and one Drakpa. So was this differentiated according to the area (wihtin Markham) or the branch monastery, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་དགོན] A branch monastery.">shigön</a>?   

**A:**  That was differentiated according to the branch monastery.   

**Q:**  Do you remember who was the abbot of Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> when you came there? Probably the abbot was the Lhopa Khembo?   

**A:**  The reason why I belonged to Tsha and Drakpa is because in Kham, I was in the monastic community [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྡུག] of Wöser ['od zer] Monastery and also in Rongphu [Tib. རོང་ཕུ] Monastery. Therefore, from the side of Rongphu Monastery, I belonged to Drakpa Khamtsen. And from the side of Wöser Monastery I belonged to Tsha. In Kham I belonged to two monasteries. Therefore, in Lhasa, I belonged to two khamtsen.   

**Q:**  Why do they call you Ribur [Tib. རི་སྦུར]?   

**A:**  That was the name of the Ribur Monastery.   

**Q:**  So was there a separate Ribur Monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, there was a separate monastery. In the past, the monastery was located on a hill so it was known as Ribur. That monastery was founded by Drongön Chögyal Phagpa [Tib. འགྲོ་མགོན་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་འཕགས་པ]. I wrote about this in my first book. In my first book, I wrote about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and the monastery because we had the historical materials. After that, the Chinese destroyed them. So I wrote it as I remembered it.   

**Q:**  Did you write about the difference between the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> and monastery?   

**A:**  No. I wrote about the ups and downs of the labrang. At first there were very big monasteries in Markham and later there were also many labrangs in Markham. So later, our monastery went down. So I wrote about the ups and downs of the monasteries. I thought that would be useful to the next generation.   

**Q:**  In your first book, there was also your life story, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you remember something that happened in Drepung about the Mönlam and something about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</a> [Tib. ཞལ་ངོ] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</a> [Tib. དགེ་གཡོག] or something about cases between estates? Do you remember these things?   

**A:**  We all know about the Mönlam. The Mönlam is fantastic and was found by the Je Rimpoche in Lhasa. Since the time Je Rimpoche founded the Mönlam until 1959, it has been held continuously. At some point, the leading of the Mönlam was done by Drepung.   

**Q:**  You mean to say since the 5th Dalai Lama the Mönlam was led by the Drepung, right?   

**A:**  Yes, since the 5th Dalai Lama, the study of the five volumes of dialectics had developed. On the other side, on the side of politics, even the way of wearing clothes has been changed. From when I came to Central Tibet, the clothes of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</a> (chief disciplinary officer) has changed a lot.   

**Q:**  How did that happen?   

**A:**  For example, the iron stick/staff called bere or jagyug [Tib. ལྕགས་རྒྱུག] has been made bigger and bigger and more elaborated. It was not that big at the beginning.   

**Q:**  How do you spell bere?   

**A:**  I don't know. Then they made the iron stick which sounds like, "sin sin" when they stuck it on the ground. I heard that they had some kind of wires in it. In the past, when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</a> stuck the iron stick on the stone floor, the iron stick didn't make any sound other,"tshob tshob]. Also in the past, the ornament on the backside of the sheyngo's gown called Droglu drogden [Tib. སྒྲོག་ལུ་སྒྲོག་གདན] used to be a thin one. Later, it was made wider and wider and they also put the design of a tiger, lion, garuda and dragon [Tib. སྟག་སེང་ཁྱུང་འབྲུག], the eight auspicious signs [Tib. bkra shis rtags brygad] and the seven royal symbols [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲས་སྣ་བདུན] on it. It was made so wide that the backside of the sheyngo was almost filled with those things.   

**Q:**  Later, I remember they also put the golden cross vajra [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱ་གྲམ], right?   

**A:**  Probably, and they also made the pin for fastening their <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཟན] The upper part of a monk&#x27;s dress.">sen</a> [Tib. སྡིག་ར] from gold. In the past, they used to have a kind of army badge made from silver with some designs on it like a lotus flower. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</a> might have some gilded ones. But the chagdampa had a just silver badge. Later, I also heard they borrowed the golden badges worn on their hat. Their conduct also became very distant from the way of Viniyana [Tib. འདུལ་བ]. Later, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</a> would wear long hair and apply black on their faces. And they would have the stylized water bottle, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་བླུག] The stylized (empty) water bottle worn by monk officials in the Tibetan government.">chablug</a> [Tib. ཆབ་བླུག], made from leather. Some of them would use red serge for the chablug.   

**Q:**  They had a green leather line on the edge of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་བླུག] The stylized (empty) water bottle worn by monk officials in the Tibetan government.">chablug</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes, it also had some designs like a flower and a dog's nose. Actually, I heard that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆབ་བླུག] The stylized (empty) water bottle worn by monk officials in the Tibetan government.">chablug</a> was used like a purse.   

**Q:**  The system of carrying a knife by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</a> was in the past, right?   

**A:**  In the past, I don't think they had that long sword.   

**Q:**  Were they carrying a longer knife?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</a> had to return their celibacy (vows) back during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> and Mönlam?   

**A:**  I heard that also.   

**Q:**  If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་གཡོག] Monk assistant to the disciplinary official (gegö) in monasteries.">geyog</a> had to return his celibacy every year during the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་མཆོད] The large religious prayer festival held in Lhasa in the 2nd Tibetan lunar month.">Tsongjö</a> and Mönlam, then that would be more than seven times. So how would they do it?   

**A:**  If they returned their celibacy, they had to get it from the abbot [Tib. ལས་སློབ] and other monks and they have to do it according for the Vinaya.   

**Q:**  I heard that they would return the celibacy, but I didn't hear that they were getting the celibacy back?   

**A:**  I don't know whether they had the vow of celibacy right from the beginning .   

**Q:**  It happened like that many times?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you were in Drepung, were there any troubles about the estates? For example in Sera, the senior monks knew about the trouble at Lhundrup Dzong and nowadays the Lhundrup Dzong's trouble was written about in English in detail.   

**A:**  Was it written clearly? At that time, I was in the monastery studying <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ] Religious books/texts, scriptures.">pecha</a> (religious texts).   

**Q:**  Probably in Drepung there might have happened similar situations?   

**A:**  I think so.   

**Q:**  Do you have anything to tell about that?   

**A:**  Yes, it happened like that.   

**Q:**  You know there were the monastic estates, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་གཤིས] A &quot;religious&quot; estate held by a monastery or lama.">chöshi</a>, and the government officials have estates and they were robbing them from each other and some of them also sold the estates. So were they allowed to sell their estate?   

**A:**  Some of them were doing like that. I don't know about that well.   

**Q:**  For example, one of the estates of the Phala [Tib. ཕ་ལ] family belonged to Sumdo [Tib. སུམ་མདོ]. I think Phala sold it. Do you know about that?   

**A:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  If a lama and his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བླ་བྲང] 1. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of an incarnate lama. 2. The property/wealth owning corporate entity of the Panchen Lama.">labrang</a> got demoted then they would take away his estates. That could happen. There were also lamas offering their estates to each other, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  Do you know beside that, among the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a>, did they hand over their estates to each other?   

**A:**  The tutor to the 7th Dalai Lama Kesang Gyatso [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་རྒྱས་མཚོ] called Trichen Ngawang Chöden [Tib. ཁྲི་ཆེན་ང་དབང་མཆོག་ལྡན] got Gyantse Palgön Chöde [Tib. རྒྱལ་རྩེ་དཔལ་མགོན་ཆོས་སྡེ] as his salary estate, [Tib. ཐབ་རྟེན]. And before he died, he said, "I don't want that. I will go to Reting. So they offered it to Reting. After that, Demo Ngawang Delek Gyatso [Tib. དེ་མོ་ངག་དབང་བདེ་ལེགས་རྒྱ་མཚོ] got Palgön Chöde. When the Demo Labrang owned the Palgon Chöde, at the time of 8th Dalai Lama Jampel Gyasto [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་རྒྱ་མཚོ] took back Palgön Chöde from Demo Labrang and handed it over to his <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] (natal family). The Yabshi said that they don't want that and gave it back to the government.   

**Q:**  Do you remember anything like that during recent times when we could remember it? There were situations like Reting got demoted and the estates of Reting were owned by the government. At the time of the Lhopa Abbot, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> got many estates so how did they get the estates?   

**A:**  I don't remember well. After the Regent Demo, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> got demoted, at that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚ་ཕྱག] The chabu (manager) of Tsha Khamtsen.">tsacha</a> [Tib. ཚ་ཕྱག] was expelled. At that time, I think the monastic estates also had a little bit of a problem. Later, at the time of the Lhopa abbot, they got back the estates. Probably it was like that. I am not sure whether got any new estates.   

**Q:**  Before the Lhopa abbot, one of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་ཡངས] One of the colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Deyang</a> abbots had a misfortune; his name was Sibug [Tib. ?] abbot. Do you have anything to tell about that?   

**A:**  No, I don't know.   

**Q:**  Do you know where the Drepung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ཆེན] The main assembly hall of a monastery. The assembly hall for the monastery as a whole.">tsogchen</a> sheyngo comes from?   

**A:**  I don't know about the Drepung one. In Sera, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</a> would take turns by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a>. But the following khamtsen: Minyag [Tib. མི་ཉག] Tayön [Tib. རྟ་ཡོན] and Gyalrong [Tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] were not allowed to do the sheyngo position.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A:**  These were the small khamtsen.   

**Q:**  In Sera, was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> small?   

**A:**  No, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> was not small, but in past probably, Gyerong was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a> of Tsha Khamtsen.   

**Q:**  So the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱལ་རོང] A Khamtsen in Drepung Monastery.">Gyerong</a> Khamtsen was like a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་ཚན] A sub-unit of a khamtsen.">mitsen</a> that became a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁང་ཚན] A monastic residential unit in which monks from specific geographic areas lived. These were corporate entities with property and internal officials. Some large khamtsen had smaller subordinate units called mi tshan. Khamtsen were part of tratsang (colleges). For example, Hamdong Khamtsen was part of Gomang College in Drepung Monastery.">khamtsen</a> right?   

**A:**  Yes. Once every 3 years or something, Ngagpa would become sheyngo. I was not attentive about that.   

**Q:**  Is the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</a> in Sera government appointed?   

**A:**  Probably it is government appointed.   

**Q:**  It was approved [Tib. ཕྱག་རྟགས་དགོངས་དོན] by the Dalai Lama or the regent, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard at the time of 13th Dalai Lama, the personal attendant of the Dalai Lama in charge of clothes, the Simpön Khembo, did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. a junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. the two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">sheyngo</a> in Drepung for 2 years?   

**A:**  That could be. In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་བྱེས] The Jey (Je) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Jey</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་སྐོས] The main disciplinary official in a monastic college (tratsang).">gegö</a> should be a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་ཤེས] An advanced degree earned by scholar monks.">geshe</a> unlike in Drepung. I am sure about Ganden. Specially, they have one gegö in winter and one in summer. The summer gegö should be done by a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a> (scholar monk) because they have to debate in the prayer assembly, (do <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་ལང] The name for two monks debating in the midst of a large gathering of monks.">tsoglang</a> [Tib. ཚོགས་ལངས]).   

**Q:**  In Sera they don't have the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་ཚང] 1. Storehouse. 2. Steward, person in charge of a storehouse. 3. A monastic official in charge of storerooms.">nyertsang</a> is the main thing, right?   

**A:**  In Sera they have the Jiso and the individual <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> have the nyertsang.   

**Q:**  In <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a> we have the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦུག་མཛོད] A manager/steward who was in charge of the estates of a monastery or monastic college.">bungdzö</a>. The bungdzö was set up later on. They also have the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཉེར་ཚང] 1. Storehouse. 2. Steward, person in charge of a storehouse. 3. A monastic official in charge of storerooms.">nyertsang</a> who had to supply the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཏོང་སྒོ] An obligation to carry out a rite or prayer session in a monastery. For example, providing food and tea for all the monks in one&#x27;s monastic college at a prayer assembly. Or it could be an obligation to give all the monks a set amount of grain or the donggo obligation that many monastery office holders had to do when they left office. Generally, donggos had associated endowments that monks used by turns to fund a donggo. The monk with the donggo obligation would lend out the capital of the endowment and pay for the event from the interest he collected. This was also used for ritual obligations of government offices like the Tseja Office.">donggo</a> (ritual ceremonies).   

**A:**  Yes. Does <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> also have the same?   

**Q:**  Probably, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a> also had <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་སྦུག] A manager (of estates and endowments) of a monastic college or monastic khamtsen.">chabu</a>, but I am not sure about Deyang. Were there any other things that happened in the monastery during your life time except the Reting issue because we all know that?   

**A:**  In my first book, I wrote the main things in that book. For example, the issue of Pomda [Tib. སྤོམ་ད] and Gongkar Lamatshang [Tib. གོང་དཀར་བླ་མ་ཚང] who surrendered to the government. And the government gave him the rank of Khenjung.   

**Q:**  I think he did <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆེ] A high monk official of the third rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">khenche</a> at first?   

**A:**  First he was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> and after that he became khenche.   

**Q:**  Is it like that?   

**A:**  I am clear about this, because...   

