# Drepung Monastery Collection  
# Interview M.0021.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Pemba [Tib. སྤེན་པ] and Namgyal Temba [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་བསྟན་པ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , , Tibet Autonomous Region/China  
**Date of Interview:** 2002  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Pemba  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 74  
**Date of Birth:** 1928  
**Name:** Namgyal Temba  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 72  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1930  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The couple interviewed were poor miser who were living on one of Deyang College's estates. The husband (Namgyal Temba) was a miser of Deyang and the wife was a miser of Tashilhunpo Monastery. In this interview, they individually provide details of their family life and their livelihood in the old society, especially what corvée work (ula) they had to do. Although they were a taxpayer household (treba) with land, they could not do the work (manage the land), so they lost the land and became düjung living on the edge of poverty. The husband discusses how their livelihood improved significantly when he was sent by th estate to do road construction work for a Tibetan government-Chinese joint project and received Chinese wages in dayan coins.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/M_0021_01/M_0021_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Today we came here to examine how the Deyang colege's estates operated. Dr Goldstein is mainly doing research on the monastery and he will ask you questions. Dr. Goldstein is very good in Tibetan language and he is same as a Tibetan and he wrote on the history of Tibet. And he speaks Tibetan very well.   

**Q:**  What is your name?   

**A:**  My name is Pemba [Tib. སྤེན་པ].   

**Q:**  Do you have a family name?   

**A:**  I don't have any family name. This area was called Khotsang [Tib. kha tshang ?]. In the past, there used to be an oil extracting house here. That's why it is called Khotsang.   

**Q:**  Are you from here and were you born hear?   

**A:**  I was born here.   

**Q:**  Did you come here as a bride or did you take a bridegroom? How did you become a family here?   

**A:**  I was from this household. My father was the son of the household near the gorge [Tib. གས་པ] and my mother was born in Tsang [Tib. གཙང]. My great grandfather was working on construction for the Tibetan government (Dewashung). My grandfather took my mother here when she was little. After that, my mother got together with my father and in the beginning they worked on a tregang (tax unit of arable land). When they were unable to work the full tregang of land, they worked on a half tregang of land which was called nangchag [Tib. གནངས་ཆག]. For this, we had to work on alternative days. At that time, my parents had 4-5 children who were not grown up, so they hired a servant for the whole year. We also had to hire a servant at the harvest time to do the threshing called nyikü [Tib. ཉིས་སྐུལ].   

**Q:**  At that time, you were working on the tregang, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and our home was here. After that, I met my husband, so we got separated from my natal family and my mother made me to live here.   

**Q:**  Did you just get together (with no formal marrige ceremony) [Tib. ཁ་ཐུག] with your husband?   

**A:**  Yes, my husband's home is just down there and they were a treba household and we merged together here.   

**Q:**  You got settled here?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, how old were you?   

**A:**  We were unable to work for the taxes because we didn't have tsamba to take when we had to go to work as ula (corvée laborers). When we had a little tsamba, we went to work for the ula. So we missed work for 2-3 days. On the 4th of the 4th lunar month, all the people were going to Sangu [Tib. གསང་ཕུ] to burn incense and do prayers. On the 5th day, Kusho Thupe la [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས་ཐུབ་འཕེལ་ལགས] called all the household fathers (heads) of the miser (bound peasants) and said that they are going to whip the two of us. At that time, the crops for which the seed had been taken as a loan had grown this high. We hadn't had any seed of our own. When we heard about the whipping, we were extremely afraid and we said we will hand over the tregang fields with the crop growing on it (on the fields), and then we handed over the tregang After that, we worked for the ula (corvée labor tax) called (Tib. དུཝ་ནམཏོང [དུ་བ་གནམ་གཏོང] where all the people sending smoke in the sky (ཨིཨེ, every household even those with no land) had to work for the tax. At that time, three households told us they want our tregang of land. There were three households who wanted that land. Therefore, we went to Sangu to ask divination from the oracle who went into trance. The divination came in favor of the old woman Tseten Drökar's [Tib. ཚེ་བརྟན་སྒྲོལ་དཀར] family. After that, my husband and I went to work on road building in Kongpo and also went to build the airport. At home, we didn't have anything and we had a baby who could hardly walk so we carried that baby and went to work on road building.   

**Q:**  So that was 1950s right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Your mother came from Tsang, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So who was your lord?   

**A:**  Our lord was Tashilhunpo.   

**Q:**  You were a miser of Tashilhunpo?   

**A:**  Yes, in Lhasa there was a person called (Tib. མིསེར་གོཔ [མི་སེར་འགོ་པ]) and also one called jugpön who made us suffer a lot. He told me that I have to pay money for a replacement to do working on a construction project (Tib. ཨརདö [ཨར་དོད]) and many other things. My children hadn't grown up to be able to do the construction and I also didn't have money to pay the ardö (replacement fee) and I couldn't go to work. That's how the lord made us suffer. I think that the jugpön made us to suffer and he came to our house in Tsang saying he is going to take me to do the construction work though I was not grown up to work.   

**Q:**  Later your mother requested to pay mibo to Tashilunpo, right?   

**A:**  Yes. The mibo was not that high. But at that time, I had to pay a lot of money for the replacement for the construction for Tashilunpo.   

**Q:**  You had to pay money for a replacement to work on construction if you couldn't go to work on the construction yourself, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  On top of that you had to pay the mibo, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right. My father's lord [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] was Deyang Tratsang (College) and he was a miser of Deyang Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Your father's household was a treba?   

**A:**  Yes, it was a treba.   

**Q:**  Did your father have one tregang?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many khe of land did you have in one tregang?   

**A:**  It was 25 khe of land in one tregang. For the tax that should be worked on alternating days, the nangchag, it was 12 khe and 10 dre. In this village, among the women, I am the oldest. I am 74 years old and there is only one old woman in this village who is same age as me.   

**Q:**  If you have one tregang, then did you have to send one ula worker every day?   

**A:**  Yes. We had to send one person everyday all year round. At the time of Wongkor [Tib. འོང་སྐོར] Festival when people carry scriptures around the field and during the New Year, we had three days off. They would send us to wash our hair on the 30th. If the shidü (estate manager) was good then he would give us a day off on the 3rd day. If the shidü was not good, then he would call us to work on 3rd day. It was also same for the Wongkor.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you have a day off on the 15th and 30th of the lunar month?   

**A:**  No, there was no day off.   

**Q:**  In autumn and spring you were doing farming, what did you do beside tha, when you had to go to work everyday, and what would you do during the winter and summer?   

**A:**  In summer, we have to do the weeding. And after that, they would send us to cut the incense which would be made into round shape. They would send us to cut incense for 10-11 days.   

**Q:**  When you went to cut the incense, how much did 1 person have to cut per day?   

**A:**  If we take our bedding and the shiga (estate) gave us a kind of beverage, we had to go to the mountains and had to cut 10 bundle of incense per day which was a big bundle, not like the small incense bundles in present days.   

**Q:**  For one person?   

**A:**  Yes. If you didn't take your bedding and came back in the evening, then you had to cut 5 bundles and take it to the shiga (estate).   

**Q:**  That was during the summer right?   

**A:**  Yes. After that, we have to collect firewood for the shiga.   

**Q:**  What kind of firewood did you have to collect? Was it cow dung?   

**A:**  No, we have to collect switches (twigs) [Tib. ཤིང་ཚག྄] for firewood.   

**Q:**  When you are saying accumulating switches that means you have to collect it because you were not allowed to cut the trees, right?   

**A:**  No, we had to cut the firewood. The place we went to cut the firewood belonged to the shiga.   

**Q:**  Can you cut the firewood from the tree?   

**A:**  No, the whole area belonged to the shiga, so we can go to collect the firewood anywhere. There are all different firewood like red colored called kyuruma [Tib. ?] and there are also black colored and we could cut whatever kind of switches we find.   

**Q:**  So you have to go to the mountain to collect the firewood, right?   

**A:**  We had to pull it out. After that, we had to cut the grass in the canal and the fields, and they would also make two people work carrying sickles, nyikü [Tib. ཉིས་སྐུལ].   

**Q:**  When would they start the nyikü (threshing)?   

**A:**  The nyikü would start at the end of the 6th lunar month.   

**Q:**  How long would it take for the nyikü?   

**A:**  It was until the threshing is over which was just before the New Year. We had to cut the grass in the fields and the canal. It would take a long time for the harvest, because there is large area of fields. The miser who don't have many people in their homes, they don't have time to work on their own tax land (Tib. ཏྲེཤིང [ཁྲལ་ཞིང]) and had to harvest the fields that belonged to the shiga.   

**Q:**  What did you do in winter?   

**A:**  In winter, we had to do the threshing for a very long time because at that time there were no machines. We had to depend on yak for doing the threshing (Tib. ཡགཆག [གཡག་ཆགས]) and sometimes it tooks about half a month. Threshing would take the whole winter and would be finished after the New Year. The quickest threshing would be over in the 12th lunar month. After the threshing, we had to take out the fertilizer to the fields.   

**Q:**  How many family members did you have?   

**A:**  I don't have family members.   

**Q:**  In the old society, how many family member did you have?   

**A:**  At that time, we had 8 family members, 6 children and the parents. I am the oldest child. After that, my parents died and I stayed for quite a long time working for the ula taxes. After I came here, the tregang of land was divided and we worked for 1/2 a tregang (nangchag).   

**Q:**  Did you divide the tregang by your own wish?   

**A:**  Yes, that was done by our wishe. We had to divide the land because we also had to divide the loans along with the land.   

**Q:**  Did you divide the household's tregang and the loans or did the estate divide it?   

**A:**  The estate didn't do that. Usually, they would collect something called (Tib. göphü [Tib. བགོས་ཕུད])and they would take away quite a lot of things from the rich households, but when we got divided, since we were poor, we didn't have anything to collect.   

**Q:**  You said that in your family there were 8 members right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So you stayed separate (from them) because you had your husband right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So you took the land called nangchag right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  About you and your husband staying separate, you had discussed this with your family members, right?   

**A:**  In our home my mother and uncle didn't get along well. So the two of us lived separately. Therefore, we two were unable to work for the taxes, so we gave back the land with the crops growing and we worked as Duwa Namtong a kind of tax where all the people living in that area have to work.   

**Q:**  After you separated from your family, how long did you stay working half of the tax?   

**A:**  We stayed just for three year, and then we were unable to work for the tax.   

**Q:**  On the 3rd year you were unable to work for the tax and you handed over the land with the crops right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that, what did you do?   

**A:**  Then we worked doing the Duwa Namtong.   

**Q:**  This is a düjung, right?   

**A:**  Yes, and we stayed as a düjung. If you have a house from your parents, then you can stay there, but if you don't, then you have to ask for lodging. Then you don't have house and land but you have to work for Duwa Namtong because you eat the grass in the area and drink the water.   

**Q:**  I still don't understand what happened? Your father died and your mother moved with separately or what?   

**A:**  Since I got married, I had to stay separate from the main family which we did. We moved and we took half of the tax land. But we were not able to work doing the ulag tax so we returned the tax land.   

**Q:**  To whom did you return the tax land? Did you return the land to the estate or your family?   

**A:**  We returned it to the estate. The estate (shiga) gave the tax land to a person who was able to do the ulag work for it. According to the policy, it was not allowed to hand over or take the land with the crops, but we had to hand it over because they almost beat us up, so we gave the land.   

**Q:**  When she got married were there other children in home?   

**A:**  Her family had several children and she was the oldest one. When she got together with her husband, then she have to separate from the main family and left behind her parent and brothers and sisters.   

**Q:**  How did they decide on giving half of the tregang?   

**A:**  She talked with her parents and they decided and she didn't interfere. When they divided the family, they didn't have anything to offer, otherwise if they had something, then they would have to do göpu which they didn't get because they had nothing. Since she and her husband were living together here, they took the half of the tregang.   

**Q:**  Why they couldn't they do the ulag? What was the difficulty?   

**A:**  Remember she told us that together with the tregang of land, there were loans on that land.   

**Q:**  You and your husband kept the (half) tregang for three years and after that you were unable to work on the tregang and returned it to the shiga. What was the main reason that you couldn't work on the tregang?   

**A:**  At that time, we didn't have tsamba to take (when they went to work) and since we have just two people, nobody would give us a loan. When we had a little tsamba, then we went to work for the ulag tax and when we didn't have tsamba, then we stayed because we couldn't work on an empty stomach, right? Therefore, the shidü (estate steward) said if you are unable to work for the ula tax then you can return the tregang as there were many people who wanted the tregang. It was like the proverb, "the crows waiting for the torma offering." [Tib. ཕོ་རོག་གཏོར་མ་སྒུག་པ] So we returned the tregang. At that time, we had to return the tregang otherwise they were about to whip us [for not doing the ula work].   

**Q:**  When you separated from your family you took half of the tregang, so with that, how much loans did your family ask you to take?   

**A:**  My family ask me to take 300 khe of grain loans with half of the tregang.   

**Q:**  What happened when you returned the land with the loan? How did you do the loan?   

**A:**  We worked for other people and paid quite a lot of the loan.   

**Q:**  Wait a minute. Did you owe 300 khe to the shiga (estate)?   

**A:**  We didn't owe the loan to the shiga. We had to pay the loan to big households like Lasampa [Tib.?], Ganden Shartse [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཤར་རྩེ], Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] and other internal households [Tib. ནང་ཁུལ]. At first, our parents took the loan from wherever they could get it because they couldn't raise their children. Later, I was the oldest child in the house. So they divided the tax land together with the loan.   

**Q:**  So there was no connection between the 300 khe of grain and the half of tregang that you got?   

**A:**  We took the loans because we had to put seed on the farmland. Therefore, we had to take the loan.   

**Q:**  Okay you have the half of the tregang and you returned the tax land because you were unable to work on it right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Your parents sent the loan with half of the tregang and since you returned the half tregang of land to the Deyang shiga, so there was no way of sending the loan together with the tregang, right? The loan was left over with the two of you, right?   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  Therefore, did you get the chance to pay off the loan?   

**A:**  We paid it quite well.   

**Q:**  How much loan did you pay off before the liberation?   

**A:**  Before the liberation, we paid about half of it. After we lost the tax land we went to do road building in Kongpo. And we exchanged the dayan coins in Lhasa and for Tibetan copper coins which we loaded on a donkey and we paid the loan to the Ganden Shartse [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཤར་རྩེ] College.   

**Q:**  Did you have to pay mibo?   

**A:**  I didn't pay mibo (human lease fee).   

**Q:**  What about your husband? Did he pay mibo?   

**A:**  He had to pay mibo to the Deyang Tratsang.   

**Q:**  Your husband paid the mibo when the rwo of you went to do the road building?   

**A:**  Yes, my husband belonged to Deyang Tratsang, so he had to pay mibo to the Deyang Tratsang and also when Deyang Tratsang had construction, he also had to go to work on the construction.   

**Q:**  At that time, you were still the miser of Tashilunpo?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, we were not able to pay the mibo and they made us suffer a lot. Then the revolution began. Before that, the jugpön made us suffer a lot. He called us to work on construction and we sent other people as our replacement.   

**Q:**  What was the custom of marriage? Did most people marry with one man and one woman or did most people marry according to the polyandry system like three brothers with one woman?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you have this kind of situation?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  In your family you didn't have polyandry, but were there any system like this in general or not?   

**A:**  In our village, we didn't have this system.   

**Q:**  How old is Namgyal Tempa [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་བསྟན་པ] [her husband]?   

**A:**  He is 72 years old.   

**Q:**  In your life did you get any seriously illnesses?   

**A:**  When I was 61 years old, my daughter who was 21 years old, died. When my husband was 61 years old, our son who was 31 years old died. We had only two children, but they died.   

**Q:**  Did you hear that the treba would achieve enlightenment under the taxes [Tib. ཁྲལ་པ་ཁྲལ་འོག་ནས་སངས་རྒྱགས]?   

**A:**  Yes, I heard that and I hoped to get enlightened. And I am thinking now the young ones died and we are in the 70s and still alive, so I am thinking that we might achieve enlightenment . I am joking, I am really thinking that in the past we suffered a lot and we didn't have tsamba to eat. Therefore, even now we are in our 70s, but still alive, because we had suffered a lot. The main thing is it is because of the effect of the true karma [Tib. བདེན་མཐུ] though we can't see it, but this is an example of karma where the young ones die earlier.   

**Q:**  Namgyal Tempa la, Dr Goldstein is a Professor of America. He has been doing research on Tibetan history and religion for many years. And he also wrote a Tibetan history and he wrote also other books. In this work, Dr, Goldstein cooperated with Academy of Social Sciences Office and he doing research on Drepung Monastery and on Deyang. So we asked about Deyang to Tse tashi [Tib. ཚེ་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and Samten [Tib. བསམ་གཏན་ལ] and today Dr Goldstein wanted to visit the Deyang shiga's taxpayers (treba). So there were not many people from Deyang. He asked Penpa la [Tib. སྤེན་པ་ལགས] some of question and she answered. Now Professor Goldstein wants to ask you some of question. So the first question he wants to as you is where were you born and how many family member did you have?   

**Q:**  Were you born here? How many family members did you have?   

**A:**  Yes, I was born here. The place where I was born is just down there. My parents died a long time ago. When I was born, in our family there were my parents, two sisters, a grandmother, and I have three younger brothers.   

**Q:**  When you were small, were you a treba?   

**A:**  Yes, when I was 10 years old, my parents made me a monk in Deyang Tratsang. I stayed in the monastery until I was 25 years old [1955].   

**Q:**  Did you study pecha (texts)?   

**A:**  No, I didn't get much chance to study well because my gegen (teacher) was a dobdo. After that, my gegen told me that he had to go to Kham as a soldier (sermag) from the three great monastic seats. At that time, they recruited dobdo monks from Sera, Drepung and Ganden for the soldiers. My gegen sold the belongings in the shag (apartment). At that time, I was young and my father was still alive.   

**Q:**  At that time, how old were you?   

**A:**  I was 13 years old when my gegen went as the monk soldier [1943]. My gegen called my father and said, "I can't stay in the tratsang (college) because it is too strict. I am going to Kham as a soldier and I don't know if I will be able to come back or not, so you shoud find a new gegen for him or do whatever you want with your child." Then my gegen handed me over to my father. My father also didn't know what to do, so he took me home for a while, and during a few months in the summer, I stayed at home and took the animals out to graze. After that, my father, who was a treba (taxpaer household) he had to go to the monastery to work for his corvée tax. Some of the old monks there told my father that if you leave your child like this, he will get spoiled. So you'd better bring your son here. There were 4-5 monks who wanted to be my gegen, so they did the senriy (lottery) in front of the deity Sangu Setrapa [Tib. གསང་ཕུ་བསེ་ཁྲབ་པ]. In the senriy it said that the monk from our village would be the right gegen for me. After that, I stayed in his shag (apartment) as his gidru (disciple/ward). At that time, my gegen didn't get the chance to teach me because he was a chabu (eocnomic manager) and had to go everywhere. I just learned 4-5 words in a day and I didn't get the chance to study completely. When I was 19-20 years old my gegen died. After that I stayed in a separate shag and adhered to the monks discipline. When I was 25 years old I came back home. After that, I did farming. When I was 26 years old I met my wife and when I was 28, we both left our natal families and stayed together and settled as a household.   

**Q:**  So two of you settled here?   

**A:**  Yes, we divided the tregang into nangchag. We have to go to work for the ula corvee labor of Deyang's estate everyday and no one gave me even a spoon of tsamba (when I worked). They would give us some tea leaves called Porthang [Tib. ?] which were collected from the mountains. They would give us the grease [Tib. ཞག] they got from the monk's tea bowls, as the butter to be added on the tea. We didn't have tsamba and we had to do every kind of work for the Deyang estate, like going to the mountains and going down to the valleys. On top of that, I have go to work for the chitr for the dewashung [outer tax, i.e., corvée tax for the government). We have to load 5 khe of barley on the donkey. I don't have good donkeys, so they couldn't carry the load. From the bottom of the mountain pass I have to carry the 2 and half of barley on my back because my donkey won't be able to climb up the mountain. From the top of the mountain pass I put the load on the donkey and come down.   

**Q:**  Where did you have to transport the grain?   

**A:**  I had to transport the grain to the main gate of Shol [Tib. གཞུང་སྒོའི་ཐོག་ཁ] [the village/town in front of the Potala].   

**Q:**  So the chitre was worked by Deyang shiga for the Tibetan Government right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You are talking about a mountain pass, so which mountain pass was that?   

**A:**  The name of the mountain pass is Nyase la [Tib. ?] which is located near the Ramagang [Tib. ར་མ་སྒང] [ferry site]. Sometimes, we had to do the chitre which entailed transporting the grain salary for the soldiers of the Trapchi Regiment. For that, we had to transport the grain to the Trapchi Regiment. That's how we worked for the chitre. We had to find tsamba by ourselves and had to remain half full and half hungry. We didn't have the chance to touch a bag load of tsamba year round. One person had to work for the ula and other person had to go to mountains and collect incense and transport it to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Was that a sideline work?   

**A:**  Yes, it is like a sideline work in present days. At that time, the main livelihood depended on the mountains from where we got such things as cow dung which we sold and bought the worst quality tsamba that was called called kamsog [Tib. སྐམ་སོག]. It looked like powdered donkey dung. We had only one donkey so we loaded two loads of cow dung on the donkey and we had to carry two loads on our backs and sell them. That's how we spent our lives. Sometimes, we didn't find the red inferior tsamba so we bought the Torma offerings from the Jokhang and took it to the mountains when we work as a ula corvée worker.   

**Q:**  At that time, when you were working for the alternating day ulatax, how many khe of land did you plant?   

**A:**  It was 12 khe and 10 dre. That was like the capital, but we could only plant one or two fields because we didn't have the capability. So other people were telling us to lease the land. We had only one or two fields we were planting plant. And when we planted the fields, we had to ask Deyang Tratsang for a loan. Even though we were the miser of the College, they wouldn't give us a loan because we were not capable and we had only two people (workers in their household). They would just lend us only 2-3 khe. They would lend the good households amounts like 20-30 khe. So we just used a little bit for the seeds for planting, and that's how we spent our lives. On the 4th of the 6th lunar month, all the Deyang Tratsang's miser have to go to the mountains to collect firewood for 12-15 days. We had to take our bedding to the mountains. When we went to the mountains we didn't have tsamba to take, so we asked for a 4 day leave from the work supervisor [Tib. ལས་དཔོན] to prepare tsamba. He said, "That will be fine. You can prepare your tsamba and come back to work later to make up the 4 days that you missed. Then we also had to bring the firewood to the estate. Then after two days, they were saying that I didn't come to work for the corvée ula and the estate steward called us to come to work. When I went there, he got a thick stick and came to beat us up saying that among the 13 tregang holders (on the estate), you two are disgraceful. It is like the proverb, "among the 8 Namse wealth deity riders, there is one disgraceful deity walking [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་རྟ་བདག་བརྒྱད་ལ་ཞབས་འདྲེན་རྐང་ཐང་གཅིག]. At that time, I was young. I went to the roof of the house. He was coming after me and I thought of jumping from the roof. He told me to come back. After that, I didn't come back, but he didn't follow me. So he stayed right there. If he had come towards me I had thought of jumping off it. Then he said come here, but I didn't go because I thought If I went there he might beat me up. After that, he said, "From tomorrow you don't need to come to work for the corvée tax and we are going to take your tregang of land back because there are many people waiting for the land. It is like the proverb, "the crows waiting for the torma offering." Among the Duwa Namtong (düjung landless households), there were 3-5 household who were better off than the treba (taxpayer households). That was on the 5th or 6th of the 6th month.   

**Q:**  At that time, how old were you?   

**A:**  At that time, I was 29 years old [1959]. At that time, the crops had grown this high. On the next day, they told the work supervisors not to make us work and sent us back and they also told us it will not be okay if you go to work any more. In that year, we had gotten quite good amount of loan so we had planted 8-9 fields and the crops were also good. Then they took over the land with crops [Tib. སྔོ་ཐོག] growing on it. Some people were saying that even in other countries, if some one took over the land with crops on it, it is like killing the people. Some of the treba told me that I should report this to the dzong (district) and they will help me on that. I told them that if I report it to the dzong, they might beat me up. I thought it would be better to become a Duwa Namtong and go to the mountains to collect something and sell that in Lhasa so I said I can't make an appeal to the dzong because I don't have tsamba to eat. One of the household heads was saying, "if you could bear the beating, then there would be no problem. Can you bear the beating? I said I can bear beatings 5-6 times. I don't think they will beat me all day long because I didn't lie and steal. I had been beaten with switches when I was in the monastery. Anyhow, they took over my land and handed it over to the other households. After that, we became like dead people. We didn't go to work for the corvée ula tax. After that, I went to the mountains to collect cow dung. Then the People's Liberation Army started the road construction at the Kuru [Tib. ཀུ་རུ] Bridge. At that time, the Chinese and the Tibetan government (dewashung) both made us work. Deyang estate (shiga) had to send one person so I went to work on the road construction and my wife stayed home. They collected the 3 dre of tsamba, and little bit of flour, butter and tea leaves from the people here (since he was going on behalf of the estate's obligation). I went to do the road construction and I stayed there for three months.   

**Q:**  Did they consider working on the construction as the work done by the Duwa Namtong for the Deyang Shiga or not?   

**A:**  Yes, it would be considered as work of the estate (shiga). After three months when I came back, I had received a good salary and I got quite a good amount of dayan silver coins and some extra tsamba to carry. I also worked very hard. From that time on, by the grace of the Communist Party, our livelihood got better, like a sick person walking with a cane. We also went to mountains in winter. At that time, we had one child who was about 6 years old. Then we went to Kongpo for the road construction.   

**Q:**  Going to Kongpo was also included in this same construction project, right??   

**A:**  Yes.   

