#  Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0222.01   
##  : with Gyankhar Nangpa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་ནང་པ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** 1981  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Professor Jinpa  
**Name:** Gyankhar Nangpa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་ནང་པ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 67  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1914  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyankhar Nangpa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་ནང་པ] was an aristocratic government official. In this interview, he talks about a law case regarding the ownership of his family estate. He also discusses the Lungshar incident in detail and how Kapshöba informed Trimön about Lungshar's plans and about Kapshöba's demotion. He also discusses his father's role in discovering the reincarnation of Reting and about Reting's death.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0222_01/H_0222_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Who was that Gyankhar Lingpa [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཁར་གླིང་པ] at the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> [Tib. ལུང་ཤར] incident?   

**A:**  He was my maternal uncle. This was the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> [Tib. ལུང་ཤར] incident. He had misfortunes and there were many things that are not worth telling you. Actually, we were the main lineage. Our original lineage was from Lungshar. At that time my grandmother was there; our female lineage was very capable. The father of my maternal uncle was an ex-government official (Tib. ཤབསུར [ཞབས་ཟུར]) who came from the household called Chundo [Tib. ཆུ་མདོ] in Lhatse [Tib. ལྷ་རྩེ]. He got together with my grandmother when he was working as an official acquiring rice for the government in Tinkye [Tib. གཏིང་སྐྱེས་འབྲས་སྒྲུབ་པ]. The two of them had seven sons. They left their children on a small estate and sent them to school there except for my grandfather. At that time, they didn't get along well with my grandfather. My grandmother's husband was also a capable person and he sent his children to school and he also made his son join the Tsikhang to be trained as a lay official. They agreed to share their livelihood with the two generations [on the estate and in the government]. They [my grandfather's son] served the government. We stayed on the small estate. At that time my father was living with Mentö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད་ས་དབང]. Mentö Sawang told my father that he shouldn't remain like this and he brought my father to Lhasa. This was the time when Tsarong's [Tib. ཚ་རོང] power was at its zenith. Mentö Sawang sent my father as the bridegroom [Tib. མགཔ] of the lay official Seshingpa [Tib. སྲེག་ཤིང་པ]. So three of the sons remained in the family and one was sent as a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a>. At that time, my maternal uncle, the shabsur, didn't have any children, so at that time Shelkar Lingpa's [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་གླིན་པ] Gombo Wangchug [Tib. མགོན་པོ་དབང་ཕྱུག], who was related to Lungshar, shared their livelihood. My maternal uncle was knowledgeable in writing and the 13th Dalai Lama also regarded him highly and appointed him as the head of Phari Dzong. But he didn't behave well and he was sent to Powo Chödzog [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་ཆོས་རྫོང]. Since the shabsur didn't have sons, Gombo Wangchug shared his livelihood with him. This was the time when Lungshar was at his zenith. They told my paternal aunt and her family, "We are serving the government and you are enjoying the things in the estate and using the pastures." Then they seized my uncle and said that they were going to lash him and did all kinds of reckless things and they also drove their animals away from the pasture and told them that they were not allowed to use the pastures and water, except the water near their house gate and the hay that they had inside the house. At that time, we had all the documents. Although my father didn't have a good living condition, he was very knowledgeable. So my parents submitted a petition to the 13th Dalai Lama in Lhasa and complained that they were making us suffer like this. We had a lot of land tenure documents to prove ownership of the land because we had served at the border during the border dispute with the Nepalese. In the Iron-Monkey Year, one of my maternal relatives took a magpa called <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] from Sikkim Yümai [Tib. ཡུལ་སྨད] and they held all of our estates and it was said that all of the relatives should belong to Sikkim. In that year we submitted a petition saying, "If the government gives the land to the Sikkimese, we don't want to be Sikkimese so please allow us to move to another place that belongs to the government." In the Wood-Tiger Year, a ruling was made on our petition saying, "The government gave them the land because they said they belonged to Sikkim on the border. Now you, Gyankhar Nangpa, can take the ownership of the estate as long as you provide the civil and the military taxes." At that time only the Taring [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] family said that they belonged to Sikkim. All the others belonged to the government. The present Taring became a lay official through his relations with Tsarong, although he belonged to Sikkim. As for the law case between us, the shabsur about how Gombo Wangchug made us suffer, we submitted the petition and the approval was issued in the Wood-Tiger Year. We wrote in the petition, "We have been an old government official family and we have many relatives like Horkhang. When there was the trouble with Sikkim, we submitted a petition and requested to belong to the government and we are still serving the government. The bridegroom Tsewang Gyentsen [Tib. ཚེ་དབང་རྒྱལ་མཚན] took ownership of the estate called Treding [Tib. བཀྲས་ལྡིང]. Furthermore, Tsipungshar made his relative Shelkar Lingpa Gombo Wangchug share his livelihood with us and they controlled all the pastures and our animals didn't have pastures to graze and had to borrow pastures in Yülha [Tib. ཡུལ་ལྷ]." At that time, the former Dalai Lama appointed the Gusung Depön Nanggar [Tib. སྣང་དཀར] as the investigator and the Dalai Lama told him, "I sent many edicts saying that whoever has seized the estates of the old government official families should return them. So you should do the investigation as soon as possible by talking with the local <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> and people." When Nanggar started to investigate the case, the shabsur side was very powerful. Therefore, Nanggar asked for leave from the investigation. So the two Gadrung <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> and Dumkhang [Tib. ལྡུམ་ཁང] were appointed as the investigators. Dumkhang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> were brothers from the same parents.   

**Q:**  Was that the same <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོན་ཤོད] The name of an aristocratic family.">Bönshö</a> who later became the shape?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Was that the present Dumkhang?   

**A:**  That was his father. Just after they started the investigation, the Dalai Lama passed away and Reting became the Regent. Then the two investigators made a plan and submitted it to the Regent and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> Tib. rgyal srid]. At that time, people involved in the [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a>] case were all in custody. There was the ex-[tsidrung] Shabsur Kongtrugla [Tib. ཀོང་ཕྲུག་ལགས], Phepola [Tib. བལ་པོ་ལགས], and Menri [Tib. སྨན་རི་བ]. There were almost half of the officials involved. When the government officials passed around the seal to be put on the document, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said, "I am not going to put the seal on it until I see the plan." They said, "It is a common affair [Tib. སྤྱི་དོན]." Like this Lukhangwa didn't put the seal on it and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a> [Tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] also didn't put the seal. After that, Trimön and Lukhangwa held a meeting with Reting. When the Lungshar party was holding their meeting, the clerk was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> Two days before they were going to arrest them [Trimön] since Kapshöba and Trimön were close, Kapshöba went to Trimön that night and said, "This is the reason why they are making a lot of documents. It was decided to arrest the Regent, Trimön and Lukhangwa." Kapshöba had composed many poems, but I won't be able to finish telling these things. Right after that, Trimön went to Lukhangwa and told him what Kapshöba had said and they said that we shouldn't leave it like this but should report it to the Regent. Lukhangwa went home and sent a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སམ་ཁྲ] The traditional rectangular wooden writing/message board. The message was written on the polished, blackened surface of the wood that was covered with a white chalk. A stylus was used to clear away the chalk leaving the shape of the letters, which appeared black. It was usually about 12-14 inches long and 2 inches wide. There was a lower board on which the messages were written and a top board which served as the cover. In many cases there were several additional writing boards between these two.">samtra</a> message to Reting telling him that the [Lungshar] party was probably plotting like this. "So if you remain like this," the message said, "it won't good. You should go to Drepung Phodrang." I also sent a samtra to the silön telling him to go to Drepung." And then they called a few trustworthy officials from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</a>, namely the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a> and the Tsipön Lukhangwa and the drungtsi took the main seal [Tib. སྤྱི་དམ] of the Tsondu and all of them ran away to Drepung Phodrang [Tib. ཕོ་བྲང]. When the four of them gathered in Drepung, as for Lukhangwa, he was really like Manjushri [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་དབྱངས] and the Dharma King Songtsen Gambo [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སྲོང་བཙན་སྒམ་པོ], but later they didn't use him well in India. You can't find a person like him. Then they called the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a> of the regiments and they got their weapons prepared. After that, they sent a notice saying, "The Tsondu gyendzom will be held on the next day and the representatives led by the Magji Tsondzin [Tib. དམག་སྤྱི་འཚོ་འཛིན] Tsipön Lungshar all have to attend the meeting." So all people were saying that there might be an important matter at the meeting. On the next day, the order was issued to the special bodyguards, the soldiers, the trustworthy Simgag and the tsendrön that "...if [Lungshar] counterattacks, just kill him." After that, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཇ] The daily meeting of Tibetan government monk officials (tsedrung) at which tea was provided. However, unlike the collective meetings of monks in monasteries, there was no collective chanting of prayers at the Drungja. The event started at around 9 a.m. and lasted for about an hour. When the Tse ga (the Dalai Lama&#x27;s Secretariat) was in the Potala, it was held there, and when it was in the Norbulinga Summer Palace, it was held there. All monk officials in Lhasa were expected to attend.">drungja</a> was held. Then the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a>, who was probably Phünraba [Tib. ཕུན་རབ་བ], came along and called Lungshar to the Tsondu gyendzom. At that time, in the place where we were seated, the tsipön were there and there were over thousand people assembled. Right at that time, Lungshar ran away towards the back gate of the Potala but the Dakpo [Tib. དྭགས་པོ] Simgag seized him by his hair knot [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག] and beat him up and brought him to the Regent's room. Then he was imprisoned in Shö bedding [Tib. ཞོལ་དཔལ་ལྡིང] and his house was sealed. At that time, I was a staff officer on the construction of the Trisam [Tib. ཁྲི་ཟམ] Bridge project although I had not joined the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩིས་ཁང] The Tax Accounting Department of the traditional Tibetan government. It was in charge of accounting for the barley taxes sent from the dzongs and estates that belonged to the government. It was also half of the Trungtsigye Council that was often consulted by the Kashag and that headed Tibetan assembly meetings.">tsikhang</a> and my late father was there. This was just a result of the karmic law of cause and effect. In the verdict issued for our law case it was written that I could join the Tsikhang before the 11th month. So I joined the Tsikhang and I became a lay official.   

**Q:**  [Jinpa] I heard that there were two oaths in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> Party: an internal one and an external one. It was said that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> said that he saw both of the oaths when the Kashag questioned him Is that correct?   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was demoted and imprisoned in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a> [Tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོག]. I saw Kapshöba when he was demoted. He was wearing a blue Tsechuma [Tib. ཚལ་ཕྱུ་མ], a kind of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> with openings on both sides. He was barefooted when they brought him down to Sharchenjog.   

**Q:**  There was a clerk in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> named Chagnang [Tib. ཕྱག་ནང] who was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མག་པ] A groom who moved matrilocally at marriage to the household of his bride and became part of her household. In Tibet, the normal custom was the opposite, i.e., women moved to the households of their husband at marriage.">magpa</a> in my home. At that time he told me that he was the person who brought <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> to the prison after his hair knot was untied. He said that at that time, Kapshöba told him, "Clerk! I am a person like a lump of glass washed with milk." [Tib. ཤེལ་གོང་འོ་མས་བཀྲུས་པ] [this means completely innocent]   

**A:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> was very smart. Now probably he is dead.   

**Q:**  He was still there [in Tibet] last year. I heard it on a broadcast from Lhasa. Is it true that the Kashag issued the verdict? [Also] Regarding the military organization under the 13th Dalai Lama, what was the condition of that? What was the reason for Drönyerchemmo Ara Garpo [Tib. ཨ་ར་དཀར་པོ] disliking him?   

**A:**  I can't say anything about what the Dalai Lama did because he is all knowing one [Tib. ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ]. There was also the incident between the Tibetan Government and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> Labrang. It was mainly caused by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> and Ara Garpo. There were political mistakes. Actually, the former Panchen Lama was a very good lama but there were mistakes. Bodhisattvas [Tib. བྱང་འཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ] won't make many mistakes. This is because we sentient beings have too much delusion. It was the result of the karmic law of cause and effect. So there was not much to blame others.   

**Q:**  It was said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of Lhundrup Dzong [Tib. ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང] was killed by Sera monks.   

**A:**  He was from the Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] household. At that time, I was a government official and I just heard about it. Anyway, I did not pay attention to it.   

**Q:**  During the Reting war, a bomb exploded in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་འབུམ་སྒང] A famous monk official of the Trunyichemmo rank.">Gyambumgang</a> [Tib. རྗེ་འབུམ་སྒང] Drunyichemmo's house, right?   

**A:**  It was said that the bomb exploded and that the bomb was sold by the horse trader <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ] The Potala Palace.">Tse</a> Tobgye [Tib. ཚེ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས]. Another <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> was also involved in that.   

**Q:**  It was said that the bomb was sent by Nyungne Lama [Tib. སྙུང་གནས་བླ་མ]. Is that true?   

**A:**  It was also said that the lay official Horsur Shönpa [Tib. ཧོར་ཟུར་གཞོན་པ] was involved in that.   

**Q:**  Tell about Reting asking for help from the Guomindang and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་མགྲོན་ལོ་གསུམ] The three monk officials (mkhan chung, rtse mgron, and lo rtsa ba) sent to Beijing during the Qing Dynasty by the Tibetan government to teach the Qing royal family written Tibetan so they could read prayer books. They also performed rituals for the royal family. After the Qing dynasty fell, the Tibetan government continued to station three such monk officials in Beijing where they functioned as a Bureau Office for the Tibetan government in China.">Khendrönlosum</a> sending the telegram? How did Reting establish the military?   

**A:**  I don't have any idea about Reting and the military.   

**Q:**  I mean the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</a> Regiment where <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>?   

**A:**  I don't remember that.   

**Q:**  When they interrogated Reting in the Tsondu, were you there and what did Reting confess?   

**A:**  Yes. This was a big error [Tib. སྐྱོན་ཆེན་པོ]. I was not at the meeting as I was standing as a prison guard [Tib. སྲུང་བྱ] at the top of Sharchenjog. The main prison guards were Tsidrung Phepo [Tib. རྩེ་དྲུང་བལ་པོ] and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལུང་ཤར] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official during the time of the 13th Dalai Lama and the Regent Reting.">Lungshar</a> Porkyok. My late father had recognized the reincarnation of Reting. This lama was a marvelous lama. Reting was born in 7th month in Dakpo Kurab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> [Tib. དྭགས་པོ་སྐུ་རབ་རྣམ་རྒྱལ]. There was a very heavy snowfall and after that when the snow on the mountain melted, 32 letters of "ra" where the snow didn't melt appeared. The letters remained there for 2-3 days. At that time, my late father submitted a report to the former Dalai Lama about this happening and he told my father, "A great Lama has born, so you should inquire about this."   

**Q:**  At that time, what was your father's position?   

**A:**  He was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</a> of Dakpo Gyatsa [Tib. རྒྱ་ཚ]. Then we were told to search for the reincarnation. At that time there was a poor couple living in the stable of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> who gave birth to a son there. My father's wife said that a strange baby was born down there at sunrise this morning. I heard that the baby sat upright just after it was born. There were many things to tell you about this. It was too bad that it happened like this [to Reting]. The family was very poor and they were just eating the leftover food of the people in the dzong. After that my father told them not to leave the baby like this. They should keep it clean. My father brought the baby up and kept it in the dzong and took good care of it. After about 6 months, the baby became extraordinary. So my father reported this to the Dalai Lama and the Dalai Lama told my father that this was the reincarnation of Reting Lama. "You should take good care of him and keep him there. I will send people soon to recognize him." One day the boy said, "Today, the monks will come from the monastery. So I have to make a place for tying the horses." His parents asked him, "How could the monks be coming?" Then the boy used some tree branches and stuck pegs in a rock.   

**Q:**  Could people see these later?   

**A:**  Yes. Then when the people came to receive him, he walked along the river side and there were self appearing [Tib. རང་བྱོན] images of the 21 Tara on the pebbles. Then my father picked up a pebble and gave it to the boy and he squeezed it and water came out from the pebble. After that, the monks of Reting came to recognize the reincarnation and they held the ceremony. One day they made soup in a clay pot in the boy's home. When the soup over-flowed, the boy used his belt and tied the mouth of the clay pot. We can even see this pot nowadays.   

**Q:**  I heard that this clay pot was put in the golden stupa Gelek Dönjö [Tib. གསེར་སྡོང་དགེ་ལེགས་འདོད་འཇོ] where the remains of the 13th Dalai Lama were kept.   

**A:**  At that time the clay pot was brought to Lhasa and kept in the Namgen [Tib. རྣམ་གན] storeroom in the Potala.   

**Q:**  That is definitely true.   

**A:**  I don't know about the Tsondu where Reting was interrogated because I was one of the prison guards at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཤར་ཆེན་ལྕོགས] The prison used for political prisoners in traditional Tibet that was located in the east wing of the Potala Palace.">Sharchenjog</a>, but all of a sudden one night something happened. They were talking about the medicine and so on. On that night, at about 3.30 a.m., when we were standing on guard at the top of the prison, I heard Reting screaming, "Oh!" This was certain. I was there on the top of the Sharchenjog and Reting was shut in a monk's apartment. I was sort of stunned and when I went to look, [tsidrung] Phepo was coming out. I asked him, "Where are you going?" He said, "Something happened to the old monk [Tib. བླ་རྒན་གཅིག་བྱས་སོང]. I am going to report it to the Tsondu." And he ran over there.   

**Q:**  I heard that Reting confiscated an estate that belonged to Tsidrung Phepo so he held a grudge against Reting. The lay official Porkyok was also demoted from the post of depön. That's why they appointed them as the prison guards. I also heard from the watchman of the Trede Legung [Tib. འཕྲལ་བདེ་ལས་ཁུངས] who was called Trede Abo, that he heard Reting screaming just as you said. But they were saying that Reting just died normally. Later, Phepo was appointed as the head of Dzonga Dzong [Tib. རྫོང་དགའ]. He was there when the war took place. I met Phepo at Kyangthang Naga [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་ན་ག] in Lhasa in 1958 when he and the lay official Draktön [Tib. བྲག་ཐོན] were departing from Lhasa. They definitely killed Reting.   

**A:**  After that, Reting's body was handed over to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཞི་སྡེ] The monastery/labrang of Reting Rimpoche in Lhasa.">Shide</a> Monastery. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> and another official went to Shide to hand over the body. Probably there were two drungtsi. Reting was really was an inconceivable lama with great merit and power.   

**Q:**  At that time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡེ་འཆང] A title some Labrang used for their managers/stewards.">dechang</a> and the steward [of Reting] were called to receive the body. I heard this from them because the two of them were slightly related to me and were from Tölung [Tib. སྟོད་ལུང]. I heard that at that time when they brought down the body of Reting, my mother told them, "They told you to come to receive the body. But what is left to receive? It is already finished." She told me, "There wasn't any wound or cut, so probably they killed him." Since then, the merit [Tib. བསོད་ནམས] of the Tibetan society declined, right?   

**A:**  Yes, since then we were ruined.   

**Q:**  Yes, since then we became degenerate and this became worse year by year.   

**A:**  Yes, you are right.   

**Q:**  When Reting was alive, it was like the golden era [Tib. བསྐལ་པ་རྫོགས་ལྡན] and we were very happy, right?   

**A:**  Yes, after he became the Regent, Tibet became very prosperous. During the time of the Reting regency, things were done according to the traditions from the 5th Dalai Lama, for example, how the tea pots were placed in a line when the morning tea ceremony was held. Then the monk servant of Reting would come and pick up one of the teapots and serve the tea starting from the Regent, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> and the kalön. After that, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> cooks of the Dalai Lama and some ordinary tsidrung would take the teapots and serve all the officials. So from the top -- from the Regent, down to the ordinary officials, the tea was the same quality. Reting had very good knowledge about the scriptures, but his handwriting was not that good. Silön <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> [Tib. གླང་མདུན] was very knowledgeable and was the manifestation of Manjushri. He had a self-appearing letter A on his feet and that's why he was limping. But Reting didn't get along with him and made him resign. That was a mistake that Reting made. At that time, I was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག་པ] An official of the &quot;ordinary&quot; rank (tib. དཀྱུས་མ) who served as a bodyguard for the Kalön and Sitsab. They did not carry guns, but carried a whip and preceded the ministers when they were traveling outside the office.">gagpa</a> in the Kashag.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> looks like he was doing things carelessly [Tib. ཐོ་ལོང་མོ་ལོང], but actually, he wasn't like that.   

**A:**  I heard that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said in the Tsondu, "We don't need a Regent. One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> will be okay. If people want to adhere to the law there is no difference whether there are two people or one person." When the silön said that we need a Regent, Lukhangwa said, "If so, the 13th Dalai Lama gave his personal daily use belongings [Tib. ཉེ་ཆས] like corals to Reting and the Dalai Lama had the idea for Reting to become the Regent." This means that Reting would be in accordance with the current situation [to be the Regent]. Reting was confirmed as a Regent in this way. It was not just that some people insisted that Reting should be the Regent. After that, there were both the Regent and the silön, and it was quite good. Basically, in Lukhangwa's comments, there wasn't anything that should be discarded [Tib. དབྱུགས་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ]. When the Chinese said that they came to Tibet to help the Tibetans and that the Chinese and Tibetans should be friendly, Lukhangwa said, "It is impossible for the Chinese and the Tibetans to become friendly just after they fought and shed blood." When the Chinese told Lukhangwa that Tibet was part of China, he said, "If so, the Tibetan King Songtsen Gambo [Tib. སྲོང་བཙན་སྒམ་པོ] took the Chinese Princess Wangchen as his wife. So would it be possible that the princess would be given as a bride to their servant? Thui! You are really disgraceful." When the Chinese told Lukhangwa that they came to Tibet and they would go back to China after Tibet could stand on its own feet, Lukhangwa said, "It has been a thousand years since we first stood on our own feet and till now we have been standing on own feet. I don't know what help the Chinese gave to Tibet, but I see that the price of the butter and barley has gone up more than ten times." He was really like a diamond, but later though the Dalai Lama regarded him highly [Tib. གཟིགས་པ་གནང], the government didn't use people like him. So they became like horses in the inner stable of the Dalai Lama. After that, the Dalai Lama had to make the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> resign and then everything was finished.   

