# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0112.01   
##  : with Liu Shaoming (and wife)  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** China  
**Date of Interview:** 30 April 1999  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anononymous  
**Name:** Liu Shaoming  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 60  
**Date of Birth:** 1939  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Liu Shaoming was a graduate of the Beijing College of Politics and Law who did his graduate student work in Tibet. He discusses his experience at the General Office of the Regional Party Committee and the start of the Cultural Revolution. He talks about the Cultural Revoluion in Lhasa and the conflcits between the many of the Party officials and the red guards who initially came from interior China. He also discusses the creation of the Da Lian Zhi (Great Alliance) revolutionary group in 1967 and how he became its leader, as well as the important study class in Beijing that he was required to attend to try to end the conflict. He also talks about the conflict that occurred when Hu Yaobang came to Tibet in 1980. And he mentions his role in the Revolutionary Committee and in the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0112_01/H_0112_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  You just graduated at that time and were ready to...?   

**A:**  I graduated from the Beijing College of Politics and Law (Ch. Beijing Zheng Fa Xue Yuan), which is now the Central University of Politics and Law (Ch. Zhong Yang Zheng Fa Da Xue).   

**Q:**  What was your major?   

**A:**  I was in the Law Department. According to the policy of our country at that time, the school retained ten people to continue with graduate study after graduation from college. I was one of them. My wife, Wei Su, stayed at the school, working at the Youth League Committee. At that time, Premier Zhou received that year's graduates in Beijing at the Great Hall of the People. Foreign Minister Chen Yi gave a lecture on the current situation. The Premier gave a lecture to the graduates. He said that our country was under construction and in need of real talent, and that young people with aspiration should go to the difficult places and remote regions. After I came back from the lecture, I went to the Party Committee of the school and insisted on going to Tibet. Tibet was undergoing democratic reform at that time, and I heard that they needed cadres from the interior area. There were already four people being assigned to Tibet. I insisted on being assigned there too. In the beginning, the Party Committee did not agree. We went directly to the dean. The dean did not approve, saying that people were needed here, too, and the cadres for Tibet had already been assigned. "You two stay here." The dean did not listen to us, so we went to the Party Secretary. He saw that we were really determined (and said) "Go." Two (of the four) were replaced. We had nothing with us and took off in an open vehicle.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  August 1961. (We left for Tibet) from Liuyuan. I almost died when crossing the Tanggula Pass. At that time, there was no special treatment. We knew nothing, wrote a report and left (for Tibet.) We traveled in an open vehicle for six days. I was in a state of unconsciousness when crossing the Tanggula Pass and did not recover until Amdo. I stayed (in Tibet) till retirement.   

**Q:**  Who received you after you arrived at Lhasa?   

**A:**  We got off at Liushahe-the place where restaurants and hotels like the Lhasa Hotel were under construction. That place used to be called Liushahe and was a stretch of sand. A tent was set up there. When the vehicle arrived, the driver said, "Here is Lhasa, this is the tent for liaison, go and talk to them." There was a woman and a telephone in the tent. I told her that we came from Beijing, and had been assigned to work in Tibet after graduation from college and needed to report to the Organizational Department (Ch. Zu Zhi Bu) of the Regional Party Committee. She said, "Here is the telephone, you can call them." I called the General Office A woman named Li Yingxiu at the General Office (Ch. Ban Gong Ting) came to greet us with a pushcart.... We settled down in a tent... She introduced us to the Organizational Department (Ch. Zu Zhi Bu) of the Party Committee to report to work. At that time, a woman called Qi Fen, wife of Zhang Jun of the Political Department (Ch. Zheng Zhi Bu), received us when we reported to work. We were kept at the General Office. At that time, the Regional Party Committee set up an Zheng Ce Yan Jiu Shi , and I stayed at the Zheng Ce Yan Jiu Shi.   

**Q:**  Of the people who went to Tibet in the same vehicle as you, how many were from Beijing?   

**A:**  Just two of us.   

**Q:**  Were there only two of you from Beijing?   

**A:**  No, there were other people. They went their own way. We went there by ourselves. There were two others from the College of Politics and Law. They went there first. We didn't go there together. There was no one organizing this.   

**Q:**  Where were you assigned to work?   

**A:**  The Regional Party Committee set up the Office for the Study of Policies (Ch. Zheng Ce Yan Jiu Shi) under the General Office (Ch. Ban Gong Ting). My wife was at the Secretariat of the Regional Party Committee. Later, the Office for the Study of Policies did not do work, and I began to work on a Party publication.... At that time, the Party Committee of every province had a publication. It was called "Work in Tibet" (Xi Zang Gong Zuo). There were two people working on the publication, Zhao Wenzhi and me.   

**Q:**  The person who later became Secretary General (Ch. Mi Shu Zhang)?   

**A:**  Yes. We two worked on Work in Tibet. Only two of us, (doing everything from) editing to proofreading. After working at the Party publication for a few years, I then worked at the General Office (Ch. Ban Gong Ting) of the Regional Party Committee. The director (of the Ban Gong Ting) at that time was Qing Guangxin. He has already died. In the beginning, Li Yingxiu and I, the two of us, took care of the General Office. At that time, all the departments of the Party Committee were located in the courtyard of the General Office. The departments of propaganda, organization, and labor were all in that courtyard. In the beginning, it was Lao Gong Wei ), which is now Jing Ji Wei It was not that big at that time; it was later expanded. Later, it moved to the foot of the hill. The relocation began in 1964. The General Office had a weekly meeting. The secretary took care of the letters and visitations from the people. I also took care of the personnel files. Only one person, Li Yingxiu, worked on the classified documents. Later, Wang Qi, Liu Shiyi, and Xiao Tiyan (worked at the General Office). Xiao Tiyan worked for a short period of time. There were just two people at the General Office for several years. Liu Shiyi was added later. There were three people at the General Office until the Cultural Revolution (started).   

**Q:**  What did you do after this was finished?   

**A:**  Then it was the Cultural Revolution. I was sent to Xue Xi Ban   

**Q:**  When were you sent to the Xue Xi Ban?   

**A:**  In 1971.   

**Q:**  Where were you in the year when the Cultural Revolution just broke out and a directive was issued? (Were you) at the General Office?   

**A:**  During the years when I was at the General Office the Autonomous Region was founded in 1965, and city construction started. The Regional Party Committee set up a City Construction Headquarters. Guo Xilai was the commander, Qiu Jiaqing was the deputy commander. Zhao Wenzhi and I were sent to work at the Office of City Construction. What did we do? One street in Lhasa, the People's Road. It's one or two kilometers long. (We) built the Cultural Palace and the cinema. The cinema was burned down and restored. (We also built) the post office, the Museum of Tibet, and the No. 1 Guesthouse. Some of them were built in celebration of the founding of the Autonomous Region. Prior to that, we built the Sino-Nepal Highway. The Hubei Shengli Art Troupe, led by Secretary Qiu, visited (the construction workers), and I was with them for a couple of months. After the City Construction Headquarters was finished and the Autonomous Region was founded, the "three line construction" [The Chinese is San Xian Jian She. It's a national defense project.] started. A headquarter was set up in Nyintri for the "three line construction." Guo Xilai was the commander, Ma Guishu, Li Zhenglin, and the like (were also at the headquarters.) Zhao Wenzhi and I were also transferred to the 101 Construction Headquarters of the Nyintri Prefecture Party Committee. Later, we went to Chamdo. In the beginning, we were in Nyintri. The leaders, once they get used to someone, will use the same person whatever they do. It's especially true with Secretary Qiu, Qiu Jiaxi. He had a short temper, and someone wrote some letters about him... About the 101 Headquarters. The Regional Party Committee had a meeting in Nyintri. Zhang Guohua convened an expanded regional Party meeting and worked there for a period of time. Then it was the Cultural Revolution. In 1965, red guards from the interior areas went all the way to our place at Headquarter 101 in Nyintri. It started with Seng Lin Gong Shi [Note: Seng Lin means "forest"; Gong Shi can be a project, a military offensive or a company depending on the tone of the phrase. It's not clear what he means here. It may be a project in this context.]The director of the forest farm was under attack and in very bad shape. There were three construction teams in our area. They also wanted to do chuanlian [Note: Red guards traveled from one place to another to set up ties during the Cultural Revolution. It's known as "Chuanlian"] and fan up the flames. They criticized people in my office as Dang Quan Pai [Note: People in power, referring to bureaucrats holding top government posts. They were the major targets of criticism in the early stage of the Cultural Revolution.]. Because the leaders were not there, we couldn't work.   

**Q:**  Do you remember if the first Red Guards were from the Beijing Aeronautic College, like Nie Chong? It's not clearly stated in the history of the Party. How many of them were there and how did they go there? Do you remember that?   

**A:**  Not clearly. I was not in Lhasa at the beginning (of the Cultural Revolution). Not until early February 1967 did I come to Lhasa. I was in Nyintri then.   

**Q:**  Which group of Red Guards went to Nyintri?   

**A:**  It seems like they were from Beijing University or Beijing Aeronautic College. I am not clear. There was also a Hong Zhao Tuan from the Nationalities College. They were there to open the lid on the class struggle, the class struggle in Tibet. When the Nong Nu Ji came, I was already in Lhasa. They were attacking Zhang Guohua and the Regional Party Committee. () Nong Nu Ji was there targeting Hong Zhao Tuan.   

**Q:**  You went to Lhasa in February 1967. How did you get in contact with them? You were away from Lhasa for a while. I am wondering what really happened about their attacks on Zhang Guohua, and etc?   

**A:**  When I was back to Lhasa, there was already an atmosphere of the Cultural Revolution. The General Office of the Regional Party Committee was also divided into two groups.   

**A:**  Which two groups?   

**A:**  One group was called Bin Tuan of the Regional Party Committee, the other group was Zhao Zong (Gyenlo) .   

**Q:**  That was the group of Tao Changsong?   

**A:**  Yes, they were already organized and quite influential. At that point of time, Da Lian Zhi was not organized yet. The headquarters were dispersed. The Regional Party Committee set up Bin Tuan. Another well-known group in Lhasa was called "Headquarters of Safeguarding Mao Zedong Thought," also known as "Han Zong."   

**Q:**  Which work unit did it belong to?   

**A:**  Wen Hua Xi Tong At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, Wen Hua Xi Tong, such as press, was first involved. Wen Hua Xi Tong set up the Headquarter of Safeguarding Mao Zedong Thought.   

**Q:**  Who was the leader? Who were the main figures?   

**A:**  A person called Shi something, a very thin person from the Bureau of Culture and there were Zhang Youming and Li Jina. Li Jina is dead. They protected Jin Sha and the people in power (Dang Quan Pai) in the Bureau of Culture .   

**Q:**  Protected Jin Sha?   

**A:**  Uh, yes. Other party committees also set up (similar organizations).   

**Q:**  Which groups were the most influential?   

**A:**  In the beginning, it was Zhao Zong and Han Zong. Han Zhong was the first one. Later, Da Lian Zhi was established. In the beginning, Zhao Zong and the red guards from the interior areas were very powerful. (Red Guards were) beating up people. They had nowhere to stay, not at the newspaper, not at the hospital, and had to leave ( Red guards from the interior areas wanted to destroy the printing house of the Party Committee--the printing house of the General Office. Later, the Central Commitee (Ch. Zhong Yang) sent in the army. It was printing the publications of the Party Committee at that time. They thought that was a black den of Zhang Guohua and wanted to destroy it. The people of the General Office went in more than a dozen vehicles to protect the printing house.   

**Q:**  When was that? 1967?   

**A:**  In January or February. At that time, the staff of the Regional Party Committee established Bin Tuan for this sake. They were not organized in the beginning. Some young people of the Classified Documents Department of the Regional Party Committee joined with the red guards from the interior area and Zhao Zong. They tried to mobilize me to get files out of the General Office (Ban Gong Ting) (so that they can) write big-character posters about all the major leaders. I definitely refused. That was out of the question. I was a secretary and knew the potential impact. I heard that they later tried to break into the Archives Office of the Regional Party Committee. It's said that they already got the word out about Ahpei's [Ngabö's] problem. They also made a case against Wang Qimei. At that time, the Archives Office was at the Regional Party Committee. When they were trying to destroy the printing house, the cadres of the General Office were organized to defend the archives Office and the printing house. When they went there, some cadres and their family members laid down at the gate and said, "Run over us if you want to get in." They dared not to do that.   

**Q:**  Did the army intervene? Did the Tibet Military Command intervene?   

**A:**  Not in the beginning. Later, it was reported to Zhong Yang . Zhong Yang sent in the army, forbidding them to destroy it.   

**Q:**  Zhou Chongshan and Wang Qimei were there, and there was also Zhang Guohua above them. Among the three of them, which group did they support? I heard that Zhou Chongshan seemed to support Zhao Zong.   

**A:**  Zhang Guohua was the target when they were attacking the Regional Party Committee. The Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution had a directive at that time to the effect that those who were attacked should volunteer to stand out for the criticism of the masses. They asked leaders to behave that way. Therefore, the more people attacked you, the more supportive you should be of them. That was the theory. So, Zhang Guohua supported the red guards from the interior area. We did not agree with destroying the Regional Party Committee and attacking Zhang Guohua. Zhang Guohua criticized us as being conservative. "You should let them come to me," that was his idea. We thought different. We were working with the leaders in the government departments. We could not stand to allow one leader being criticized today and another leader being attacked tomorrow. Zhou Chongshan was with us in the beginning. Later, because the red guards from the interior area wanted to destroy the Regional Party Committee, we went to Zhou Chongshan and said, "Secretary Zhou, you can not support those people at this time." I heard that he wrote a note in support (of the red guards) seizing power from the Regional Party Committee.   

**Q:**  Did he write a note to Zhao Zong; To Tao Changsong?   

**A:**  He wrote it to the red guards from the interior area. I'm not sure who he wrote to. We said, "How could you support them? Why are they right and we are wrong? As the secretary of the Party Committee, how could you give the power to them? It's not right. How could you give the power of the Communist Party to the red guards?" He said the rebels (Zhao zong -- Gyenlo) should be supported. He was with us in the beginning and was supportive of us. We don't know why all of a sudden he wrote them a note, supporting them. Several of us went to him and said, "You are in charge of the work and we rely on you as the leader. If you act that way, what about us subordinates?" People from all sides wanted his support at that time. The local people were also not happy. "Zhou Chongshan betrayed us." Some of the masses made trouble for him, saying, "You are not a good person." He also said that other leaders could be taken out (as the targets of criticism.) So Guo Xilai was picked out. At that time, people had many opinions against Guo Xilai, saying that he is like a monk chanting sutras when he talked about Mao Zedong's thought. "People will even be fed up with meat if they eat a lot of it." In fact, the remarks make sense when being reflected upon. Who could stand reading quotes (of Mao) like that every day? But then, it's very evil to say things like that. So, Guo Xilai was put on the spot in the beginning. We had been working under Guo Xilai. He had been working there for many years and was a pillar. Zhou Chongshan was of an advanced age and sometimes stayed in the interior area. Guo Xilai worked in Tibet for many years. He worked very hard and was very pragmatic.   

**Q:**  When did Zhou Chongshan come to Tibet?   

**A:**  About 1963. From Inner Mongolia. He was mature, stable and capable. For example, when it came to the theory at the Party class, it was Zhou Chongshan who taught it. He was a good teacher and had a rather high credibility. People had a good impression of him. During the Cultural Revolution, we still always treated him as the Party Secretary and protected him. It was because of the note he wrote... The same with Zhang Xinming, supporting the red guards from the interior areas. We resented the red guards from the interior areas at that time. Why do we need you to come to Tibet to fan up the fire and tell us what to do with the Cultural Revolution? Why do we need you to be our savior and tell us what to do? Although I don't know much about Tibet, you are from the interior area and what do you know about Tibet? Tibet is an ethnic region and has its own characteristics. Tibet is an ethnic as well as a border area, can it be treated the same way as the interior area? That will throw it into chaos. There is an ethnic issue in Tibet. What do you students from the interior area know about it? We are the secretaries in the government departments and not young students and we work with the Party Committee. We had different modes of thinking and needed to take into consideration these issues and couldn't do whatever you wanted us to do. That's how the contradiction formed.   

**Q:**  Of the students from Beijing, who do you have the deepest memory of, besides Nie Chong?   

**A:**  Nobody. I didn't have any contact with them.   

**Q:**  How about arguing with them?   

**A:**  I didn't argue with them. They were in Lhasa and we were at the Regional Party Committee. There was a Han Zong and a Lian He Zong Bu . Those who had contact with them were the public health department , the culture and education system They attempted to break into the Party Committee and to no avail. (The Regional Party Committee) didn't give them a chance to go out to the street. Later, they began to expose the mistakes of Zhou Chongshan. He also made mistakes at the Regional Party Committee. You pointed out this mistake and that mistake, you Zhou Chongshan also had made mistakes. Don't you support the rebels in exposing problems? You were happy when you exposed other people's problems. Since you had mistakes, we would also like to expose yours and report on you. The other side, because he supported them in seizing power, publicly safeguarded him. So, the confrontation escalated. What did you just say? What about Wang Qimei? Wang Qimei was actually with us in the beginning. He was in support of us behind people. Zhou Weiguang was his secretary and was with us. Wang Qimei went to the interior area later. There was a telegram from Zhong Yang saying that he was a traitor. That side already considered him as a living dead at that time and didn't expect to get much out of him. Since Zhong Yang called his name, we collected some materials about him. Wang Qimei was at the Regional Party Committee, and they wanted to destroy the Regional Party Committee. How could he support them?   

**Q:**  Was it the Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution or ... that sent the telegram? Did the material come from Tibet or from Beijing?   

**A:**  I don't know. There was a telegram from Zhong Yang. There was a telegram here. It's the Central Committee of the Cultural Revolution. On January 24, 1968. That's how one side tried to protect Zhou Chongshan and the other side attacked him. When Da Lian Zhi (the Great Alliance) was doing something, Zhong Yang already made it clear and the Premier showed his attitude. Zhong Yang issued a "May 4 Directive" criticizing him and set up a special committee.   

**Q:**  What about Da Lian Zhi?   

**A:**  At that time, people wanted to destroy the printing house of the Regional Party Committee and ... archives of the Regional Party Committee. The Bin Tuan (Regiment) of the Regional Party Committee itself did not have enough manpower. The surrounding areas of Lhasa were also concerned about the Regional Party Committee. So they were organized so as to be stronger. Under those circumstance, ten separate organizations were...   

**A:**  Woman: At that time, the people of the Regional Party Committee were protecting the Archives Office. A whole row of rooms was used to store archives. It was called Archive Office at that time. In addition, people of the Regional Party Committee were protecting the printing house. They were much understaffed. Many people from other work units volunteered to come inside and help us out.   

**A:**  They know this, too.   

**A:**  Woman: I was in the courtyard at that time. They drove in in many vehicles, trying to take away the archives and destroy the printing press. The people against them were not clearly organized yet.   

**A:**  Man: No, not yet.   

**A:**  Woman: The people against them were defending. In addition, they wanted to drive out all the secretaries and parade them. We also needed to protect those small buildings. Have you been to those small buildings?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Woman: We needed to protect those small buildings and obviously we didn't have enough hands. Therefore, many people from various organizations, like workers and peasants' organizations, volunteered to go to the Regional Party Committee to lend a hand. Later, they came together gradually and thought that they should be united.   

**A:**  Only when united can we deal with them.   

**A:**  Woman: There was some Han Zong, Bin Tuan, and some Si Ling Bu . A lot of them. The situation was like that. Later, the seizing of power from the Regional Party Committee and the taking away of the archives became a catalyst and made them feel that they should be united.   

**Q:**  Do you remember when it was formally set up?   

**A:**  Da Lian Zhi was set up in February 1967.   

**Q:**  Was there any organization under it?   

**A:**  There were some people under it.   

**Q:**  What was the structure like, such as the division of work?   

**A:**  It was nothing but a mass organization, it had the division of work. There were a couple of offices.   

**A:**  Teacher Liu, as you know, both sides compiled something like a chronology of major events, I am wondering if you have something of that nature.   

**A:**  There was no chronology for this side, there was one by Zhao Zong. Do you have the chronology?   

**Q:**  No, I don't. When I was interviewing Tao Changsong, he said that they were all taken away. When I was interviewing Feng Keda the year before last, he said that there was such a thing. He said that everything was taken away, but his diaries were returned to him. I went to the Archives Office of the Party Committee to check it and saw only some newspapers. They said that it might have been burned or hidden in a corner.   

**A:**  You can go to the chronology compiled by Zhao Zong and find out what happened in Tibet during the Cultural Revolution. It is the chronology written by itself. The chronology says clearly what happened ... I regret very much about (the loss of) some materials. I relocated (several times) and went to Xue Xi Ban ... I was transferred down to local governments. After we got out of Xue Xi Ban, the army in support of the leftists began to criticize us as people standing in the wrong line. In Xue Xi Ban (The study class), my wife and I couldn't even talk to each other and stay together. They treated us that way.   

**Q:**  When was your first child born?   

**A:**  1962. The Premier received us. He asked us how we went to Tibet, what it was like and asked about our child.   

**Q:**  When was that?   

**A:**  1969 ... It was September 8, 1969 when the Premier made a speech to the Tibetan group reporting its work. It was after the Revolutionary Committee was established. The Revolutionary Committee criticized Da Lian Zhi--Liu, Zhao, Ma and Tashi--and published editorials.   

**Q:**  Could you tell me what their names are?   

**A:**  Liu Shaoming, Zhao Wengui, Tashi Pyindrol and Ma Junhua. Five editorials were published in a row.   

**A:**  There were nine editorials at that time.   

**A:**  The Tibet Daily published five editorials in a row criticizing Liu, Shao, Ma and Tashi. They said that Da Lian Zhi was standing on the wrong side and organized a Xue Xi Ban (Study class) in Baiding. I was taken to the meeting to receive criticism every day.   

**Q:**  What was it specifically about?   

**A:**  About the establishment of the Revolutionary Committee. Jiang Qing and Gang Sheng thought that Zhao Zong had the spirit of rebels.   

**Q:**  So they thought that Da Lian Zhi had the tendency of conservatism?   

**A:**  This group was conservative. So Zhong Yang was in support of them and put them in charge. Ren Rong was in support of this side and considered himself to be with the conservatives. In the beginning, the Premier meant to make Ren Rong the director. Later, Gang Sheng said something and Jiang Qing said something and suddenly the tone changed Zhong Yang would appoint someone to be the director of the Revolutionary Committee. Meanwhile, Ying Huatang was treated as a representative that suppressed one group in support of the other. He was director of the Political Department (Ch. Zheng Zhi Bu) at that time and leaned toward Da Lian Zhi. ... Probably it was Gang Sheng who said that Ying Huatang was wrong in supporting this group. So, within the army, it was Ying Huatang who was criticized, and outside the army, it was us who were criticized. We were criticized as being on the wrong side and not following the guidelines of the "Gang of Four." There was a lot talking about what Jiang Qing said. There were also masses on this side, and they were suppressed in their work units. Their leaders were out there, how could they not be under pressure? As a matter of fact, the people on this side joined us later. The number of people in Zhao Zong was dwindling and the number of people on this side was increasing. They include people from both inside and outside the army, in particular peasants and herdsmen, and residents from Lhasa. Their hearts were on our side.   

**A:**  A party member...   

**A:**  Woman: The Regional Party Committee knew that this was top secret, but they divulged it, so this led many people to be able to tell who was right and who was wrong.   

**A:**  Whether you are a Party member or not, you cannot do this. In that way, our Party was put in a passive situation and it was a disservice to Ahpei (Ngabö).   

**Q:**  Teacher Liu, did you ever directly confront teacher Tao Changsong?   

**A:**  We didn't directly confront each other. Later, we went to the same study class (Ch. Xue Xi Ban). When we were in Lhasa, he went his way and I went my way. We didn't have much contact with each other. Such things as negotiations and the stoppage of fighting were carried out by people under (us). Tao Changsong sometimes did it himself. I never presented myself in such situations. I was not willing to. I didn't want to be the leader. I didn't become the leader because of the rebellion. It was because of the secretaries around me. Because they were people in power (Ch. dang quan pai), they would be protecting themselves if they came forward. Then aren't they typical Bao Huang Lao ? I was then the secretary of the Regional Communist Youth League Committee at the General Office of the Regional Party Committee. I was also director of Jia Shu Sheng Chan Dui They thought that I was not an unscrupulous person. So they came to me again and again, mobilizing me to be the leader. That was what happened. After I became the leader, I didn't go to the talks and etc. Sometimes people would pick out some officials of the Party Committee and criticize them. They said that we were conservative. We were not conservative. We sometimes put up a show (by criticizing some officials). Even that I didn't attend. I never attended it once. Later, in the movement of rectifying the style of the Party, the investigation group went to Tao Changsong and asked him what Liu Shaoming had done. He said, "Liu Shaoming didn't do anything on this." When we were in the study class (Xue Xi Ban) in Beijing, we were sitting together (in the same room) and talking about such things as stopping fighting, alliance and reception by officials of Zhong Yang. He reported his part and I reported mine. There is not much going on between us. No bickering or arguing.   

**Q:**  When the first study class (Xue Xi Ban) was held in Beijing, Tao Changsong didn't talk about this until he was in Qinlin. Do you know this?   

**A:**  I heard about it later.   

**Q:**  Were you in that airplane?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  How did you come to the study class in Beijing?   

**A:**  Were we on the same airplane, Wei Su?   

**A:**  Woman: I don't know if we were on the same airplane. I heard that they put a big gauze mask over Zhou Chongshan's mouth. (L: I didn't know that.) He used an alias, someone else's name, when he went on board. They didn't disclose his identity to the army representative until they almost arrived at the destination. So, Zhou Chongshan was not put into the dormitory like the rest of us. He was put in a separate room. Da Lian Zhi was unhappy about this and the army representatives persuaded Da Lian Zhi by saying they didn't know he was coming.   

**A:**  As a matter of fact, it would have been better if he'd not come. His presence exacerbated the confrontation. He didn't know it, and insisted on mixing with them. The more they protected him, the happier he was. He unintentionally piqued the emotion of the masses on the other side.   

**A:**  Woman: It seems that Zhao Zong (General Headquarters of Rebels) didn't come in the same airplane as we did.   

**A:**  He was at the study class (Xue Xi Ban) of Zhong Yang. . We were surprised that he was there. We felt very strongly about it at that time. But we listened to the persuasion of the superiors.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in the study class?   

**A:**  Very long. In the beginning, one faction said this faction was conservative and wanted to brand them a conservative organization. Zhou Chongshan made the remarks when he reported to Zhong Yang. Premier (Zhou) said, "how can you say that they were born conservative? They have affection toward the Liberation Army and cadres. It's good. There were also masses on that side. It was not conducive to the stability of Tibet. That way, the masses on this side were depressed. They were both revolutionary masses."   

**Q:**  Where did the reception happen? At the Jingxi Hotel?   

**A:**  Only leaders of the Autonomous Region and the military command were received. The mass organizations did not attend it. (It was) on September 18, 1967.   

**A:**  Woman: Zhou Chongshan seemed to be at that reception and said that Da Lian Zhi was born conservative and there were too many Party members and free peasants and serfs in it. After that, Da Lian Zhi was officially regarded as a masses organization. .   

**Q:**  When did this happen?   

**A:**  Woman: As he said, it happened when they received the leaders.   

**Q:**  At Zhongnanhai or the Jingxi Hotel?   

**A:**  Woman: I don't know.   

**A:**  When we were in Chengdu looking for Zhang Guohua to reason with him, he met us only once and never saw us again. He told us, "You should rise with the rebels to expose the problems of the Regional Party Committee." That's what he said.   

**Q:**  (You) didn't support him?   

**A:**  No.   

**A:**  Woman: Also, they did something like "attack local lords," and we opposed it. They wrote something about "attack local lords" (Liu interrupted, "a bulletin."), we read it and it didn't make much sense.   

**A:**  I had a complete set of the materials, including newspapers and photos. A whole box of them.   

**Q:**  Were all burned?   

**A:**  Who dared to keep them? He was criticized again and again.   

**A:**  I was also a target of criticism during the rectification of the style of the Party for several years. I was in very bad shape.   

**A:**  Woman: He was criticized again and again.   

**A:**  Later, I was transferred down to the counties and relocated many times. Our whole family ... Two big boxes... I really really have regret regading those things. If they had existed, I need not say anything.   

**Q:**  Yes, it would be very clear.   

**A:**  Woman: From the viewpoint of historical materialism, there is nothing reactionary about those materials. They are records of history.   

**A:**  Hong Zao Bao of that side, the Feng Lei Ji Zhang Bao of this side, as well as originals, bulletins, things published by the newspaper about what's going on then. There were boxes of them and a whole box of photo negatives. They took pictures of what happened in Lhasa at that time. (The pictures were) very clear.   

**Q:**  So things can't be clarified. I have been to the picture archive of the Military Command and reference rooms. The newspapers are either burned or scattered. For the newspapers you just mentioned, only a few pages survived.   

**A:**  Woman: We had a complete collection of them.   

**A:**  Liu, Zhao, Ma, and Tashi were criticized as having captured the center. Why? Because we didn't attend the revolutionary committee. What did you attend the revolutionary committee for at that time? I was not willing to attend it. When the Great Alliance of Tibet (Note: The Chinese is Xi Zang Da Lian He) was set up, the Revolutionary Committee asked the heads from both sides to attend it. I said, I have completed my historic tasks. I didn't want to be the leader. It was all because of the secretaries. They said, "you go ahead." Later, the revolutionary committee was set up in Beijing and I was asked to attend. I laid in bed for three days. I said, I have completed my historic tasks, I quit. At that time, the Xue Xi Ban (Study class) of Zhong Yang didn't approve this. The leaders, including the military command and study class, came to talk to me one after another. "You are the head of Da Lian Zhi, if you don't attend, the masses will not approve." Zhong Yang also knew Liu Shaoming and Tao Changsong. "If you don't attend, how could that work?" They forced me into it. You set up the revolutionary committee and you lead it. You in the army support the leftists and the military command should do whatever you were supposed to do. What can we, the representatives of masses do in it? I was nobody but a government official. I was not a student who wants to be this or that. How can I work in it? Even if I was combined into it, I would not participate in your activities. Then they said that we were creating multi-centers, opposing the Revolutionary Committee. But when we went there, whenever they had a meeting, they would treat us as enemies standing in the wrong line... Why should we join it? We couldn't do anything. Therefore, we were sent to the Xue Xi Ban and continued to suffer. So, I insisted on leaving Lhasa and wouldn't attend any conferences of the Autonomous Region.   

**Q:**  Where did you go?   

**A:**  I went to Langkazi (Tib. ཎངཀརྩེ), in Lhoka. I was assigned to the Political Work Group . I said "no." I wouldn't work in any government department of Lhoka. Send me down to the counties. I want to do some real work. They said, "you're from Lhasa and are supposed to get some preferential treatment. How about working in a county nearby?" "No," I said. "I am going to the county with the most difficult conditions. I'm going to do some real work." So I went to Langkazi.   

**A:**  Woman: I'll give you a timetable and you'll see what role he played in the Revolutionary Committee. On which day of September 1968 was the Revolutionary Committee established? (Liu: September 5th.) After we came back to Lhasa from Beijing, the Revolutionary Committee was established. At the end of 1968, you were sent to Baiding for criticism. At Division 11. You were criticized for being conservative and standing in the wrong line. In 1969, you were sent to Xue Xi Ban for absolute criticism. (Liu: In 1970.) From 1969 till 1970. (You) graduated in 1970 and were reassigned to work. We were late. We were organized in companies and platoons. We were in Company 1, at the Worker's Rehabilitation Center in Nyingchi. We were in Platoon 1 of Company 1, because we were all with the General Office. We were in the same class, but we were not allowed to talk to each other. Later, he was moved to the headquarter for criticism.   

**A:**  They had a small study class, a study class in a study class. (The Xue Xi Ban was) at (the garrison of) the army in support of leftists.   

**A:**  Woman: When we were together, the army representatives basically treated him like a prisoner. But they treated people of Zhao Zong like cadres. They are people who worked on special cases, security, materials about Dang Quan Pai (People in power), and records of ours. We were all like prisoners, but he [Liu] was particularly so. No one was allowed to talk to him. (Liu:(I got) Criticism. Then went to the mountain to gather firewood.) He was the so-called deputy director of the Revolutionary Committee. You can imagine what he was like on the Committee. First he was sent to Baiding for criticism, later he was sent to the study class. Criticism among the masses is not enough, and so he was sent to the headquarters for criticism. After it was finished, he was reassigned to work in 1970. His attitude was to go to work in the county level. Lhasa is a place of trouble and factional fighting. Some people wanted to make trouble for him, so he left the place of trouble. So he was sent to Langkazi.   

**A:**  At that time, the Party Committee of Lhoka wanted to keep me at the Political Work Committee (Zheng Gong Zu), but I refused.   

**A:**  Woman: The (Lhoka) Branch of Military Command was in charge then. The Branch didn't participate in the things in Lhasa. It thought that he was well-educated and had worked well at the Regional Party Committee. He was head of the Party group and secretary of the Youth League. He was a somebody. So they wanted to keep him at the Political Work Committee. But he insisted on going down to the county, so he went to Langkazi.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay there?   

**A:**  More than a year.   

**Q:**  So you came back after 1971?   

**A:**  1972.   

**A:**  Woman: He didn't come back. Later, the army representatives withdrew and local governments began to restore the Party Committee at the county level. He was at the Political Work Committee (Zheng Gong Zu) in Langkazi, helping prepare for the restoration of the Party Committee. There was a county called Sangri, that also was wanting to set up a committee.   

**A:**  The work at Sangri was paralyzed at that time. (Woman: That's all I have to say. That's the role he played in the Revolutionary Committee.) No one went to work. The offices were locked. After the Party Committee was set up in other counties, Sangri also wanted to restore the Committee and reorganize the leadership. The secretary (of Langkazi) was Fu Dihua at that time. When the Party Committee was set up in Langkazi, it was me who basically did it. Later, when the Party committee was set up in Sangri, I was one of the five leading members on the Party committee. So I went to Sangri County and worked there for seven years. When I first went to Sangri, it was poor beyond words. When I left Sangri, the masses not only were self-sufficient with food, but also could sell two million jin of grain to the country.   

**Q:**  How late did you stay in Sangri?   

**A:**  1979. End of 1978.   

**A:**  Woman: Originally the people in Sangri had to live on grain returned to them from the government for half a year. Later, it was self-sufficient and was named "county of Dazai style." (Liu: The whole Autonomous Region went to visit it.) Moreover, it was in bad need of water so water canals were dug and water conservancy infrastructures were built.   

**A:**  I had a 42-km long water canal built around the mountain. The office was moved to the construction site and a tent was set up there in the winter. (We lived on the construction site for) ten months. The water canal was heard to be renovated later. At that time, many people were following the example of Dazai out of mere enthusiasm We had technicians from Hunan. There was a young man named Xia Benghua in our county. He was an agricultural technician and had knowledge about water conservancy... The water canal benefited three counties. Local people call it the "life-saving canal." When I was criticized during the campaign of rectifying the Party style, the masses were not happy. "Secretary Liu did something for us." The canal still works. Later it was renovated and expanded. When I left, the masses in Sangri were self sufficient with grain. I stayed in Sangri for seven years. In 1978, I was designated commissioner of the area and later secretary of the Prefecture Party Committee. I didn't go. I said, "I would like to work in the county. Don't promote me anymore. So far, the situation in Tibet at that time was that the higher you promoted me, the worse I would end up. I would like to work at the county level for the rest of my life." So I didn't go there for a long period of time. Later, the Prefecture Party Committee held a meeting and made the decision to send Li Chongmin to the meeting. Secretary Liu, Liu Shaoming, must transfer the work within three days. I was asked to report to the Prefecture Party Committee within three days. So I went to the Prefecture Party Committee. The Prefecture Party committee specifically sent Li Chongmin to tell me to go. Because Wu Wenhui was transferred to Lhasa, the Prefecture Party Committee was short-staffed at that time ... Shortly after I went to the Prefecture Party committee in 1979, Hu Yaobang went there in 1980, turning the whole situation in Tibet upside down. Looking back soberly now at the way Hu Yaobang acted. he did not have a clear head at that time. He treated Ren Rong as the representative of the leftists. Why? Because he listened to somebody. The Tibetan masses posted pictures of Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou because they love the Communist Party. Their affection for Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou was in fact their affection toward the Party. At that time, there was a current against Chairman Mao in the interior area. We wouldn't talk about the achievements and mistakes of Mao Zedong. So far as the situation of China at that time was concerned, the masses' affection toward the Party and Mao Zedong were one and the same. There was some over-reaction in the interior area at that time. Also, the interior area had its own situation. Otherwise, why did Deng Xiaoping talk about "Four Adherences to" later?   

**A:**  Woman: In Tibet, Mao Zedong is the Communist Party and the Communist Party is Mao Zedong.   

**A:**  Tibetan masses used to believe in the Dalai, but now they post pictures of Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou. Is there anything wrong with that? He was very stubborn. Also, about winter wheat. Many people had diarrhea (after they ate winter wheat.) He made a mess. That was actually the destruction of the work in Tibet. We had been working in the counties for many years. (We knew) whether winter wheat was good for the masses or not. Why did they want to grow it if they suffered from loose bowels? ... There was no scientific foundation. It was totally (for the sake of) political struggle. So I was considered to be with Ren Rong. Honestly speaking, Hu Yaobang brought with him some people to Tibet and maybe you heard something about what kind of people they were. In 1981, I was transferred down to the county again. Chongjie County. So, I stayed for a long period of time at the county level. I stayed in Chongjie County for another four years. Then came the rectification of the style of the Party and we were branded "three kinds of people." Thus I was a target of criticism from 1980 to 1989 when Hu Jintao went to Tibet and heard about my issue. I was on vacation in the interior area at that time. The Party Committee brought up my issue again. The Party Committee said that after repetitive investigation among the masses of the places where I had worked before, we found out that you don't have any problem. You are still such and such a comrade and should come out and work again. As a matter of fact, I didn't become the Prefecture Party Secretary because of the Cultural Revolution. I was working at the county level in 1978. People, including Dang Xiangming, said at a regional agricultural conference that the work at Sangri was good. Many people visited Sangri. Under those circumstances, I was transferred to the Prefecture Party Committee. I was not the kind of person who was going up in a helicopter during the Cultural Revolution. I would rather do some real work at the county level than be a secretary in the regional Party committee. The Revolutionary Committee gave me a title but I didn't attend the meetings of the Revolutionary Committee. I thought that the Revolutionary Committee was a product of extremes at that time.   

**Q:**  When did you go to the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry?   

**A:**  It's after Hu Jintao resolved my issue. Tian Chongming was attending a meeting of the Department of Organization of the Central Party Committee and talked to me. It was at the guesthouse of the Department of Organization. "Shaoming, we want to clarify your issue so you can go back to work in Tibet." He knew that I had written to the Regional Party Committee requesting early retirement after my issue was resolved. [I said] You can do whatever to resolve my issue. Whatever happens, I am still a citizen of the People's Republic of China and have the right to... I will retire as soon as you resolve my issue. Tian Chongming said, "You go back to work first. We don't need to talk much about your issue. Many people in Lhasa talked about it. We know it. You are a secretary at the Regional Party Committee. I was also a secretary at the Regional Party Committee in Inner Mongolia. I know you very well. Even if you were asked to do something bad, probably you couldn't do it. Don't mention it again. Go back and work." I said, "I can't go back. I can't stay in Tibet any more." "Put down the burden and go back." ... The organization said this, so how could I [not go]... After I went back to Lhasa, Hu Jintao talked to me for a night. The minute we met, (he said,) "Lao Liu, your issue is clear. Let's not talk about the past tonight. Let's talk about the work in Tibet, and why we want you to go to the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry." There was not a head at the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry at that time. There were five leaders and five ideas. They couldn't get along when they meet. "You go there." Additionally, it was after 1989 and the leadership at the institutions of higher learning in the interior areas was also being adjusted. He said, "You have the education level. If someone else were sent to the school, it'd be very difficult for him. You have been in Tibet for so many years and were a college student in the 1950s. You go there." At the beginning, I said that I wouldn't go to a school. The school is a place of trouble. I heard that they couldn't get along there, if I go there ... He then told me why I should go there. "Don't talk about your issue. Put down the burden and go to work. You are a seasoned comrade." Initially, Secretary Chen said that the meeting would end at nine o'clock. We talked from eight o'clock till half past ten. Could I say "no" since secretary Hu said this? So in March 1990, I went to the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry. I originally planning to come back after I talked to the leaders there. Later, Wang Hailing of the Department of Organization talked to me. I stayed there for two years and wrote to the Regional Party Committee again requesting early retirement. Feng Jun talked to me and said, "Comrade Shaoming, don't behave like this. We know something about the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry. You are an old comrade and can't give up ... We know your situation. Your past is already clarified. Stay here at ease." When I was on vacation in 1996, I wrote every leader of the Regional Party Committee a letter requesting early retirement. It's hard to work there. I don't have the aptitude. They are all intellectuals ... Then Feng Jun talked to me. Wang Hailing also talked to me...   

**Q:**  When did your wife come back?   

**A:**  In 1979. There was a Tibetan class at the University of National Defense at that time. In 1978, we requested that we be transferred to the interior area. The Central University of Politics and Law was also restored and the school wrote a letter asking us to go back. The Autonomous region didn't agree. I have two children. One of them is a boy. When the child was born, it had an enlarged heart. After an examination at the hospital, the child needed to be sent to the interior area. We sent the child back to the interior area in an open vehicle. Later, we had a boy in 1964. He was sick at the age of two during the Cultural Revolution... The boy died later. My old father hired someone to take care of the child in the interior area. My mother had passed away already. I didn't go back when my child died ... My father passed away in 1984 at the time of the rectification of the style of the Party.... I received three telegrams when my father was dying and he wanted to have a last look at me.... I wasn't allowed to leave ... I wrote to the Autonomous Region again and Hu Jintao learned about it. Later, leaders of the Regional Party Committee and the Department of Organization tried to talk me into staying. So I stayed...   

**A:**  Many things are not true. For example, it's reported in some newspapers that about two years ago, deer were discovered for the first time in Tibet. When I was in Sangri, we not only found deer but also built a deer farm. We got the newborn deer from the mountains and artificially breed them. We had 37 of them. They would go wherever people went. They are more understanding than cattle. They would lean on you when you were leaving...   

**A:**  Woman: That deer farm is in Lhoka.   

**A:**  It happened 20 or 30 years ago. Now they say it's the first time. Moreover, the agriculture and animal husbandry was very good from 1970 to the time when Ren Rong left.   

**Q:**  This is a very interesting issue. During that period, one thing is the socialist reform of Tibet, the other the agricultural production...   

**A:**  Even Li Xiannian said, it's a real accomplishment that you can solve the issue of food in Tibet... When I first went there, masses had to feed on grain returned to them from the government for half a year. Their poverty was beyond words. When I left there, every household had enough food and could sell two million jin to the country... In the past, the Tibetan and Han cadres were like one family. How come? We had good policies, good cadres and a good working style...   

**A:**  Woman: When I was in Shigatse, we conducted "Three Education" campaign for more than a year. We slept with the masses (in the same room.)   

**A:**  Every time we went down (to the countryside,) we brought with us doctors to treat their illness, motion pictures to show them and some necessities to give to them-there were some families I was very familiar with. No matter how poor they were, the Tibetans treated us not as leaders but as their family members.   

**A:**  Woman: when I was conducting San Jiao in Shigatse, I asked him to bring the overcoats we had at our home in Lhasa...   

