# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0100.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Ren Rong  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Wuhan, China (Tibet Autonomous Region)  
**Date of Interview:**   
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Ren Rong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ren Rong was Party Secretary in the TAR from 1971-1980. Before that he was a key figure during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. In this interview, he discusses various aspects of the Cultural Revolution in Tibet, for example, the the conflict between Gyenlo and Nyamdre in Tibet.   

---  
### Tape   

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0100_04/H_0100_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  All the people took part in the production work, including those from the CCP organizations, schools, troops and the Political Consultative Conference. All were working hard on production. I want to give you an example. Especially when the harvest season came, almost everyone in the Party Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region (Ch. qu dang wei) took part in the harvest work for half a month with the exception of those who were on duty doing the work of Party Committee. Everyone in the troops had at least half a month or a month off duty to take part in the labor. Even the leaders of the Party Committee of Tibet took part in the labor to gather grain for several weeks in order to protect it from hailstone. Our medical care staff went to villages and pastoral areas to give the masses medical care for free. They all made an effort to help the masses. During that time, the relationship between the masses and the troops was quite good, which was an old tradition in Tibet since the 18th Army Corps had entered Tibet. Moreover, when the Tree-planting Day was coming during the spring season, all the people were involved in planting trees during the Cultural Revolution, including the cadres in Party organizations, and army men. We planted apple trees and pear trees. I got the seedlings of apple trees from Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture and from Sichuan I got seedlings of orange trees for which the growth technology hadn't been developed very well. And I got the seeds of grain from Guangxi Province, which was very warmly welcomed in Chayu, Tibet. Zhao Jingwei was quite familiar with this, since he was in charge of these matters at that time. These were about the agriculture of Tibet at that time. During the difficult time of Cultural Revolution, we got great achievements in the development of agriculture and improved the living conditions of the people in Tibet. Basic living conditions could be guaranteed. What about industry? In the past, there had been some factories in Tibet, yet though some of them were in good condition, the others were not. So we built many new factories such as a Matches Factory, a Carpet Factory at Lhasa, and another Carpet Factory at Shigatse. Next, I want to talk about the electricity generation in Tibet. Earlier, in summer, electricity generation could satisfy the demand because the rainfall was enough, but in winter, most of time we didn't have electricity. The reason was that since in winter water is frozen due to cold weather, there was not enough running water to produce electricity. Therefore, it was really a hard time. In order to solve this problem, first, we built a power station across the Lhasa River, as well as some smaller power stations in the western suburban area of Lhasa. And a thermal power plant with power of more than 12,000 kilowatts was also built, but due to its high cost of burning oil, actually we seldom used it. The biggest project in Tibet during that time was building the geothermal power plant in Yangbajain. Who was in charge of this project? A scientist called Li Guang. If you have a chance and time in the future, I suggest you read some material about him. Li Guang was a scientific research personnel who was really diligent and conscientious in helping the people in Tibet. He really worked very hard. He even wrote a letter to me saying that he thought building a geothermal power plant in Tibet would be helpful and so, if I agreed, he would like to do experiments on that. He wrote this note to me, of which I approved and sent this to Yang Zongxing, the vice director (Ch. zhuren) of the Revolutionary Committee of Tibet. I forwarded the approved note to him, since he was in charge of production in Tibet at that time. I told him that he should make every effort to support Li Guang for experiments by organizing scientific research personnel and raising money for that. At first, little light bulbs of 10 watts could work by means of the electricity produced by this power plant. We visited the place to see the light bulbs, and felt that it was pretty good. After that, we felt more confident and made up our mind to do that. When I left Tibet, the goal of 6,000 kilowatts was achieved. The major problem for producing electricity was that the water pipe would get blocked up after water ran through for more than 10 hours. We made every effort to solve this problem. And after that, we decided to stop the machine when it had worked for 10 hours and we used another type of pipe, which proved to be better than the former one. In this way, this problem was solved. At the time when I left, all the projects of high voltage electricity had almost been finished. This was really a big achievement in Tibet. Then we did another project of a power station at Yangzhuoyong Lake that cost more than 1 million for design and investigation, but we stopped it, because if we kept doing that, water resources in that area would be depleted, which would have a bad effect on the environment of six counties nearby. So, this project was temporarily discontinued. After a while, someone continued that project again, since they developed a way to produce electricity by pumping water up first and then let the water flow down to produce electricity. In this way, the water resource would never be depleted; we learnt this from Japan. This technology was pretty effective at that time, and really solved the problem of limited water resources in Tibet. During this period, we also solve the problem of electricity shortages at both Shigatse and Lhoka by building power stations. Moreover, A large-scale power station was built in Linzhi, which solved the electricity shortage in nearby areas. In Chamdo, there had been power stations earlier, and we continued to build new power stations there. The only area where the problem of electricity shortage still existed was Naqu. At first in Naqu, we tried to produce electricity by wind, but we did not succeed. During the Cultural Revolution, technicians and workers really made great contributions in solving the problem of electricity shortage in Tibet. They all tried their best and did a good job. For this, I don't need to say more. Another problem was about traffic and transportation. During the Cultural Revolution, the two masses' organizations had conflicts with each other. One organization supported developing agriculture and industry, while the other disagreed. At the meeting of mobilizing production, we wanted to develop the automotive industry to improve transportation and to improve the living condition of the people living there. Then we mobilized people to take part in the production and labor. Someone blamed us for doing revisionism (Ch. xiuzhengzhuyi) because they asserted developing agriculture and industry couldn't be counted as doing revolutionary work. Right after the mobilization meeting, they held a meeting to criticize us. Once in Golmud, I told Hou Jie, who was the Party Committee secretary of the transportation department, that they should mobilize people to organize the trucks and to take part in production. Yet lots of people in Golmud opposed our idea and criticized us, saying that we were doing revisionist activities. We made every effort to develop transportation and to organize traffic, but we faced a lot of difficulties. This is what happened during that time. At last, after 1972 or 1973, the situation started to return back to normal. We talked to several people to try to persuade them to do work rather than to make trouble. Another issue about traffic and transportation concerned building bridges. During the Cultural Revolution, Gangga Bridge at the Yarlungtsangbo River (Ch. yalu zangbu jiang), and the Yiyanghe Bridge, Jiacha Bridge, etc. were built. During the Cultural Revolution, many bridges were built whose quality is very good and they still work very well even now. The reason why we could make these achievements lies in the effort and great contribution made by the masses, workers and scientific personnel, who always kept Party and the masses in mind and would devote themselves in improving the well-being of Tibet. Furthermore, in order to solve the problem of transportation, we built a petroleum pipeline from Golmud to Lhasa. This was supported by the Central Committee and the Central Military Committee (Ch. jun wei). If we used trucks to carry petroleum from Golmud or Liulian to Dongba, Jilong, or Yanjing, it would take a long time and would cost a lot. So, in this way, we solved this problem. Several kinds of petroleum could be transported, like gasoline, kerosene, lubricating oil and even aircraft oil. And one kind of oil could begin to be transported right after the previous one finished. This was really a big project. After that, a big oil depot was built in the western suburban area. Have you ever seen that? It is really very big. That was a good and big project. Those were all done during the Cultural Revolution. These were about the work of industry, agriculture and transportation. About the service industry, although in 1971 it was not very good, after 1972 everything went back to normal and entered the stable stage of development. Almost all kinds of service began to develop quickly. Based on all of these things I have said today, I want to raise a question: can we give a correct judgement about the Cultural Revolution? The Cultural Revolution was a big mistake regarding the general direction and guidelines (Ch. lu<a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 县] A rural administrative unit in post-1959 Tibet that is comprised of several xiang. It is normally translated as a county and is roughly equivalent to a dzong in the traditional society.">xian</a>) of Chairman Mao and the Central Committee of CCP (Ch. dang zhongyang). However, as a result, many people now dare not to talk about any achievements made during the Cultural Revolution. My idea is that it's true that this mistake was committed by Chairman Mao and the Party Central Committee. We know this since we all experienced a hard time during that period. We all know this very well. We really don't agree with the Cultural Revolution, which would destroy our country and make people's life harder. This severe mistake killed many good people and made the social order a mess. In fact, though many Communist Party members, the masses, cadres, including many leaders, especially the workers and peasants, dared not show their disagreement with the Cultural Revolution in public, they took some concrete action to resist it actually. I'll give you an example. Some old comrades insisted in doing the work of production. What was their true attitude toward the Cultural Revolution? They were criticizing the Cultural Revolution by virtue of their real actions and took specific actions against the Cultural Revolution. They did not take part in those political movements to criticize and denounce others. Rather, they tried hard to develop production and to construct our country. They did what they should do. They all did what they should do as Communist Party members to serve the masses and the country. We all felt that the motivation and enthusiasm of workers and peasants was so important. Especially during those hard times, we should praise and encourage them for their hard work and contribution. But this does not mean that we agree or disagree with the Cultural Revolution itself. So, we should make a clear distinction between two issues. Take Lin Biao as an example. In the end, he turned renegade from the Communist Party, which brought him everlasting grief. But we also should acknowledge he had made contributions in the past. We must treat him in a fair way. At the beginning, he was good and made contributions in several battles, during which he was injured several times. But finally, he did something wrong and betrayed the Communist Party, which was his big mistake. Therefore, we cannot say that he was always bad since he made some big mistakes in his late years. How could he be the vice chairman of the Party? How could he be the successor of the Communist Party? How will you treat this? What about those battles he had won and the contributions he had made? Have all of those disappeared? As far as I'm concerned, to be honest, what is wrong is wrong, and what is the right is right. We should take them separately. As for Lin Biao, he betrayed the Communist Party, which of course, was a big mistake. Therefore, we should think about how to treat things fairly. From this point of view, during the Cultural Revolution, when Chairman Mao made some mistakes, is it true that all the Party members and the masses all over the country were wrong? We should make this issue clear. This is my thought on this. With regard to the Cultural Revolution, some people now don't dare to say the truth. Just like what I have said today, maybe some parts are right, but some others are wrong. I just want to talk about my own opinions. I talked about our work of production and construction. I don't need to mention other minor things now. Many people were committed to the development of Tibet, defending Tibet and serving the people whole-heartedly, and really hoped that the people living in Tibet could lead a happy life. This was all that we thought, including both the leaders and the ordinary cadres. After I entered Tibet, I found that the life there was really very hard at that time. I was willing to do whatever the Party and the masses wanted me to do regardless of any difficulties. I didn't care about the difficulties we encountered in Tibet. A few people made some mistakes during the Cultural Revolution. I will not talk about this topic more now. I'll talk about the issue of religion tomorrow. I don't have relevant documents on hand now. So I'll only talk about what I myself did previously. The Central Committee supported cultivating and promoting Tibetan cadres in Tibet. Premier Zhou asked about the ratio of Tibetan cadres to Han Chinese cadres. I knew a number of ratios according to our statistics: at the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, before the situation became disorderly, the ratio was 3/7. That is, 30% of cadres were Tibetans, while 70% were Han Chinese. This was the ratio. At that time, Premier Zhou said that we should pay attention to promoting more Tibetan cadres; if the ratio could be changed from 3/7 to 7/3, which meant 70% of the cadres were Tibetan and 30% Chinese, that would be better. After receiving this instruction from the Premier, we thought this was right and very important. After discussions, all of us agreed on this point. The next step was what and how we carried this out. One way was that we should persuade the Han Chinese cadres. This was not so easy to achieve, since many Han Chinese cadres thought that because they worked hard, they should be promoted first. Another concern was whether those Tibetan cadres had enough work experience and work capacity to be qualified for their work. So it was really hard to deal with this issue. Later, we still decided to promote those Han Chinese cadres who really did excellent jobs and made great contributions, but more attention should be paid to cultivating the Tibetan cadres. Our aim was to cultivate good cadres for constructing socialism. Many meeting were held to spread this idea and it was taken as the most important issue at that time. The third was that what should we do to achieve that. There were 3 ways to do it. First, excellent cadres could be recommended by local governments and they would be promoted after discussion. We followed the right guidelines for serving the masses. The local governments should recommend those who really did a good job and made contributions to the construction of Tibet. The next was which positions should the Tibetan cadres take. We decided that as long as they were Tibetan cadres, even though they didn't have adequate experience, we still would appoint them as the main leaders in the local governments or other organizations. As long as he would like to devote himself to the construction of Tibet without the "Narrow Nationalist Idea" (Ch. xiaai minzuzhuyi), and would firmly follow the thought of socialism and communism, we would promote him to be a leader. The key was that he should have good work-style and life-style (Ch. sixiang zuofeng). If the Tibetan cadre really hadn't been qualified yet, what we did was to promote him as a deputy for a while. If he really did a good job and made a good performance, he would be promoted to be the the main leader. We used this method to promote people. We began the promotion from the grassroot level (Ch. jiceng). We were trying to replace the Han Chinese cadres at the grassroot level with Tibetan cadres. And also we could solve this problem via democratic elections. In this way, as more and more Tibetan cadres acquired experience, many of them were promoted to work in the government of the Tibet Autonomous Region. One of the Tibetan cadres who was promoted to be a top official was Basang. Why was she promoted? Maybe you know her. Why did we choose her? When she was still young, since she once worked as a slave, she really led a hard life during that time. Later, after the liberation army (Ch. jiefang jun) entered Tibet, she ran away from that work. Where did she go? She fled to the Linzhiboming Region after hearing that the liberation army would go there. She stayed there doing odd jobs (Ch. ling gong). Although her life was pretty hard at that time, she really worked diligently even though she was really very skinny. Other people there thought that she was really a good person, since she worked hard regardless of difficult living conditions. And she liked studying. She worked hard to study Chinese. At first, she did not even recognize a word, but she did not lose heart and still kept studying industriously. While she could speak Tibetan, she could not read Tibetan characters. She spoke Chinese with army men, studying from them some basic words and asked them to teach her how to write. She always took a dictionary and a small note book with her in order to put down what she learnt. For quite a long time, she studied in this way. I do not know what she is like now, but before, when she was the party secretary (Ch. shuji) of the regional Party Committee (Ch. dang wei), whenever she attended meetings, she took a bag in which there was a note book and a dictionary, while most of other female cadres always took cosmetics purses. She took a note book and a dictionary with her all the time. When she encountered problems, she either asked others, or looked it up the dictionary. In this way, she studied and worked very hard. Then she went to school to study for a period. After she came back from the school, she worked at the grassroots level. After that, she was promoted. Since she was born from a poor family and led a hard life when she was young, she really firmly supported the Communist Party, the liberation army, the liberated people of Tibet, and the construction of the country. Another Tibetan cadre was Raidi. He was a serf in the past. His name "Raidi", in Tibetan, means a person with curly hair. Do you know that? Is this right? There are many differences between the language in Lhasa and that in Naqu. Good words in Lhasa are taken as bad words in Northern Tibet. Bad words in the north of Tibet have good meanings in Lhasa. This is one of the problems. Raidi was quite close to the liberation army, and he was chosen to study in a public security school. After that, he worked at the grassroot level as a public security officer. He was recommended by herdsmen in Naqu and we also thought he was excellent after our discussions and investigation. He really worked hard and did excellent jobs during the Cultural Revolution. He strictly observed the instructions issued by the Central Committee. He did not agree with criticizing and denouncing cadres. He was really very honest and upright. He once took part in some masses' organizations, but just for a short while. Basang never joined any masses' organizations during that period. Jiangcuolongbu, Luosangcicheng (Lobsang Tsering), Langjie, etc, were all promoted. I can not remember them all now. Those were promoted first. After that, some more people were also promoted. At the time when I left Tibet, Langjie was the mayor of Lhasa. You all know him, right? Gao Shizhen was the Party secretary (Ch. shuji). He was also Tibetan. Li Benshan was the party secretary of Lhasa. The situation of the Lhasa area was pretty complicated. Li Benshan was the secretary, but he only worked for a while before he resigned. After that, I cannot remember clearly. He was the secretary of the municipal Party committee in Lhasa, and also a member of the standing committee. But later, he resigned. There was also a man who wore glasses. I forgot his name suddenly. He was also Tibetan. I'll talk...(not clear)... The Party secretary was Yang Yucai, who was Tibetan. The commissioner (Ch. zhuanyuan) was Cerisangzhu. These two main leaders were both Tibetan. The Party secretary of Lhoka was Jia Qu. He is now still in Tibet. The commissioner was called...I cannot remember. He was pretty tall and had worked quite a long time in the northern part of Tibet. Maybe his name has four syllables. I really forget. He was also one of the main leaders. We decided to promote Tibetan people to be the main leaders, and Han Chinese people to be the deputies, while keeping the Han Chinese deputies' salaries the same as those of the main leaders. Our aim was to cultivate Tibetan cadres in Tibet. At the time when I left Shigatse, who was the Party secretary there? Dorje Tsering (Ch. duoji cairang). He once served as the director of Department for Civil Affairs of the Central Government (Ch. minzheng buzhang). He served as a vice head of a county (Ch. fu xian zhang) and many people thought he was very excellent and versatile. He really worked very hard and was committed to his work. And he could learn things pretty quickly. Later, he was the head of a county and then was appointed the vice Party secretary and the vice commissioner of Lhoka. After that, he was assigned to Shigatse to be the secretary of Party committee. And then he was a member of the standing committee of Party committee in the Tibet Autonomous Region. The commissioner of Shigatse was Jiang Ceng. Jiang Ceng? Was he? Yes, I think so. And another man, whose surname was Yang. Those two were Tibetan. In the past, the commissioner was the head of a county. The two main leaders in Shigatse were Tibetan. One was the husband of La Zhen. La Zhen. Do you know her? During the Cultural Revolution, La Zhen's husband committed suicide. When Zeng Yongya served as the commander, some cadres, including them, were sent to go to Linzhi to attend a Study Class (Ch. xue xi ban). Yet actually, those were sent there to receive examination. As a result, during the examination and interrogation, La Zhen's husband felt he was treated unfairly, and so he jumped out of a window to commit suicde. La Zhen suffered great grief. Her husband was really a nice person... Later on, the commissioner was the person who once served as the vice chairman of the government of Tibet Autonomous Region...Now he works in an institution of the CCP government at Hong Kong, serving as the director of the office. Now this person is in charge of the financial affairs and the affairs about foreign trade. All these people were very good people. In Naqu, the former Party Secretary, Cao Ju, who was a Han Chinese people, was appointed the director of the Organization Department (Ch. zuzhi bu) of the Tibet Autonomous Region, and a member of the standing committee. So a new person, a Tibetan, was promoted to serve as the Party Secretary of Naqu. The commissioner of Naqu was a people who once worked for developing the economy of Shuanghu. Do you know the area of Shuanghu? Previously he was the vice commissioner, and later on, he was promoted to be the commissioner. One of his tasks was to develop the economical and social situation of that "No Man's Land." This person was a rather diligent person, and he had a clear mind. As for the area of Ali, at that moment, it was governed by Xinjiang province rather than by us. At that time, since the transport situation was really bad, we were not able to transport supplies to the area of Ali, so this area was governed by Xinjiang province. All of the above that I talked about were the situation of political leaders whose ranks are higher than county head. At the level of county, we almost have achieved the goal: both of the chief leaders of a certain county, are Tibetan officials. In order to benefit the general situation, the Han Chinese officials gave up their positions to the Tibetan cadres, since the principle of our CCP members is that we should do our best to serve the people. All these went smoothly, and almost no big problem happened. Though some Han Chinese cadres even now make complaints about it, generally, the situation was quite good. Besides that, many Tibetan cadres joined the leading positions of the Party Committee of Tibet Autonomous Region... Luosangciren, was promoted as the deputy Party Secretary of Tibet. The directors of both the procuratorate and court were Tibetan. The director of procuratorate was Jiangcunluobu. The Procuratorate is an important institution. The director of the court was Cicheng. In both the procuratorate and court, the former directors who were Han Chinese cadres all retired. Because the function of the three institutions, namely procuratorate, court, and public security office, were very important and complicated, within the Party committee of Tibet, we organized a "Political and Law Team" (Ch. zhengfa xiaozu), to be in charge of the matters about the three institutions. The leaders of that team were all members of the standing committee of Party committee. If there was some very important issues, the members of the team could discuss the issues first. During the Cultural Revolution, many former laws and regulations were all forgotton or ignored by the people, which could easily lead to many problems. And also, during that period, the ultra-leftist thoughts prevailed. The Discipline Inspection Committee (Ch. jilu jiancha weiyuanhui) was headed by Yiquzhuoma. Do you know Yiquzhuoma? She was a female cadre. She was a very good person who was from Batang. And she had received an education. In the Party committee, Basang was an important people. The Health Department (Ch. weisheng ting) was headed by Zhuoga. Do you know Zhuoga? The Education Department (Ch. jiaoyu ting) was headed by Duojicaidan (Dorje Tseden), who later went to Beijing. Maowuhua served as the Party Secretary of Education Committee (Ch. jiaowei). Duojicaidan was the director of Education Department. In the Department of Agricultural and Pastoral Affairs (Ch. nongmu ting), two Tibetan cadres served as the deputy directors. Who was the director then? It was Zhao Jingwen, because in the past, Zhao Jingwei was the commissioner (Ch. zhuanyuan) who was quite familiar with the agricultural and pastural works. Since in Tibet, the works about agricultural and pastual affairs played a really key role because in Tibet there was no industry, we appointed Zhao Jingwu this position. The Department of Industries (Ch. gongye ting) was headed by Jinagcunbuduoji. In the future you can go to see them to interview them. In order to develop industry in Tibet, we established a carpet factory at Lhasa, as well as a carpet factory at Jiangzi (Gyantse), both of which were very large-scale factories. In both the factories, we invested a lot. However, in the past, we did the project of "Three-line Construction", in which some problems happened. For example, in the end, we did not use the machinery factory at Bomi and the ammunition factory at Chamdo. In Chamdo there was a cement factory. When I was there, this factory worked well. The cement factory at Lhasa was also expanded, and doubled in scale. The products from the cement factories were not very good, but they still qualified so in the work of irrigation and water conservancy construction we still could use it. Other factories, such as the machinary factories or leather factories, all worked well. And also, we built some power stations. A Han Chinese cadre called Liu Diangong went to .... And then, some Tibetan cadres.... later on, they joined the government of the Tibet Autonomous Region. Those Tibet cadres worked in the People's Congress (Ch. renda). They were all old Tibetan cadres. In the Organization Department (Ch. zuzhi bu), Lieque served as the deputy director. In the past, another person ... I can not remember the people clearly. In the system for propaganda affairs (Ch. xuanchuan xitong), the number of Tibetan cadres were less than that in other fields... Zhang Zaiwang and Li Wenshan, were both famous writers. Both of them had received good education. They were all members of the standing committee of Tibet Autonomous Region. In the Transportation Department (jiaotong ting), a Tibetan cadre served as the deputy director. Yet in the system of transportation organizations, most of the people were Han Chinese cadres. Anyway, in all the CCP organizations (Ch. jiguan) of Tibet, lots of Tibetan cadres were promoted and appointed to important positions. Besides all of these, after I started to be in charge of the work in Tibet, I re-opened the Party School. It was called "a propaganda team for cadres" (Ch. ganbu xuanchuan dui), or "a progaganda school for cadres" (Ch. ganbu xuanchuan xuexiao). Our former Party School (Ch. dangxiao), during the Cultural Revolution, was ended. Very quicly we re-established the Party School, which was called the "cadres' school" (Ch. ganxiao) and was located at Yezhu. Why did we set it at Yezhu? One of the reasons was that the situation in Lhasa was too difficult: we did not have sufficient food and fuel at Lhasa. However, in Yezhu the climate is very good, and also, its natural resources are rich so we could get sufficient food and fuel. The only problem of Yezhu was that its transport situation was not very good. In the end, though, we decided to set up the cadres' school at Yezhu, which was a very large school. And I also ordered the local governments of all levels to establish Study Classes for cadres or a Party School, whose main goal was to cultivate Tibetan cadres. Our ultimate goal was to speed up the growing-up of the Tibetan cadres. Why did we do it? One reason was that according to the instructions from the Central Committee, we should increase the number of Tibetan cadres in order to reverse the former Chinese-to-Tibetan-cadre ratio of "7:3". Another reason was that we thought that the enterprise of marching into Tibet, liberating the people of Tibet, doing the decmocratic reforms in Tibet, and joining in battles against foreign invasions, could greatly educate the young cadres as well as the people. During the period of doing the enterprises, we found lots of very excellent and active cadres. So we had a good condition. Also, in the past our Party had selected a large number of excellent young Tibetan people, including serfs or herdsmen, who had very qualified family backgrounds, to go to inland provinces (Ch. neidi) to receive education. After those people returned to Tibet, if they performed well, we should give them positions. So if all the time all the positions were occupied by the Han Chinese cadres, these Tibetan cadres would have no opportunities, which would exert bad influence on our enterprises in Tibet. And also, in that period, we had another consideration: in Tibet, as the social development was going on, on some day in the future, the Tibetan people should have right to achieve self-government, to govern themselves under the leadership of the CCP. So the Han Chinese cadres should not play the role of baby-sitter all the time. So we promoted lots of Tibetan cadres. Even though at that moment some of our cadres had different opinions, we still did it. (... one sentence unclear) First of all, these cadres supported the CCP and the CCP's liberation of Tibet, and loved socialist enterprises and the motherland as well as Tibet. So far we have not found any symptoms of their opposing the CCP and socialism, or of their doing separatist activities. At least, when I was in Tibet, I did not find any of these activities. I say it just according to my experience, so, as for the matters in the future, I am not able to predict. In that period, I deeply felt that some words, if expressed by Tibetan cadres rather than Han Chinese cadres, would be more effective for the masses. So, when I had to go to local areas to inspect work, I would ask some Tibetan cadres such as Duojicairang (Dorje Tsering), to accompany me, and for some topics, I would ask them to explain our policies to the masses. The Tibetan masses were happy if it was the Tibetan cadres who spoke to them about the issues. I could feel their emotion of happiness. For example, once when I was at Longzi, I asked (not clear who) to explain our policy to the masses. He is a very good and nice person who was never condescending when he talked with the masses, since he came from a family of peasants. So after he talked to the masses, all the people applauded him warmly. So I realized the actions done by Tibetan cadres could be more powerful. So, from then on, I found that this policy that was put forward by our Central Committee and by our Premier was really good. Now I have left Tibet for almost 20 years, so every time I encounter the cadres from Tibet, I am very happy. I stayed in Tibet for about 16 years. At first I worked with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> troops stationed in Tibet rather than in the government. I worked in the government for about 10 years. I tried to cultivate the Tibetan CCP cadres. The cadres who were minorities and were devoted to communist enterprises were very precious. Even though now, most of time we do not discuss communist enterprises any more, yet in fact, our ultimate goal in the future is still to accomplish a communist society. Now, we only talk about socialist enterprises, which, anyway, is continuous with our past goals. Those cadres I talked about were all very good. These words are that I want to talk about on the topic of cadre work. I did not make any preparations. I only tell you what I myself have done. Another topic I want to talk about now is that there is one kind of thought. Namely, according to the Indian government's and British government's policies, they will attack us. What they want to do, is to occupy our land, and to take away the best areas we have. Their policy remains the same all the time, and it is gradual and continuous. For example, Nehru's policy was like that, and later on, when Gandhi [Indira] took the power, their policy remained the same. They contnued to attack us, and at the same time the Dalai Lama supported them from outside. I had thought about this problem for a long time and tried to find a solution. At last, I decided that according to the policy set by the Central Committee, we would never start an attack or make trouble first. We would try our best to maintain the peaceful situation in our borderline areas. While we stuck to this point, if you came to invade our territory and take away our wealth, we would fight back. That was our idea. So at that moment, I thought that we should take back the area of Yunxia. The area of Yunxia is in Dingri County. In Dingri County, there is a very large valley, through which we could go southwest toward Nepal and India. This area is called Yunxia, which at that moment was controlled by the Dalai Lama's followers. If we wanted to attack those enemies and take back this area, we had to climb over a mountain first. So we submitted a report to the Central Committee, requesting that we send troops to go there and to get back this area. In order to achieve this goal, we made comprehensive preparatory work. We organized a "military work team" (Ch. wugongdui), which in fact was composed of PLA soldiers who had put on make-up to pretend to be civilians. This team was equipped with very good arms. First we ordered this team to do reconnaissance works in the borderline areas. After getting the information there, we ordered the team to go there to attack the enemies. After arriving in the area, we did not arrest the enemy. Rather, our soldiers did some propaganda work there. They told the enemy that this area belongs to China and to Tibet, and the illegal foreign people there should leave. However, since you are Tibetans, you can stay and settle here, but if you want to leave, you could leave. We also dispatched many CCP workers to work in this area. We also sent lots of supplies into this area for our workers and soldiers. The millitay work team organized people to patrol all over the area. At that moment the situation there was rather severe. It happened in the early or middle 1970s. This military action was planned and commanded by the Party Committee of Shigatse. We gave this task to the Party Committee of Shigatse. So they dispatched soldiers there to occupy this area. Later on, our people did development work there and established schools there. And then, I left, so I do not know what happened later on. Yet at least when I worked there, our troops had occupied this area and controlled the situation. The government, the school, the residents' group, were all established there, so the situation there was very peaceful and from then on, there has been no severe problem. In this area, militias also were organized. During our activity at this time, no battles happened. We tried to avoid making trouble in the bordline areas. We tried to take actions in a peaceful way. Another area I want to talk about is Shenggeri. Shenggeri belongs to Luozha county, Langkazi. In Luozha, there is one area called Chenta. In the past, after ending the Sino-Indian war, in this area, we did some work in order to collect timber. Yet we did not do any other work. So I decided to strengthen our power in Chenta. We did it by means of sending a military work team (Ch. wugongdui) into this area, and establishing some security posts. We also launched the Masses Work (Ch. qunzhong gongzuo) in Chenta. What we did there contradicted the interests of the spies. So later on, some spies went there, and we arrested them. In that period, we did lots of propaganda work for the masses, forbidding the spies to go there. There is a large village in this area which is located near a confluence of rivers and there is also a large valley nearby. The name of the village is Shenggeri. If in the future you can go there, you should do interviews there. The climate there is very good. I did not go to Shenggeri then, but they reported the situation in Shenggeri to me many times. There are old forests in this area which are very beautiful. The reason why I ordered the military work team to occupy this area is that I knew it was a really good place. If not, since the policy of the Indian government was to continue to go forward, once they built a railway there, it would be very difficult for us to take the area back. So we made a great effort to go there. We ordered the Party Committee of Naqu to send people there to occupy the area. At first, we had some issues on our decision because there were some problems: we had to face food-shortages; we had to go acrosss the area of "No Man's Land" (Ch. wurenqu), and so on. Later on, some of the masses were willing to go there, yet some others were not. In the end, we took the measure that every pastoral team should send people to support the work there and these people should go there together with their livestock. So our work went on very well in this area later on. In this area, our people could go hunting for some wild animals. At that moment, the number of wild yaks, wild horses, and wild asses, was very large. The number of black bears was also large. So sometimes they could hunt for these animals for food to improve their lives. During the period, we did what we could do to try to occupy all the borderline areas we were able to occupy. Another topic I want to mention is that... At that moment, Mietuo belonged to Lhasa city. The armed spies always came to this area to threaten the masses' lives. The residents here suffered a lot from the crimes committed by the armed spies. So, I asked the people in the area to organize a military work team, and also I ordered an Independent Battalion to reinforce the team. I asked the troops to try to go foward. I told them that as long as you did not find the sign of the border line, you could continue to go forward. So in the end, the situaion in this area improved. However, after I left, I do not know what happened later on. The areas with which I was familiar most are Ningxia, Chenta, and Shenggeri. That is what I want to say on this topic. Most of these specific tasks were done by the Party Committees of Shigatse, Lhoka, and Lhasa. So as for us, the Party Committee of Tibet Autonomous Region, we only supported them in logistical works. Also, we were in charge of the general direction of their work. We guided their work from the pespective of general policies. Yesterday you asked me about Premier's meeting with me in 1967. Now with regard to it, I have not found the materials and documents about this meeting. So I will tell you on this topic according to my memory. During the Cultural Revolution, the most contentious issue among the leaders was how we should treat the two masses' organizations? During the period, the revolt organization... the Central Committee and Chairman Mao, asked Red Guards to move around all over the country to do revolt activities (Ch. chuanlian). So the people with the most violent actions were from this group of Red Guards. At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, lots of Red Guards came to Tibet from Beijing, such as the organization led by Ye Chong. Ye Chong came to Lhasa two times. The first time he was leading some Red Guards and came to Lhasa where he organized a committee for "special attacking" (Ch. zhuanda), and the target of their actions of "special attacking" was Zhang Guohua. They claimed that they came to Tibet specially in order to attack the "local tyrant of Tibet" (Ch. xizang de tuhuangdi), namely, Zhang Guohua. At that moment, Zhang Guohua was our commander and the Party Secretary. At Lhasa, Ye Chong mobilized the masses to do rebellious things and to join in the activities of the Cultural Revolution. Many of his followers were in schools, such as the High School of Lhasa. (several sentences unclear) Ye Chong's headquarters was located at the 2nd Office (Ch. er suo), which is east of the Potala Palace. These people, belonged to the organization of the people who agreed to overthrow "the local tyrant of Tibet" and to rise to do revolt activities and to seize the power. The other people belonged to the other group. They did not agree with the members of the former group. Rather, they thought that if the political leaders had made mistakes, we could criticize them, and ask them to correct the mistakes; and regarding the issue of "destroying the Four Olds" (Ch. po sijiu), we should chiefly oppose the feudal superstitions. Most of the members of this group were cadres in CCP organizations. At that moment, the two organizations both were established, and were very antagonistic against each other. One organization accused the other one of violating Chairman Mao's instructions, and of being the "royalists," and of being the rightists. The term "royalists" means the people were trying to help their parents (if the parents were officials) and the capitalist roaders (Ch. zou zi pai) escape from criticism during the Cultural Revolution. This group of people was labelled by the other one also as "the conservatives" while they called themselves revolutionaries. So how to treat the two organizations was disputed for a long time internally. At the meetings, the people from one organization said, since Chairman Mao once said "a revolution is not a dinner party," you all should tolerate us to do some extreme actions. The people from the other organization said, the old comrades and the old cadres had contributed greatly to serving the people, yet now they were criticized and denounced as if they were landlords and the gentry, which was certainly wrong; if the old cadres had mistakes, they could make self-criticism, yet they should not be physically attacked or humiliated. So the two organizations had lots of conflicts with each other. So in the meetings of the members of the standing committee of Tibet Military District, there were two different opinions. The first opinion was that: since doing revolution and revolt activities was the mainstream at that moment, we should support the more revolutionary organization. And even, some cadres once said: I would support any group of people who opposed me. The second opinion is that: we could not do it. Yin Fatang, at that moment, was the director of "Office for Supporting the Leftists" (Ch. zhizuo bangongshi). Very frequently we two had communications with each other. What was the situation then in the Military District? I was not the person in charge of the general matters, nor was I the political commissar, or the Party Secretary. At that moment I was only the deputy Party Secretary. My position then was deputy political commissar. And at that moment there were other several old deputy political commissars. During the period of chaos, all the other people asked me to be the leader in charge of the general matters, and our superiors also asked me to do so. So I had to know the situation first. As the deptuty director of Military Control Committee (Ch. junguan hui), I had the responsibility to do so. So I often talked with Yin Fatang to hear his ideas. They had done lots of investigations then. So he, as well as the other people of his office, often told me the situation then. These other people included Zheng Faji, Wang Jiao, Luo Xingdu, and Shi Hongsheng who once served as the deputy president of Party School. Many of those people live in a cadres' sanitarium (Ch. ganxiusuo) in Chengdu now. So I dispatched them to do social investigation. After the investigation, all of them told me that one of the severest problems of the more revolutionary group, namely the organization of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> (Ch. zaozong), was that they did not follow any policies or regulations; so the group which they regarded as the one more willing to follow policies and were more peaceful was Geming dalian hezongbu, namely <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> (Ch. dalianzhi). That was the conclusion of their investigation work. However, some superiors thought that the organization with the true intention to do cultural revolution was Zaozong, and that Dalianzhi was a conservative organization. At that moment, in Chengdu, an organization regarded as organization of conservatives was being suppressed by means of military action, which was really very severe. They dispatched militiamen from more than ten counties to suppress the conservatives in Chengdu. Lots of people were killed in these military activities. In Tibet we did not do that. Later on, the activities of seizing power from the conservatives happened. During these activities, the Party Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region was not regarded as a target, yet still, it in fact disintegrated. Many members of the Party Committee escaped, and some were arrested. The situation of the government of Tibet was even worse. It almost disappeared. That was the situation then. Within us, the question of which attitude we should take toward the two organizations remained unanswered. So we attended a meeting at Chengdu in early summer 1967. This meeting lasted for many days. Zhou Renshan was also asked to attend this meeting. Some people said I would support any people who opposed me in order to mobilize the masses, and to let them dare to rise to revolt. Also in order for them to express their opinions, we should first arrest all the possible capitialist roaders, and then we could make investigation to make sure whether they were truely capitalist roaders or not. We should first seize all the power from the officials, and then make investigations to see whether these officials were innocent or not. So there were lots of disputes in the meeting. We did not dare to obviously oppose the people holding this opinion, since they said starting the Cultural Revolution was the decision directly made by Chairman Mao and the Central Committee. Yet we still did not think we should do this. At last, comrade Zhang Guohua expressed his opinion: We could regard Zaozong as a revolutiona group, and we could regard Dalianzhi as a partial-conservative organization (Ch. pianbao zuzhi) rather than a conservative organization. If we regarded any organization as a conservative organization, we had to then regard it as a rightist organization. If so, we should destroy it. Thus, as long as we regarded Dalianzhi as a partial-conservative organization, it could still exist. So in the end we all agreed on this point. After this meeting in Chengdu, we went to Beijing to attend a meeting, in which we asked the Central Committee and Premier Zhou what we should do on this issue. At this time, the most important and advantageous point was that: we all acknowledged that both of them were revolutionary organizations, and both of them were the masses' organizations; neither of the two was even a partial-conservative organization. So in the meeting in Beijing, we solved this problem. However, still one problem was left: in theory we solved the problem yet what should do in specific pratice? For example, how should we deal with the relationships between the people from the two antagonistic organizations within Tibet Military District? At that moment, I was neither the commander nor the political commissar, and I had not stayed in Tibet long enough, so at that moment I did not have enough authority and not all the people in Tibet obeyed my orders. What should we do next? So later on, in Tibet, we always needed to discuss with each other on the specific problems frequently. And the principle when we discussed this problems was that we should solve our disagreements in a moderate way. In that period, we had some slogans such as, "a revolution is not a dinner party". Namely, sometimes we had to solve the problem in a violent way. Yet at the same time we also stressed that, Chairman Mao said this slogan in a specific context. He said it under the situation that the reactionaries exploited our people, tried to suppress the CCP and other progressive people, sticked to exercising dictatorship domestically and to surrender to the imperialists abroad in order to put down Chinese people. So in that period, we said we should not simply copy the slogan, yet we also did not dare to say this slogan itself was not right.   

