# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0100.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Ren Rong  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Wuhan, China (Tibet Autonomous Region)  
**Date of Interview:**   
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Ren Rong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ren Rong was Party Secretary in the TAR from 1971-1980. Before that he was a key figure during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. In this interview he discusses various aspects of the Cultural Revolution in Tibet.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0100_03/H_0100_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I want to know more about the two factions (Ch. liang pai) in Tibet. Can you tell me some more details about how they formed and the process by which they developed, and how they changed at the end. We don't know the details very clearly. Although yesterday you talked about this generally, we still want to know some more details. Especially one thing that we don't understand was how The Central Cultural Revolution Group (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 中央] 1. The Central Committee of the CCP. 2. The Central Government of China. 3. Sometimes it also conveys &quot;China.&quot;">zhongyang</a> wenge xiaozu) influenced the situation in Tibet. What was the attitude of the Central Committee in Beijing toward the two factions in Tibet? What was the relationship between Tibet and The Central Cultural Revolution Group? And what was the relationship between the Central Committee and the local government, the Party Committee (Ch. dang wei) and the local leaders? It is just like how we know each other. We know each other after we both make a self-introduction. It was not possible that we could know each other well immediately from the very beginning. I really want to know the process and details about these problems.   

**A:**  I don't know very well either what happened at the beginning. Why? At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, I was on holiday in Beijing. After I went back to Tibet, something happened within the headquartrs of Tibet Military District. There were two factions within the headquarters. Both factions supported the Cultural Revolution, but they took actions in completely different ways.   

**Q:**  Who supported this opinion? Which leaders?   

**A:**  Within the headquarters, some people who supported this were those from the Logistic Department (Ch. hou qin), especially Li Yiwei, who was the leader. The general leaders in the headquarters included Zhang Guohua, Chen Mingyi and me. We almost had the same ideas about this. We thought some actions during the Cultural Revolution were right, such as eliminating superstition and the "four olds" (Ch. si jiu, meaning old ideas, old culture, old customs and old habits, used during the Cultural Revolution). We all agreed with these points. I thought it was right that people should correct their own mistakes or faults, but we opposed beating people, robbing people of their private property, and damaging people's properties. I did not approve of the actions to criticize and arrest cadres without any reliable evidence. And we all disapproved of seizing power from those people illegally, which was our principle all the time. Things happened like this at the beginning. In all the CCP organizations (Ch. ji guan) of the Tibetan Military District, a few people who were ultra-leftist (Ch. ji zuo) took actions frequently, and did lots of things wrongly. They seized power, not only the power of the government, but also the power of the headquarters of the Tibet Military District. During that time, these people did these things frequently. Some local people also did that. The people from both of the two factions supported the Cultural Revolution, but they did it in different ways after the Cultural Revolution began. One group arrested capitalist-roaders (Ch. zou zi pai, meaning persons in power taking the capitalist road) and criticized and denounced them, while the other group thought they should take action only after careful investigation and analysis. At that time, the general orientation for carrying out the Cultural Revolution was to arrest the major leaders. This was one of the two viewpoints during the Cultural Revolution. The other viewpoint was Zhou Renshan's opinion. He thought that no matter whether those people were capitalist-roaders or not, they should be arrested first, and only then should we start to investigate whether those people were capitalist-roaders or not.   

**Q:**  Was that Zhou Renshan's viewpoint?   

**A:**  Yes, it was his viewpoint. He said that they should arrest people first before they knew everything clearly; if the people arrested were innocent, they would set them free after investigation; if they were indeed capitalist-roaders, it proved that they had done right. Zhou Renshan's viewpoint was to arrest capitalist-roaders even before we could know who were capitalist-roaders and who were not. He did not know well who were capitalist-roaders, but he still aroused the masses to arrest them without any evidence. This was his viewpoint. I want to tell you one example. Zhou Renshan insisted in arresting Hu Zongren who at that time served as the director of the Department of Civil Affairs, and previously was an old Red Army man. Another example is about Lu Yisong. Once Zhou Renshan talked about Lu Yisong and said that since Lu knew too much, therefore his problem was very severe and he should be arrested. At that time, I very firmly thought we should not arrest those old Red Army men, but Zhou Renshan insisted on doing it. As a result, Lu Yisong was arrested. After investigation, we did not find any evidence that he did anything wrong, so we set him free very soon. Therefore, during the Cultural Revolution, most of our conflicts were about these sort of matters. Also, some people in Tibet said that the headquarters of the Tibet Military District will turn traitor and go over to India. And some people also said that the Military District was full of capitalist-roaders. The big-character posters (Ch. da zi bao) expressing these kind of thoughts were posted everywhere outside our barracks. From all that happened, we could see that this group of people always held extreme opinions. Since he often tended to go to extremes, we were not friendly and close with each other. Yet at that time, we the Headquarters of Tibet Military District, implemented some principles which I think were good: 1. we only supported the group of people who did good; 2. we would oppose the group of people who did wrong; 3. we should never solve our disagreements by means of military fights (Ch. wu dou). During the Cultural Revolution, many people held different opinions with others, which made the situation and problems much more complicated. Is there anything more you want to know? (To the interviewer)   

**Q:**  Can you talk more about how the Office of Supporting the Local Cultural Revolution by the Headquarters of Military Distirct (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 军区] Military headquarters.">junqu</a> zhiyuan difang wenge bangongshi) was established?   

**A:**  Why did that happen? After the situation in Tibet became disorderly and the local government in Tibet had broken down, the Central Committee announced that both the CCP'S organizations in Tibet and Tibet's local government would be managed directly by the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a>. In order to do this, the leader, Zhang Guohua, talked with Chen Mingyi and me about how to organize the people in the two factions and how to make them united. Therefore, an organization was established to deal with these matters. Some people were dispatched to go outside to make some social investigations and to collect documents. So according to these people's investigation and analysis, we decided which group we should support and which group we should not. This office was composed of these people. So in the end, based on their investigation, we made the conclusion that the members of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> (Ch. dalianzhi), compared to those of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> (Ch. zaozong), were inclined to take more proper and more moderate actions; while the people from Gyenlo always took some extreme actions. That is what we knew then. Yet in public, we still claimed that the people from both of the two factions were all revolutionary masses and we should support the people who did right and should oppose those who did wrong, though in fact we thought that Nyamdre was better than Gyenlo. For example, we found that Nyamdre had more cadres, more CCP members, and that most of the masses and most of the PLA soldiers sided with Nyamdre. At that moment, some people said, the serfs in Tibet, the students in Tibet, as well as all the local people in Tibet, are naturally inclined to be conservative. Hearing this, I said to them that in the past, the people in Tibet led a difficult life and they strived to earn a better life; and after they were liberated by the Communist Party, they became the masters of our country and could go to school to get education without paying for it, so, the people in Tibet appreciated the Communist Party and respected the Party members. There was no reason for them to attack the CCP, the PLA, and the government of Tibet. There was no reason for the Tibetan people to make rebellious activities to oppose the CCP, the PLA, and the government's leaders. Therefore, though the Tibetan people were not active in some radical movements of the Cultural Revolution, we still can't regard them as being conservative. Rather, we should cherish, protect and support this sort of feeling of the Tibetan people. This was my opinion. At that moment, some people even asserted that we should support the people who are opposing us. I couldn't accept this idea, and I debated with him on this point. I asked him, if you insist that you would support the people who opposed you, since the Dalai Lama also opposes you, would you support the Dalai Lama or not? He answered that my question was meaningless, and that what he was talking about were the people (rather than the enemies of the people). I replied that the people wouldn't oppose you without any evidence, and that you should first make clear who was opposing you. I think that this is an important issue. We shouldn't express opinions like his. "I will support the people who oppose me"--This viewpoint is ridiculous. In the end, he confessed that he had to say this because some leaders of the Central Committee asked him to say so. I told him that no matter who asked him to say this, I couldn't agree. If the people opposed me because I indeed did something wrong, of course I will welcome their criticism. However, if some people opposed me unreasonably, certainly I couldn't accept it. At last he was not able to answer me. Sometimes we would experience some political movements. During these movements, we shouldn't blindly accept any opinions. If we accepted these unreasonable opinions, we would suffer a loss.   

**Q:**  Can you talk about how the decision was made?   

**A:**  They should not have criticized and denounced me, since I just worked for the Communist Party and the Tibet people. As a Party member, I would like to make contributions to the Party and the masses. All the achievements were not made by me, but by those technicians and masses who worked hard and indeed got experience from working. Did those give credit to me? Definitely not. Those were not my own credit. Someone also said that I made some mistakes. I did not care about that. But criticizing those technicians and the masses would frustrate their enthusiasm and confidence in work. During that time, people in Tibet really led a hard life, but they still kept in mind self-reliance and kept to the style of hard struggle. They always worked hard in order to improve their living conditions and production quality. This was a good sign, which we should support. Even though maybe they made some mistakes sometimes, we should know what was the truly most important. And the most important was that we should praise those who did well, and we should help those who made some mistakes to correct their mistakes and should further encourage them to make progress. Of course, there might be a long way to go. We should give those people opportunities to correct their mistakes.   

**Q:**  At the end of January in 1967, Zhang Guohua went to Beijing to receive medical care. On February 5th, in Lhasa, the event where some masses' organizations seized power from CCP government took place. On February 14th, a telegram from the Central Military Committee was received saying that Zhang Guohua was a good comrade and he basically kept implementing Chairman Mao's orders and policy. On September 18th of 1967, in Beijing, Premier Zhou Enlai met with you and other leaders. At that time, Zhang Guohua was not there, since at the end of January, he went to Beijing to receive medical care. On September 18th, when Premier Zhou met with you, he was not there, so only you met with the Premier. I don't know the reason for Zhang Guohua's leaving. Did he leave because of his illness or some other reasons? I have another question to ask. On May 5th in 1968, in Beijing, Zhang Guohua met with some major leaders of the masses' organizations of the two factions.   

**A:**  In 1968?   

**Q:**  Yes, on May 5th in 1968. Premier Zhou said that, First, the report of establishing the Revolutionary Committee of Tibet must be submitted by May 5th; and that Zhou Renshan shouldn't join in the committee. On June 6th in 1968, Premier Zhou met with you again. I do not know the details. This happened in 1968. In 1971, from March 5th to 28th, Premier Zhou met with you and other major leaders again. At the meeting which some leaders from the Political Bureau (Ch. zheng zhi ju) attended, Premier Zhou said that some leaders in Tibet made some mistakes; the biggest mistake was that they did not implement the Party's policies for ethnic affairs correctly. Right after that, on April 7th, Zeng Yongya was deposed, and you were appointed in place of him.   

**A:**  When?   

**Q:**  On April 7th. The Central Committee decided to replace some major leaders of Party committee in Tibet with new people. There were several big changes. One was to replace Zeng Yongya and assign him to Shengyang. You were appointed the director of the Revolutionary Committee of Tibet and the leader of Party's core team (Ch. hexin xiaozu).   

**A:**  Did it mention I was the acting director in the document?   

**Q:**  Yes, you were the acting director and leader of the Party's core team. And one person was added. That is Feng Keda, the vice director. He worked in Tibet from 1971.   

**A:**  He went to Tibet from Northeastern China in 1970.   

**Q:**  That is the summary we made based on what you had told us this morning. We would like to remind you about this information.   

**A:**  So, you want to know the meeting in 1971. And any others that you want to know?   

**Q:**  We would like to know more about Zhang Guohua. At the end of January in 1967, he went to Beijing to receive medical care. And on February 5th, the event of seizing power (Ch. duoquan shijian) happened.   

**A:**  Did Zhang Guohua meet Premier Zhou with me in Beijing in 1967?   

**Q:**  No, he went to Beijing to receive medical care at that time.   

**A:**  Yes, I remember it now.   

**Q:**  On September 18th of 1967, Premier Zhou met with you. At that time, Zhang Guohua was not there. I don't know what happened.   

**A:**  During that time, since Zhang Guohua was suffering illnesses, he almost did not do any work about Tibet. Then he was assigned to Sichuan. It was not because he made some mistakes. He was the director of the Revolutionary Committee of Sichuan, in charge of the work in Sichuan.   

**Q:**  During the meeting on September 18th of 1967, Premier Zhou pointed out that the two factions in Tibet were all revolutionary people's organizations. And some leaders including Jiang Qing met with you and other leaders of Tibet. Can you talk about where did you meet with them and what did you talk about with those leaders in the meeting?   

**A:**  In which year?   

**Q:**  In 1967, on September 18th.   

**A:**  In 1967, on September 18th? Not in 1977? In 1967?   

**Q:**  Yes, in 1967.   

**A:**  Let me check it and tell you later. I can not remember it clearly. I thought it was on September 18th in 1977, so I did not find any document on that. What do you want to know? About Zeng Yongya? We held a meeting in Lhasa in March of 1971. In December, the Central Committee sent us a telegram saying that I was appointed as the director to replace Zeng Yongya to be in charge of the work in Tibet. After Zeng Yongya had left, it was just the time when many riots happened in Tibet. And it even became severer after he left. Some people felt unhappy since Zeng Yongya was ordered to leave, while most of the people thought it would be better for Zeng to leave. In the meeting, the core team (Ch. hexin xiaozu) of the Communist Party called the cadres together to seek unity of thought. The main point was to sum up experiences and to learn lessons. Moreover, we made some criticism on Zeng Yongya's wrong actions. After that, we wrote a report about the meeting and sent it to the Central Committee. What I remembered was that he made several mistakes. One was that he supported one faction, namely <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a>, but suppressed the other one, namely, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> (Ch. dalianzhi). Many cadres, Party members, activists, workers, peasants, including students, were all in Nyamdre which was suppressed by him. He even made lots of reorganizing for the troops in Tibet. He moved the troops of 7 garrison battalions, more than 1,000 soldiers, away from Lhasa. And he also moved the 52nd Division of the 18th Army Corps away as well. So many people, following Zeng Yongya, started to support Gyenlo, whose members were in the minority, and turned to oppose Nyamdre whose members were in the majority. Suffering the suppression made by Zeng Yongya, many people from the 52nd Division expressed their discontent, which led to the disorder within the troops, as these people refused to obey the orders of the leaders. A lot of the masses and the cadres felt they were being treated unfairly. Qiao Xiaoqin knows about this, so does Li Jian. So Zeng Yongya moved the troops of this division away. In the past, the 11th Division supported the majority, too. It was a big and good division. At the beginning, it obeyed us, but later, it turned to follow Zeng Yongya. As for the 52nd Division, though its leaders turned to support Zeng, most of its officials and soldiers did not. At that time, I was the vice director, yet I almost lost power. The situation was really severe. So Zeng moved the troops of the Garrison Battalion away. And he also moved the 52nd Division to Sichuan. As a result, the 52nd Division was replaced by the 19th Division of the 50th Army Corps which previously was stationed in Sichuan. After Zeng Yongya took office, he reorganized the organizations (Ch. ji guan) of the Tibet Military District. With regard to those who supported the majority, he assigned them all away, including even my driver. When he told me he would assign my driver to another area, I asked him why. He said that if the driver was assigned to another area at that moment, he could be given a new job; if not, later on, it would be hard to find a job for him. Hearing this, I had to accept his suggestion. This was one of his mistakes. His second mistake was that he mistook the conflicts between us and our enemies as those between different factions within us. For example, though the fact is that some counterrevolutionary riots (disorders) took place, he insisted that these were only conflicts between the factions within us. In Bianba (Pemba), there once was a counterrevolutionary riot in which lots of people were killed. 24 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> soldiers were killed at that time. In Bianba, 25-26 PLA soldiers were killed. The commander of the Independence Battalion (Ch. duli ying) of Naqu (Nagchu) who was really a nice guy, as well as his two soldiers, were all killed by some counterrevolutionaries, and their horses and belongings were taken away. So the disorders in Tibet became more and more severe. But he still thought that it was just conflicts between factions. When we discussed the Nyemo Incident, since he was the commander, it should be he who conducted the discussion. Yet he asked me to hold the meeting. I agreed. During the meeting, when I was conducting the discussion, he took liberties with a woman who was from Mangkang. When he was talking with the woman, he took liberties with her, but she resisted. When we held the meeting outside, in the room he did such kind of things. After that, that woman ran away and told us that he assailed her with obscenities. Then we criticized Zeng Yongya for that, but he did not care about that and said that it was just a joke and he did not do it seriously. Also, Zeng maintained an immoral relationship with one of our typists. He did not care about it at all and did not think it was a serious matter. There was also a Vice Chief of Staff (Ch. can mou zhang) who supported him regarding these sorts of immoral affairs. He did not pay any attention to our criticism. He did not care about it at all. But after it got spread to the masses, many Tibetan people became very angry. What made the situation worse was the dissatisfaction toward the cadres and workers. More problems arose and more and more people took actions to express their dissatisfaction and anger. Premier Zhou blamed Zeng Yongya, saying that he was involved with factional affairs, which led to conflicts between us and our enemies, and that this was Zeng Yongya's severest problem.   

**Q:**  What did the Premier mean by the phrase "conflicts between us and our enemies"? Did he refer to the Bianba Incident and the Nyemo Incident?   

**A:**  Yes. He criticized him for arousing the conflicts between us and our enemies and said that it was his biggest mistake. What was the reason why he made these mistakes? Afterwards we had a discussion about why he did wrong. His mistake was that he did not understand that the two factions were both people's organizations. He should have treated them both in a correct way. This was one of his mistakes. Another mistake of his was that he should have paid attention to and supported most of the masses, rather than only some of them. When some of the masses felt dissatisfied, he should have reported the situation to the Central Committee, and discussed it with other leaders in the Party Committee. Before that, I always supported him. We were comrades-in-arms (Ch. zhan you) for many years. Previously he served as the commander of the 40th Army Corps, and I served as the political commissar of the 38th Army Corps. We were both cadres in the troops. At that time, I really supported him sincerely. But in contrast, he took actions against me. He did not pay any attention to my advice to him. Moreover, he held a meeting to criticize and denounce me which lasted for 2 days. I did not know the issue of the meeting at all until I was informed to attend the meeting. From the very beginning of the meeting, I became the target of attack. They all criticized me. Of course, he almost did not say anything, but his followers all blamed me. For the whole two days during the meeting, I did not say anything. At the end of the meeting, I expressed my opinion and attitude and said that they have made some mistakes. But he still did not care about what I said. In this way, our relationship became worse. At that time, the Central Committee found the problems happening in Tibet. More and more people frequently reported these problems in Tibet to the Central Committee. Soon, we received a telegram from the the Central Committee. At first, I did not know the details of the telegram. At that time, I was at Naqu. We held a meeting and thought that we could not decide by ourselves so we should report that to the Central Committee in Beijing. In a meeting held by Premier Zhou, he talked about how to do work in Tibet, how to improve unity and how to solve the problems during the Cultural Revolution. And then, a relevant document was issued by Political Bureau of the Central Committee (Ch. zhengzhiju). ...(unclear)...at that moment during the Cultural Revolution, Zhang Guohua was not in Tibet. At first, Wang Qimei, who was the vice Political Commissar, was there and he was in charge of the issues in Tibet. At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, he was assigned to Beijing and ...(unclear)... was in charge of the work of Party Committee of Tibet. He was an ordinary party secretary (Ch. yiban de shu ji), but not the 1st party secretary (diyi shuji). We all valued and respected him. Finally, most of the people were separated into two factions.   

**Q:**  Did he also support <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, he also supported <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> who advocated seizing power from the leaders. Almost all the people in Tibet knew that Gyenlo tended to go to extremes and its members took actions frequently. A small number of the people from the organizations of the Tibet Military District even joined Gyenlo, though they were not very many. Why weren't the major leaders of Tibet Miltary District criticized and denounced severely during the peorod, those including Zhang Guohua, Chen Mingyi, Yu Zhiquan (a vice commander), Wang Kang and me? Only Yu Zhiquan was arrested for a time, yet very soon he was released. Then, we made a policy: the cadres of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> shouldn't be denounced. Fortunately, at that moment, most of the people in the army agreed with us. Gyenlo once arrested and kept Yu Zhiquan in prison for several days. And one of our vice Chief of Staff, Shi Wanqiao, was also arrested and kept in prison by Gyenlo for one or two months. And then, Shi Wanqiao escaped by himself. During that time, many people were criticized and denounced. I was also been criticized and denounced many times, maybe more than most of the others. There was one time when I was criticized and it lasted for more than 20 hours, from 10:00 am on the first day till the afternoon of the following day, during which I did not even eat anything and did not have a rest. I was not afraid. They did not hit me and I could sit down to talk with them.   

**Q:**  Were these done by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> or <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a>?   

**A:**  Both of them had done some of these. Some were done by <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> and the other were done by Nyamdre. However, most of them were done by Gyenlo. They criticized and denounced some people, since they wanted others to agree with them and support them. We did not approve, because we followed what Chairman Mao said: the people should solve conflicts by debate rather than by violence (Ch. yao wendou, buyao wudou). And we declared that the troops in Tibet shouldn't exclusively support either of the two; and that we supported only those actions which were right and would oppose those which were wrong. During that time, the situation was really in disorder.   

**Q:**  Just now, you mentioned that the two factions, especially <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a>, had better base among the masses ("masses base") (Ch. qun zhong ji chu; it means there were many masses supporting Nyamdre). I have some questions. Can you give me some names for me to interview in order for me to understand better the things happening in Tibet at that time? Can you give us some clue about where are those leaders are now?   

**A:**  The leader of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ; ch. 大联指] One of the two major revolutionary organizations during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Alliance&quot; or the &quot;Great Alliance.&quot;">Nyamdre</a> is living in Fengtai District, in Beijing now. His name is Liu Shaomin.   

**Q:**  Is he in Chengdu?   

**A:**  No, he is in Beijing, at the University of Public Security (Ch. gong an da xue). His wife's name is Wu Yushu. She was a teacher working in a school in Tibet, but now she has retired. They both graduated from the University of Public Security. They all graduated from University of Public Security and perhaps they are still living there now. I can not remember it clearly. And there is someone called Li Guangbi, who came from Shandong. He was also a leader. Now, he is the vice director (Ch. ju zhang) of the Shandong Tourism Bureau (Ch. lu you ju). Another man's name is Zhaxi pingcuo (Tashi Phuntso). At that time, he was the director (Ch. tingzhang) of the Department of Civil Affairs of the Tibet Autonomous Region (Ch. zizhiqu minzhengting). Moreover, for the Red Guards' organization, Nongnuji, there was a general commander (Ch. zong si ling) called ... I can not remember. He came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Is his name Luosang?   

**A:**  No. I remember now. I think his name is Basang Luobu (Norbu). In fact, he was a kind person. He began life as a serf (Ch. nong nu). When he was a student, he studied very well. During the Cultural Revolution, he went to join the army. He was one of the leaders of Nyamdre. The leader of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> was Tao Changsong. He was the main leader. Another leader's name is Zhu Jinshang. I don't know where he is now. And Yang Tianhou, he worked in the Ministry of Transportation (Ch. jiao tong ting). And one person called Jiang Ying who was from Golmud, was also very well known at that time. There is also a cadre of Gyenlo called Cirenganmu, who is a nice person but was taken advantage of by some people. We were quite familiar with him and we knew he was a good cadre. And there were also a lot of people I need not mention because they were not so important. ... Later on, they got together to take me as the target of attack. And today I can tell you the truth: when they attacked me, I didn't hesitate at all to fight back. When they made some mistakes, I criticized them and even took extreme measures toward them. For example, I arrested Tao Changsong twice. The first time we arrested him was because he led some people to try to rush into the Headquarters of the Tibet Military District to attack us. The second time was... I can not remember clearly. But I set him free after some investigation. With regard to other people, we kept trying to communicate with them. During that period, because of these problems, we executed a person by the firing squad. His name was called Zhang Xueliao, and he was from Gyenlo. He worked in Lhasa. What kind of person was he? During the period of the Guomindang's rule, he was a squad leader (Ch. ban zhang) of the Youth Army (Ch. qing nian jun). After the Guomindang fell from power, he began to obey the Communist Party and did not leave. He said that he was the nephew of Zhang Guohua. One of Zhang Guohua's nephews is called Zhang Xueyang. Zhang Xueliao pretended to be Zhang Guohua's nephew to visit Zhang Guohua. Zhang Guohua admitted that he was his nephew, since he had left home for so many years that he could not remember clearly. And then Zhang Guohua assigned him some work to do. At first, he worked in the system of the industrial and commercial administrative organizations (Ch. gong shang guan li xi tong) and then, he worked as a section chief (Ch. ke zhang). Then the "Four Clean-ups" movement (Ch. si qing yun dong, a nationwide movement to "clean thing up in the field of politics, economy, organization and ideology") took place, during which, he was fired due to his actions of corruption and misbehavior. After that, he became an ordinary worker. During the Cultural Revolution, he was very active. He wrote a lot and drew caricatures. The northern suburban district of Lhasa became his sphere of influence (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 师] A division in the Chinese Army.">shi</a> li fan wei). At times, he resorted to violence during which someone was even killed. After that, he did not ask people to bury the dead body and just put the dead body in the office. He also looked down upon the municipal Party committee (Ch. shi wei) of Lhasa, and said that he would not coexist with Party committee of Lhasa. At that moment, Li Benshan was the party secretary of Lhasa. So he furiously opposed Li Benshan. Our principle was to maintain stability and unity, but he always took actions to destroy unity. He did not listen to what we said at all and kept doing that. Things became worse. When we improved stability and unity, he expressed disapproval and broke it. Then someone in Lhasa City put forward that he should be arrested and be brought to justice (Ch. fa ban). After a discussion made by the members of municipal Party Committee as well as those of the Autonomous Region and Public Security Bureau (Ch. gong an ting), this case was reported to the leading group (Ch. lingdao xiaozu) of the Public Security Office, the Procuratorate, and the Courthouse (Ch. gongjianfa). Then a discussion was made by the members of the standing committee (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> wei). Almost all the members attended the discussion, including Tianbao, Yang Dongsheng, Guo Xilan, Ba Sang and me. We all agreed that Zhang Xueliao committed many crimes and he was the root of the instability. So we decided to arrest and kill him. Moreover, about him, as what I mentioned last time, he even said that I was the biggest counterrevolutionary. Since we all approved of killing him, he was executed by shooting. Yet from then on, I think about his case over and over again. He should not have been killed. Although he brought a false charge (Ch. wu gao) against me, but finally he did not succeed. Later, someone else also said that he should have been rehabilitated (Ch. ping fan), which I agreed with. We could have just put him into prison for the purpose of unity and stability. I think we should have been more cautious and considered more thoroughly before we made the final decision to kill him. After he was executed, we wrote a report of self-criticism and submitted it to the Central Committee. Someone in Tibet blamed me for killing Zhang Xueliao: they said that I did it just in reprisal and therefore it was my own mistake. Hearing this, the Central Committee took this seriously and asked me to give them all the specific relevant documents and materials (to investigate).   

**Q:**  Was Zhang Xueliao rehabilitated later on?   

**A:**  Yes, and I agreed with that. I said that he did commit many mistakes, though he should not have been executed. We rehabilitated him and the situation seemed to be better. The Central Committee criticized me seriously and all the relevant documents were sent to them. Some leaders reviewed all the documents and made some investigations. And I was asked to write a report about what happened during that period. Since I did not have any documents on hand then, I wrote a letter to the Central Committee just according to my memory. After the investigation, the Central Committee gave all the documents to me and asked me to review them and asked me if I had any opinion on that. I said I did not have any opinion and I agreed that Zhang Xueliao should be rehabilitated. Someone in the Central Committee also told me that this matter has ended and that I did not make mistakes. After the Beijing meeting, the work environment in Tibet became better and smoother. Since then, all the work was carried out according to the principles of the Communist Party, rather than that of the Cultural Revolution. During the Cultural Revolution, I want to say, I did not do everything just according to the commands issued by the Central Committee, even if in public, I still acted as if I did carry out all the orders issued by the Central Committee, because I was not able to publicly oppose Jiang Qing, Yao Wenyuan, Wan Hongwen, and Zhang Chunqiao. I want to talk about several things, of which maybe you know something. One was about the criticism of revisionism (Ch. xiuzheng zhuyi) in the educational system. It was carried out all over the country on a large scale. Bao Shengwen was one of the people who did it actively. But we did not launch this movement in Tibet. What was the reason? I told them that since there were just a few schools in Tibet, including a middle school in Lhasa which was newly established, a college for educating teachers, and some elementary schools, the education in Tibet had not been fully developed. So there was no reason to start this movement to make the criticism of revisionism. Out task now should be educating our children well, rather than doing actions to damage the education. So we didn't do it. But we did not report this decision of ours to the Central Committee. Some people asked us why we didn't start the movement, and we explained to them many times: since the situation in Tibet was very special, we couldn't do it. The second point I want to talk was about the movement of arresting the members of the so-called "516 organization" (Ch. wuyiliu fenzi). Many people were arrested in other parts of the country in the name of this movement. During that period, this sort of arresting happened frequently. I said that we should not let this happen in Tibet. At first, we made some investigation and did not find any member of "516", so we did not start the movement. At that time, I did not arrest or criticize any person in the name of this movement. This was the second thing I wanted to talk about. The third thing was that during this period, the political movement of forcing cadres to do labor in "57 Cadres' School" (Ch. wuqi ganxiao) was also started. Yet we didn't start it in Tibet either. Why? I said that people in Tibet all led a hard life. There was nothing for them to warm themselves in winter and most of our cadres in Tibet were single. They could only eat together in the staff restaurant and even so, there was not enough food for them to eat. Sometimes they worked into the night, till 12:00 am or so, when we didn't have enough food to eat. It was very common for there not to be any hot water or firewood left. Considering that their lives were pretty hard, we should not force them to take part in physical labor in those "57 Cadres' School." Moreover, due to the lack of oxygen in the plateau area of Tibet, there were not very many cadres working then. If we forced them to take part in labor, there would be less people who could work there. Therefore, I really felt that people in Tibet led a hard life. We should not let cadres take part in the labor due to this sort of special situations. But someone criticized us on this decisioin and said that we disobeyed the orders of the Central Committee. So I told them that we were still considering and discussing it and trying to find an appropriate place for it. We indeed made some effort to find the place. For example, we heard that we could build the cadres' school in Liangshan: we thought that, if so, the cadres could have a good rest after doing labor, since there was a hot spring in that area. However, after consideration, we decided that since that area is so remote, we canceled our plan of building a cadres' school there and therefore didn't start this movement in Tibet. I can give you another example. A notice from the Department of Cultural Affairs of the Central Government (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 中央] 1. The Central Committee of the CCP. 2. The Central Government of China. 3. Sometimes it also conveys &quot;China.&quot;">zhongyang</a> wenhua bu) said that we should take part in the activities of building Chairman Mao's memorials and of spreading the thought of Chairman Mao. The main content of the notice was to disseminate the thought of Chairman Mao. But in Tibet, how could we do that? To do that, big projects and buildings should be built. In Chengdu, Liu Bei's old palace (a historical site) was destroyed in order to place the statue and memorial hall of Chairman Mao. But we did not do that in Tibet. Why? Many people in Tibet even did not have enough food to eat. So how could we do these sorts of activities? I told my thoughts to the leaders of the Central Military Committee in Beijing. I said that I knew many memorial halls of Chairman Mao were being built all over the country, and that we indeed got the notice from the Central Committee. However, I also said, it was really hard for us to carry out it in Tibet, and also, we certainly could do that if the Central Committee really wanted us to do so and could offer us some funds. First, I said to them, we wanted the Central Military Committee to serve as the secretary for building the memorials. However, they replied that the people working in the Committee were not enough, so we could not get help from the Committee. Then I said that, if so, we did not have the capacity to build the statues and memorial halls in Tibet. In this way, we put this off again and again and in the end, did not do the building work. We did not do these things in Tibet. Now, I am not saying that doing these things was wrong, but as for Tibet, considering the special conditions, it was really hard for us to carry out those activities there. These are what I want to talk about regarding the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. During the Cultural Revolution, in Tibet, it was really hard to carry out the production and construction work there. The reason was that most of the people then, no matter whether they were students or were cadres, were focusing on doing revolutionary activities such as criticizing or arresting counterrevolutionaries. As a result, they had no time to take part in production and construction work. During that period, some important events happened. For example, the Lin Biao Incident took place, and had a great impact on the PLA. Other events included the problem of Chen Boda, as well as other movements like breaking the "four olds" (Ch. si jiu, meaning old ideas, old culture, old customs and old habits). We tried to do work to contribute to the production and the construction, yet because of this, some people criticised us for committing revisionist mistakes, since they thought the sort of work we did belonged to just non-revolutionary matters. In fact, it was really hard to carry those out in Tibet. However, there was one advantage: the masses, cadres and Party members in Tibet were very nice. After the Party Committee of Tibet put forward this issue, many people felt happy, since the main problem in Tibet was that the people did not have enough food to eat. The major problem was how to solve the problem of eating. As what I mentioned before, during the Cultural Revolution, especially before the Tibet Autonomous Region was founded [in 1965], people begging for food could be seen almost everywhere in Lhasa. After the democratic reforms and the founding of the government of the Tibet Autonomous Region, the situation became better. But as the Cultural Revolution began, the situation became bad again. There was not enough food and necessities for the people. I think the biggest problem of Tibet was to solve the difficulty of the lack of food. Therefore, at that time, we decided to take developing agriculture as the first priority. Construction of farms and water conservancy facilities and spreading knowledge of agriculture were carried out in Tibet. We started to select and distribute good strains of grains, cattle, and horses. I can take grain-planting as an example. 10 years ago, the output of winter wheat was over 900 kilograms. In Shigatse, the output of highland barley was over 600 kilograms, in contrast to the previous output of only 100 kilograms. After the popularization of winter wheat, the output of grain in Tibet increased dramatically. Until 1978, we almost achieved the goal that Tibet could produce enough grain for itself. As the population in Tibet increased, both the number of produced goods and the output of grain in pastoral areas increased. At that time, the basic necessities could be guaranteed, which was a great progress. Therefore, in the meeting held in Beijing, after doing research and investigation, we reported the situation in Tibet to the leaders, which was published by The People's Daily (Ch. renmin ribao). Comrade Li Xiannian conducted this meeting. We could supply ourselves with enough food, which was great progress in Tibet. Especially during the Cultural Revolution, since no one could help us ship food from the outside, we could only produce food by ourselves. The Central Committee paid special attention and expressed its support to the development of Tibet. Moreover, besides constructing water conservatory facilities, we had some other plans to develop agriculture: I wanted to make some large-scale projects. And each area should also have its own plan on developing agriculture. In three counties, Shigatse, Bailang, Jiangzi, we made lots of projects to deepen the riverbed, and built roads and dams, and planted trees along the rivers. After doing these projects, the agricultural environment in these counties improved greatly.   

