# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0100.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Ren Rong   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**© 2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Wuhan, China  
**Date of Interview:** April 21, 1999  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Ren Rong   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ren Rong was Party Secretary in the TAR from 1971-1980. Before, that he was a key figure during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. In this interiew, he discusses various aspects of the Cultural Revolution in Tibet in detail, for example, the fighting beteeen Gyenlo and Nyamdre. He also talks about the monasteries during the Cultural Revolution and about the Panchen Lama's problems.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0100_05/H_0100_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Some people were willing to listen to you and some did not listen to you at all. But we had to keep doing this even though they didn't listen. Sometimes there were armed fights, because they asserted that since "revolution is not inviting guests to dinner," there was a reason to fight. We were firmly against this. Every time there was an armed fight, some would be killed and some would be injured. Sometimes the two groups fought with each other and damaged the windows and doors with bullets, stones, tiles, and slingshots (Ch. gu duo; Tib. འུར་རྡོ), which were especially used well by the Tibetan cadres. These slingshots were so powerful that a big stone like this can be thrown tens of meters away, breaking tiles, windows and doors and even injuring or killing someone. After armed fights, the street would be scattered with tiles, bricks, stones, and a lot of people were injured or killed. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྱན་ལོག] One of the two major revolutionary organizations extant during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It is sometimes translated in English as the &quot;Rebels.&quot; It was the less &quot;establishment&quot; and more leftist oriented group.">Gyenlo</a> (Ch. zaozong) tried to use dynamite to cause explosions in west suburbs. However, as a result they failed to do it and rather injured themselves, killing a dozen of people and injuring more with their self-made explosives. In Chamdo, some people, using several trucks, marched to attack a road maintenance station which was equipped with wall and gun towers in order to defend against rebel bandits. So those people were not able to enter and decided to use explosives to destroy the wall. However, they didn't manage to do it and also injured themselves. 10-20 people or so were killed in this event. We firmly opposed this kind of armed fighting. In the actions trying to stop those people from fighting with each other, our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> troops also suffered lots of casualties. Certainly not very many PLA cadres were killed, yet anyway we suffered heavy casualties as well. Another regulation we had was when there were this kind of armed fightings among the massses we were only allowed to mediate between them, but not to join in the fights. No guns were allowed to be used in the mediating, because if guns were used, it would seem that we had conflicts with the masses. It was a big headache for us then. Some of our soldiers and cadres often kept complaining, saying that we leaders were incompetent. We had to explain to them that we were really in an awkward situation. We had to reason with them. Some cadres were nice, and quickly accepted our ideas, but some others were very stubborn. Such cadres did not listen to us and formed their own small groups. Those people, not because we wanted to push them aside, but because they themselves felt that they could not stay there anymore, gradually left their cadre positions. So those people were determined to leave Tibet. There were this kind of cadres in both the army and the government. There was a comrade in the Shigatse Military District. Even though we did not allow the "Big Four" (Ch. da ming, da fang, da zi bao, da bian lun, meaning great sound, great release, big-character poster, big debate ; abbr. da min zhu, meaning great democracy) in the border area, he insisted on doing them, putting forward five or six issues to criticize the headquarters of the Tibet Military District. At last, especially after I was in charge, he left the PLA and started to work in government. Yet he did not learn from this lesson and continued to do the same thing in government, resulting in him losing the respect of the people. In the end he suffered some disease and died. The situation then was really severe and the struggle was rather intense. Anyway, the biggest achievement won in this meeting was the Premier's assertation that both of the two organizations are masses' organizations, and that therefore there was no need to fight. And more importantly, we should carry on the Cultural Revolution well, achieve friendly relationships between ethnic groups, and work hard in production. These were the main issues discussed in the meeting. Since now I don't have the relevant documents, I can't remember the details. Do you have any other questions?   

**Q:**  When you were there... First it was the democratic reforms, and then the establishment of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region (Ch. zizhiqu choubei weiyuanhui), and then the Cultural Revolution. So, what was the general religious situation during this period? And what was the situation about the activities of anti-separatism? And especially, the most important, what about the activities of tearing down the monasteries? For example, Gandan Monastery was dismantled.   

**A:**  I will talk about this. At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, I was not quite familiar with the situation in the local area since at that moment I worked in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a>. Around that time I just participating in the Military Control Committee (Ch. jun guan hui), and I wasn't quite familiar with the social situation outside of the PLA. I only knew things happening inside the army. Frankly, at that moment I knew very little about the situation in Naqu and Chamdo. Before the "February 9th Incident" (Ch. erjiu shijian) when the headquarters of the Military District was attacked, the main activities of the organizations of Tibet Military District in carrying out the Cultural Revolution were mainly done via educating and discussing or debating, and no fights had happened yet. We started to deal with the local affairs after the Military Control Committee was established. We did not allow border defense troops to be involved with the political movements of the Cultural Revolution from the start and paid more attention to monitor this. But some comrades insisted in participating in the Cultural Revolution, saying we were right-wing inclined and were conservative, not daring to mobilize the masses, as I said just a moment ago. The situation of the monasteries had been investigated for a decade. Many people went to the monasteries to take away things from there, like from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a> Monastery, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and the Potala palace. The Red Guards from Beijing also proposed to smash the monasteries into pieces. As soon as we knew the information, we sent our troops to the Jokhang Temple, to Norbulingka, to the Potala palace and to the Tashihunpo Monastery in Shigatse to protect them. Also we tried to protect the lamas. When the lamas wanted to go on the street we tried to convince them that it was not safe. At that time we had Democratic Management Committees (Ch. minguan hui) (in the monasteries), which was liberal and prestigeful. So we asked the democratic management committee to organize the lamas to lock the buildings of the monasteries, trying to close the monasteries from public visits. And even those people who wanted to go to the monasteries to copy books were forbidden to enter them. Troops were ordered to protect the monasteries. Even under such protection, one storeroom of the Jokhang temple was broken into by the Red Guards and lots of things were taken away. In Norbulinga, some outside people tried to get in to take things and in the meantime some cadres working inside also tried to steal relics and other things. Later on we found out about their actions and punished these cadres. In the future, if you go to Tibet, you can find documents about this matter. Several cadres were punished because of their actions. We were determined to protect those monasteries, because after the democratic reforms, we had made the decision about which monasteries in Tibet should be protected. The most famous monasteries in Tibet were all under protection. That said, due to the lack of army forces in some places it was not realistic to protect the monasteries there. Take Gandan Monastery for example. In fact, we didn't even know when they tore down the monastery, and we were not able to protect it, because first of all, the monastery was on a mountain, and secondly, the tension on the border did not allow our border defense troops to move away. Thirdly, at that time we were also afraid of civil strife. Unlike now, the local governments of many areas hadn't been established during the period of the Cultural Revolution. So what we could do was to control all the monasteries that we were able to control at that time. That's the first. Secondly, there were indeed some monasteries torn down by the masses or the Red Guards because they needed to build houses and cowsheds. These people took the things (from the monasteries) at will and nobody knew about that. It was said that in Gandan Monastery, there was a long-lit pearl which was the most important gem in the monastery, yet it was stolen and was never recovered. It illuminates irself at night, and people know now it's because of radioactive substances. With those people messing around, and Red Guards keeping attacking the monasteries, the lamas gradually left. This was the situation at Gandan Monastery according to my knowledge. Some buildings were torn down by the masses, some were torn down by the lamas themselves, and some were moved out by the lamas. I heard about this only afterwards. The damages to the monasteries in Tibet fell into the following categories: First of all, from 1958-1959 the counter-revolutionary rebels largely used many monasteries as their military bases. A lot of rebels moved into them and they damaged many. Living in the monasteries, the rebels caused some damages and they even robbed many precious items from them. Secondly, some monasteries were taken by the rebels as fortifications. I can give you an example. There was one monastery in Longzi which was located very near to the border. The mountainside was so steep and the temple was located on it. We had a very fierce battle there, and quite a few our comrades were killed in the battle. And actually near the end of the battle we still didn't manage to occupy it. Yet at last, in one night, the rebels escaped under the cover of a dark night. Later on I went to that place to investigate in person. In that battle the rebels held their ground and the PLA kept attacking, even using cannons and aircraft to bomb at the rebels since for a long time we were not able to occupy it and the rebels there caused lots of casualties. All these military actions could lead to damages for the monasteries. Thirdly, due to the democratic reforms (abbr. Ch. min gai; Ch. min zhu gai ge), many lamas, especially those from small monasteries, secularized themselves and got married. With those lamas leaving the monasteries, the monasteries were gradually deserted. This also contributed to the damage of the monasteries. Especially during the Cultural Revolution, many monasteries were left there, with no repairs and no management and they were eventually torn down by someone. So the Cultural Revolution should not be take as the sole one responsibile for the damages of those monasteries. I oppose that accusation because to be honest, that isn't the truth, is it? As a PLA leader, I don't make any complaint today. We tried our best to protect those monasteries, but there were some places of which we were not fully aware. And during that period, lots of troubles intervened in our everyday work (so we were not able to pay attention to the protection of some monasteries). Sometimes we even couldn't hold a normal meeting to discuss issues. Sometimes we had to go to the air force command post in the western suburb of Lhasa if we wanted to hold a meeting and discuss our work. The air force command post was located in a place near Drepung Monastery. We, several leaders of the Military District, had to take the Jeep to drive there and under the cover of night had to sneak into the command room of air force command post just in order to have a meeting. Sometimes we even had to go into the vegetable cellar located in the backyard of the Garrison Battalion in order to just hold a meeting. Why did this happen? It happened because the masses might come to arrest you suddenly. What could you do when the masses attacked you, when you were not allowed to fire at them? Let me tell you, at that time, the local cadres were in an even worse situation. They didn't even have armed forces to protect themselves. So when I was there, I was trying my best to protect the local cadres by gathering those cadres into a big yard in front of Guanyu Temple (Ch. guan gong miao) near Norbulinga. We did it not in order to take them under custody, but in order to protect them. We organized them to study there so they would not be criticized and denounced. At first we assigned a platoon to protect them. When that was not enough, we sent a company. We dispatched the troops to protect these people and to not allow anyone to break in, especially after the establishment of the Revolutionary Committee. There were a few of those comrades who had connections and therefore could get protection outside. So if they decided to leave, we let them go with no criticizing and no denouncing. We were trying to protect them. Thus, in Tibet, the number of cadres who died because of the political movements of criticism and denouncement in that period, in fact were not very many compared to the situation in those other provinces. That said, there were still some cases. For example, in Nagqu one cadre committed suicide at the beginning of the Cultural Revolution. In Lhasa, Zhao Wentang, the deputy Party secretary of Lhasa, committed suicide. Some were beaten or even disabled as I know. In the headquarters of Tibet Military District, a deputy chief of staff committed suicide. In the yard of the headquarters, some members of rebellious organizations criticized and denounced him. At that moment I was in Beijing. After the criticism and the denouncement, he felt he was treated unfairly, so he committed suicide. He was a good person from Shanxi (Ch. shan xi); his name was Liu Quan. There was another man, a deputy director of the Logistics Department (Ch. houqinbu). He was a hardcore activist in the rebellious movements. I can remember once when we had a mobilization assembly, he jumped onto his bench and began yelling. He would not stop yelling. And once, when he was debating with the masses in the playground, he was struck by a heart attack and died. That was also considered to be caused by the Cultural Revolution. So in the headquarters of our Military District two comrades died. Their death was not because of our organizing the movement of criticizing and denouncing. Rather, it was because of the activities done by the masses' organizations. In summary, we did not have the power and force to protect all the monasteries. And also, we should not attribute all the damages solely to the Cultural Revolution. Another issue is about Buddhism. During the period when I was there, we basically dealt with the matters about Buddhism according to the regulations issued after the democratic reforms. Based on the Central Committee's and Chairman Mao's principles, I carried out the policy of freedom of religious beliefs. The people who believed in religion had the right to do so. And the people without religious belief also had the right to be a non-religious person. But at that moment, I had set some restrictions. If the lamas and gurus had difficulties in living in the monasteries, we would offer help by providing supplies. During that period, we provided them with food and money. They also had some cattle and pasture areas which could provide them with some meat. The freedom to believe or not to believe religion was the basic policy. At that time some objected to my opinion, saying that the principle that both the freedom to believe religion and the freedom to not believe religion should be supported equally, could hurt some believers' feelings. The most important one who objected to my opinion was Yang Jieren. He even had government documents and had published a book stating that we should avoid mentioning that we also support the freedom of not to believe religion. I was not able to criticize him because he was the leader, but I quoted Chairman Mao who once said it is the masses' right to choose to believe religion or not. I said if someone did not believe, yet you forced him to believe, you would also hurt those people's feeling. In China, the people with religious beliefs are only the minority, although in Tibet the majority believe in some religion. Yet in Tibet there are still some people without religious beliefs. Why shouldn't they have the right to choose not to believe in any relgion? One principle was that the activities of the lamas should be within the monasteries, and should not get involved with politics and matters about the regime. The second principle was that their religious activities should not affect public safety, economic production and the people's lives and work. Under this principle, their activities could be free. Another principle was that we should try to exert the influence of the Democratic Management Committee. I can tell you that the Democratic Management Committees at that time functioned very well, and they managed the monasteries in very good way. And they themselves claimed that they would be independent in living and did not want support from the government. They organized themselves to build water conservancy works, to plant vegetables and trees, a lot of trees. Very frequently I went to visit Drepung Monastery with one of my secretaries. They treated me with butter tea. Sometimes they picked peaches that they grew by themselves and gave me some. I noticed they planted many peach trees, apple trees, and built a big water pool and a very good water channel. I was very supportive of them and praised them, saying that you comrades and lamas had done a very good job, and that you alleviated people's burdens and you could now depend on yourself. Besides, in that period the monasteries were closed and in general nobody was allowed to enter them. But I told them that there can be one exception: their family members such as their parents, should be able to enter the monasteries to visit them, and that they could go outside to visit their parents as well. At that time, the temples were so peaceful. Even though some incidents happened, people would notify us immediately. At that time, we were trying to make connections with the people who knew the situation and the real facts very well. And in contacting with them, we asked them to implement one principle: they should tell us the truth. When Dalai Lama secretly sent someone back to Tibet, we knew everything clearly about where they went and what they said, etc. Until I left, Tibet was peaceful and there was solidarity. Lamas were obeying the law, and following the regulations and policies. The Democratic Management Committee played a very good part in solving problems, and worked well in all aspects. This is my thought on religious issues. I don't have more to talk about on this topic. I had very good relationship with some religious people like Pagpala and Shenqin (appr. Ch. shen qin), and they became my good friends. There had been many more lamas who were my friends. We greeted each other when we met. During the important festivals, I would visit them, especially during the Tibetan New Year. I visited Pagpala, Shenqin, Langdeng and Tudeng's homes. I did it to express my respect to them. And they also behaved really well.   

**Q:**  How much do you know about the case of Panchen Lama? Certainly this case happened relatively early.   

**A:**  Ha ha, let's talk about Panchen Lama. The Panchen Lama was a good person in the beginning. The Central Committee developed and educated him. The last Panchen Lama [the 9th] was not even allowed to enter Tibet by the Dalai Lama. He died outside (of Tibet) and wasn't able to go back eventually. Those old Panchen Lamas all stayed inland and their local area was governed by their own monastery. It is all because of the Dalai's refusal to let them enter Tibet. Our Party was righteous to assist the Panchen Lama, and to help him enter Tibet [the 10th]. Chairman Mao, Prime Zhou, and General Commander Zhu De, the elder generation of revolutionaries all supported him, wishing him to develop well and to become a good patriot. This was done well and was successful. However, later on, the Panchen had some mistakes in his thoughts on the democratic reforms and on quelling of the counter-revolutionary rebellion. His mistake was that he regarded some local issues as the overall situation, and regarded some individual problems, as the problems of the Central Committee. He had illusions like that. He failed to listen to the voice of the masses, and instead he listened only to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔོན་པོ, མངའ་བདག] 1. A manorial estate holder. 2. Chief of an area.">lord</a>s, the lord's agents and some leaders of lamas. Those people only reported to him about the dark side rather than the bright side. And he did not try to get to know the (full) details, but instead went ahead collecting materials to support the dark side arguments. After that, He wrote a letter with seventy thousand characters (Ch. qiwanyan shangshu). In that letter, there were correct statements, but there were also wrong ones. He was right on his support of Communist Party and the people's government, on his approval of the democratic reforms, and on his confirmation of the democratic reforms. He did have lots of contributions. However, he said Communist Party's actions didn't match its rhetoric, claiming that the acts of quelling the rebellion went too far, that many people were not allowed to believe in their religion, that many monasteries were destroyed and the people had suffered lots of difficulties. He seemed to say that although the Communist Party's high-ranking leaders were saying some sweet words, actually the Tibetan people's culture and religion were all destroyed (Ch. miezu miejiao). He collected lots of cases of this kind, emphasizing this sort of problem and claiming that the democratic reforms were wrong, because the leaders' actions failed to match their words. He said some good words at the beginning of his letter, but denied them in the end. Then he actively organized armed forces and gathered the reactionaries. For example, he organized the Panchen's garrison battalion, which should have been managed by the Headquarters of Tibet Military District. Then he tried everything, looking for equipment and weapons to strengthen his troops; and he trained them and asked them to do target practice every day. He also set up a machinery school in Shigatse and tried to train his military cadres there. Because of his actions of this sort, the Central Committee criticized him, saying although some of his opinions were right, many were still wrong. He did not listen to this advice and still kept building up his armed force. I went into Tibet in 1964 and in 1965, as one member of the standing committee, I criticized him back to back (meaning not face-to-face), wishing he could thoroughly talk about himself, which he didn't do. Later on, the Central Committee saw the problem and took some measures. First, the Central Committee disbanded his garrison battalion and took away his weapons and horses. Based on the spirit of the Central Committee, we sent him to Beijing, where we gave him a house with a large yard, which was much bigger and better than mine, because anyway he was still treated as the vice chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (abbr. CPPCC). Guards and workers were still sent to help and protect him and his life still remained the same. His parents and his brother's wife were also sent to live with him. Did you know that his brother's wife was living with him, which was regarded by us as a joke? And his dumb (meaning cannot speak) younger brother also went to Beijing to live with him. During the Cultural Revolution, the Central Committee continued to protect him. However, once, the masses took him away from his house. Some Tibetan students from the Central College of National Minorities (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 中央] 1. The Central Committee of the CCP. 2. The Central Government of China. 3. Sometimes it also conveys &quot;China.&quot;">zhongyang</a> minzu xueyuan), as well as other Tibetan students from other colleges, took him out of his house and held a meeting to criticize and denounce him. This is what I know. And especially, he was forbidden to participate into political activities. At the end of the Cultural Revolution, he was released. At that moment, comrade Zeng Yongya had left and so it was me who was in charge of the work of Tibet. So in Tibet, according to the spirit of the Central Committee, we met the Panchan Lama and talked with him, telling him that we wanted him back to work. Before the Central Committee talked with him, we talked with him first in order to know his attitude. So we took him away. And then, I, Yang Dongsheng, Guo Xilan, Raidi, Basang, and some others, held a meeting in Beijing and took him away. When we met him, it was very funny that we found he had become extremely nice and extremely humble, and he was extremely friendly to us. He confessed all the time that he felt really sorry to the Party, to the people, and to Tibet. He even said his crimes made him deserve ten thousand times of death. He said hadn't met us for several months, so he was very happy when we met again. He said he was willing to abandon his old self and to improve himself to become a new person who would closely follow and support the Chinese Commmust Party forever. The Panchen Lama said lots of words like these all the time. So we all thought he had exellent speaking skills. Many words he said even we were not able say them. Then we invited him to have a dinner in Beijing. Many of our Tibetan cadres were not happy about that, and at first were reluctant to have dinner with the Panchen. So we told the Tibetan cadres that we should try to do the united front work. Finally, the Tibetan cadres were persuaded and agreed to sit together with him to have the dinner. After the dinner, we sent him back. Later on, he talked with the Department of the United Front Work (Ch. tongzhanbu). He also married his wife Li Jie. After the Central Committee's approval, he married Li Jie. After his marriage, when we came to Beijing, he invited us to attend his wedding party. So we, lots of members of Standing Committee of Tibet Autonomous Region, went to attend the wedding party. Some cadres were not willing to attend, but at last we persuaded them to go there together with us. At that moment he behaved very well. And then, in one year of the 1980s, we went to Beijing to attend the meeting of National People's Congress. In one meeting of it, he said he had been kept in prison for more than 10 years, and that the reason why the rebellion took place was that we committed ultra-leftist mistakes. When I heard this, I was shocked: I did not imagine that he had became this kind of people! He even regarded the rebellions as the result of CCP's committing ultra-leftist mistakes, which I could not accept. So at that moment, we had our different opinions. However, since I had retired, I did not want to be involved with these kinds of matters any more. But in private I disagreed with him. Later on, Zhao Ziyang also said, the problems in the past were all as the result of our ultra-leftist mistakes. I really disagreed with Zhao Ziyang on this point. For a long time I had a very good relationship with Zhao Ziyang. When I worked in Tibet, Zhao Ziyang worked in Chengdu. During that period, we frequently met with each other to discuss issues. So I could not understand why he said this kind of thing! And also, the Panchen said that after the democratic reforms, all the cadres promoted to higher positions were ultra-leftists, and that therefore, all the actions done by these leftist cadres were ultra-leftist, and that in the end their actions led to all the problems happening later on. The Panchen wanted to say that all the wrong-doings were because of us, because of the CCP. Both the Panchen and even some other comrades within our Party said this kind of things, which I can not accept.   

**Q:**  Did you meet Zhao Ziyang or send a letter to him, to tell him your opinion on this issue?   

**A:**  No. I never did that. I do not want to make that kind of trouble. So that is the end. In Chengdu, I saw a document about his action of divining (Ch. dagua), which I did not see in the past. He made a divination in front of a statue of a god, asserting that he would say what the god said. His activity of divination was really reactionary. Via the divining, the Panchen said: the ruler would be changed (Ch. tian yao bian); the CCP could not get the people's support. Thus, we should say, this comrade, though in some aspects he had done right things, in other aspects also committed wrong-doings. As for the right things he did, in addition to what I have mentioned just now, I will add one more point: he was different from the Dalai. After all, he was a patriotic person, and he did not defect and escape. So, the Central Committee said that he is a patriotic person, and praised many of his contributions, about which I agree. However, as said today, he also committed some wrongdoings. And some of his wong-doings were really severe. After his death, in the inland provinces, according to what I knew in Wuhan, many people were worried about whether the situation of Tibet could remain stable and peaceful after the Panchen's death. Then I answered them that according to my knowledge, no big trouble would happen, because among the cadres of Tibet, though the Panchen had some influence, his influence was not so large. There is no doubt that the CCP has the largest influence. In addition, this person had committed some mistakes. Some people were not satisfied with my answer, so I said to them that if you do not believe me, you could wait and see whether Tibet will remain stable or not. As a result, as what happened afterwards, no big trouble happened in Tibet at all. Anyway, I was not quite acquainted with him. I had met him just several times. After his release, in Tibet we sorted out all his previous belongings, including his deposits in bank, his gems which we kept for him in the bank, and his materials in his pasture. These were really a large amount of belongings and we did not lose any of them. And we returned all his belongings to him. In terms of only the cash we returned to him, it amounted to more than 5,000,000. And there were many boxes of gems. We returned all these to him and did not hold back anything. At that moment, he did not ask us to return his house. He once had a house in Lhasa which we did not return to him. Yet we also told him that if he wanted it, he could get it back. He did not make this request. At that moment, when Chen Yonggui came to Tibet...   

