# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0100.01  
##  : with Ren Rong  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Wuhan, China  
**Date of Interview:** 12 April 1999  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Ren Rong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
**Name:** Wife  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** ??  
**Date of Birth:** ????  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ren Rong was Party Secretary in the TAR from 1971-1980. Before that he was a key figure during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet and on this tape discusses various aspects of the Cultural Revolution in Tibet and his work.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0100_01/H_0100_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A2:**  The first phase for him (Ren Rong) was to take part in the Long March. He went through the grassland and snowy mountains three times and then he arrived in Yan'an in Northern Shaanxi Province. This was the first stage for him. His second phase was to participate in the war to "Resist U.S. Aggression and Aid Korea" (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">kang</a> mei <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> chao). He was involved in this for quite a long time, around 8 years. At that time, he was the chief representative (Ch. shou xi dai biao) of the Central Committee for 6 years.   

**Q:**  Was there a guy called Edward [Robert Ekvall], who was a U.S. representative?   

**A2:**  Maybe he does not remember? Do you? (She asks Ren Rong)   

**Q:**  The American representative had the accent of northwest of China. And he was an expert on Chinese studies. I think he was born in Gansu and he is the son of a missionary. I have read his story.   

**A2:**  He (Ren Rong) entered Korea as one of the first group of people. At first, he was the director of the Organizational Department (Ch. zu zhi bu bu zhang) in the Volunteer Army (Ch. zhi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> jun). Then he worked as both vice director of the Political Department (Ch. zheng zhi bu zhu ren) and director of the Organizational Department. A series of reports about the death of Mao Anying, which were written by him and others, were published in the Beijing Evening Paper (Ch. wan bao). During the war to Resist U.S. Aggression and Aid Korea, he was the chief representative of China. This was in his second stage. The third stage when he had brilliant experiences was the period when he stayed in Tibet for 16 years, from 1964 to 1980. He had, in fact, wanted to continue to stay in Tibet until he finished the projects on the Yarlung and Lhasa Rivers, but Hu Yaobang asked him to go back to Beijing quickly, so he had to come back home in 1980. He had been in Tibet for 16 years in total. These three stages were really important to him. Moreover, during China's War of Liberation (Ch. jie fang zhan zheng), he got wounded several times. In the history of one's life, there are some prominent points. It is not possible that what a person has done are all worth writing. Some stories about him are not so important. But he left home and became a Red Army soldier and took part in the War of Resistance Against Japan for 8 Years and the War of Liberation for 3 or 4 years, and then joined the War to Resist U.S. Aggression and Aid Korea; and then worked in 50th and 38th Army Corps (Ch. jun) and in the Headquarters of the Tibet Military District (Ch. xi zang jun qu). He was even the leader of 4 organizations of the Tibet Autonomous Region (Ch. xizang zizhiqu): the National People's Congress (Ch. ren da), political consultative conference (Ch. zheng xie), the Party Committee (Ch. dang wei) of the Tibet Autonomous Region and Tibet Military District's (political commissar). Then he also went to the Wuhan Military Region (Ch. wuhan junqu) for a short time. In the Wuhan Military Region, he worked as the 1st vice political commissar and Party secretary (Ch. shu ji) of the committee for inspecting discipline (Ch. ji wei; short for ji lu jian cha wei yuan hui) of the Wuhan Military Region. Then he retired and came to the college for old people (Ch. lao nian da xue) until now. The Party Committee of Tibet encouraged him to write his memoirs. His niece also said that the memoirs would be valuable and can be kept as important historical materials for our children. About 7 or 8 years ago, I once saw a small book about him, which was written by an American person perhaps, and it was published in Hong Kong. In this book, the author says that once in Tibet, Ren Rong implemented a series of ultra-leftist policies (Ch. ji zuo zheng ce) and thoughts, which had negative influence on Tibet. However, this in fact, was not true. In China, lots of people don't know the truth, so they accepted these ideas, such as what has been said by the author of that little book. Actually, at that time, when Ren Rong was in Tibet, it was during the period of the Cultural Revolution. Yet, Ren Rong was one people who was not ultra-leftist at all. He was sincere and generous to people and liked to communicate with the masses. You can see that since he stayed in Tibet for 16 years. He is very familiar with almost every area of Tibet, and I think the only area where he didn't visit is a county city called Luotuo. Except for it, he visited all the areas of Tibet. Most of the people in Tibet respected him and thought highly of him. Even now, if the civilians in Tibet are asked who the party secretary of Tibet is, they would say "Ren Rong." Most of the people there knew him very well, even in the remote regions, though the young people now don't quite know him. The above is his main story that I would like to tell you two.   

**Q:**  Did you ever work as a political commissar in the Headquarters of the Tibet Military District? The first question I want to ask you is about that... [tape unclear for about 2 minutes]   

**A1:**  I worked in Tibet for 18 years, or maybe 16 years. To me, it was really a long time and a special period for me in my lifetime. This was really a hard time for me. At that time, I was in charge of the work in Tibet. It was really a complicated, difficult, and messy time. Under these conditions, I was appointed the governer of Tibet. There were many complicated and hard things to solve. In the beginning, I did not adapt myself well to the circumstances there, but I had no choice but to get used to that. First I want to talk about how I went to Tibet. Before that, I worked in the 38th Army Corps. At that time, the Central Committee decided to assign some people to work in Tibet. So from the Shenyang Military Region (Ch. shenyang junqu) lots of people were selected, but as far as I know, some of them didn't want to go, giving reasons such as bad health or difficulties at home. Hearing this, I told Zhang Weihan, who was the director of the Headquaters of the General Staff (Ch. zong can mou bu), that I would go if it was hard [for him] to find someone else. After that, the leaders of the Shenyang Military Region did not say anything. Very soon, however, Zhang Weihan asked me to take a physical examination in Beijing. It was in May. According to the physical examination, I knew that my body functioned well, except the only problem was that I got appendicitis and needed an operation. After the operation, I stayed in the hospital for 10 days. Before long, I was informed to go to work in Tibet by the Central Military Committee (Ch. zhong yang jun wei) and was told that I would be in charge of the work of Tibet. After that, I went back to the 38th Army Corps to take part in a military maneuver. Then, I had a holiday and moved to Beijing. I entered Tibet in September. I think it was in September, right after Mother's Day. Before Mother's Day, in a meeting, they told us what happened in Tibet at that time and that the enemies there took action against the Communist Party frequently and furiously. They said we should make every effort to guard the frontier and to protect the people's safety and property. Then we met Zhang Jingwu, who was the Party representative of Central Committee for Tibet, and Wang Chenhan, who was the commander of 60th Army Corps, and a comrade. He was also the director of the office of the commander of the Shenyang Military Region and later worked in 50th Army Corps and then was appointed as the vice chief of staff (Ch. can mou zhang) of the Tibet Military District. Wang Chenhan was appointed vice commander, and I was appointed the vice political commissar. We three were going to enter Tibet together at the same time. We went to Tibet by plane before October 1st. I went to Tibet because I made this request to go to Tibet by myself. I had been to Tibetan areas (Ch. zang qu) during the Long March and knew that the life there must be hard. But it was our responsibility to guard the frontier. Chairman Mao told us that a good comrade is the one who chooses to go to work in the tough areas even though he or she knows clearly that it is difficult. Keeping that in mind, I was not afraid and would work hard to finish all the work there so as to be a good comrade. I was very happy to go to Tibet. I took a plane that went through Qinghai, the Mountains of the Tanggula pass, and then arrived at the airport of Dangxiong (Damshung) in Tibet. We visited some people at the airport and went to the barracks (Ch. bing zhan) at Yangbajing to have lunch. Before the lunch, we visited the kitchen and some rooms in the barracks. And then the Headquarters of the Tibet Military District dispatched some people to pick us up and take us to Lhasa. The leaders there were all happy to see us. Tan Guansan was not there at that time. The rest of the leading comrades welcomed us and invited us to have dinner with them. [2 sentences unclear] On the second day, they held a meeting at which they told us something about the situation in Tibet and asked us our attitude toward some issues. Later, we visited some organizations of the Tibet Military District to get familiar with the environment and the conditions there. And we went to visit the Party Committee of Tibet Autonomous Region. Why did we go there? Because Zhang Jingwu asked me to be a member of the standing committee of Tibet. [3 sentences unclear] I was not quite familiar with the local work there at that time. Then I went to inspect the work of the 52nd Division which was stationed in Linzhi. I want to tell you something about that. After I arrived there, I began to inspect the work there. I lived there in a barracks built for temporary use. I didn't leave there until the end of the year.   

**Q:**  When did you get there?   

**A1:**  I arrived at Lhasa on October 2nd [1964]. In October and November, I visited the art troupe (Ch. wen gong tuan). After I finished checking the work there, I wrote a report. Then we went to Chayu, which is near the eastern border line. The condition there was also very complicated.   

**Q:**  When did you go there? Before or after the Chinese New Year?   

**A1:**  We went to Chayu after the New Year. At the beginning, in Chayu, we organized many troops and launched the movement of "Great Producing"(Ch. da sheng chan), organizing people to reclaim wasteland and cultivate land, as well as to strengthen the national defense work along the border there. During that time, in Chayu, for that period I had made a discussion about the situation in Chayu, where the atmosphere near the border was really highly charged. And at that time, it snowed heavily so that the transport conditions there became worse. Then we went to Zhadong, by way of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, and also to Jilong, Zhongba, and Shaga, to inspect the national defense work along the border in these areas. The reason why we inspected the work there was that, at that time, the Central Military Committee asked us to assign troops to block all the important mountain passes and to train cavalry troops since automobiles could not enter these areas, and to concentrate the strength of our troops. I worked with Wang Chenhan, who was the vice commander, and Wang Kang, who was the chief of staff (Ch. can mou zhang) of Tibet Military District. We worked there for several months. In August...   

**Q:**  Was that in 1965?   

**A1:**  Yes, in August of 1965. No, it was in July. We finished all the work for organizing. After a discussion about this, we were asked to prepare for an important job, a large-scale military action. At that time, the relationship between Pakistan and India was quite tense. We planned to attack the troops of the "Defenders of the Faith" (Ch. wei jiao jun) [Chushigandru]. At that moment, the governments of USA, England, India, the Soviet Union and Taiwan all took actions to help the troops of the "Defenders of the Faith" against China, which made the situation very severe. Later, on the first day of autumn (Ch. li qiu), we held a meeting of the government in Jilong.   

**Q:**  When was the meeting held?   

**A1:**  Still in 1965, in that Autumn... (tape unclear for 1 minute). After Mother's Day, I went to the mountain of Chagula, whose height is more than 5,300 meters. That is what I have checked, more than 5,300 meters. We could only get there through another mountain. The road was so hard to go on that we could not move any more on the way. Seeing this, some soldiers helped us to reach the top of the mountain. We reached there in the morning, and left in the afternoon on the next day. At night, we <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲང] A unit of traditional Tibetan currency. It was also called ngüsang [tib. དངུལ་སྲང]. 50 nügsang = 1 dotse; 10 sho = 1 nügsang; 20 5-karma coins = 1 ngüsang. There were also paper currency notes of 7-sang, 25-sang, and 10-sang denominations.">sang</a> two songs. We were all very happy. And then we went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, to inspect the work there. At that time, the situation in Yadong was not good: the troops of India had reached the area at the foot of the mountain of the Jiedila Mt. Pass. We assigned the troops of two battalions (Ch. ying) to defend different mountain passes. Also, we had another two regiments, as their reinforcements. We organized our troops there for two goals: to defend the territory against an invasion by Indian troops, and to attack the rebels led by the Dalai Lama. Before our mobilizing the troops, the enemies had attacked us: once they attacked one of our teams of automobiles by which many of our cadres were on vacation; and also, they once destroyed one of our teams of automobiles transporting supplies. As a result, lots of our people were wounded or killed by them, and lots of our supplies were lost. And at that time, some British people even made a film to praise the rebels' activities. You can see how cruel and aggressive they were. That was really a hard time for all of us. And from then on, we began to strengthen both the troops of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> and those of local military organizations to make war preparations. This is what happened in 1965. In 1966, in autumn, the Cultural Revolution had not yet begun. I went to Chamdo to inspect the work of the troops there. In Chamdo, I attended a meeting and heard a report of their work during 1965. After that, I went back to Beijing to have a holiday.   

**Q:**  Was that the first holiday you took after you went to Tibet?   

**A1:**  Yes, it was the first time. I stayed in Tibet for one year in 1965, and then, in the first half of 1966, I attended the meeting to hear the reports of their work summaries, which was made by the government of Chamdo. Then I went back to Beijing to have a holiday. When I was in Beijing, the Cultural Revolution began. Knowing that the Cultural Revolution had begun, I went back to Tibet immediately. At that time, in Beijing, the activities of the Cultural Revolution were not done as violently as later on, but in Chengdu, it had been quite fierce. In Beijing, some Red Guards (Ch. hong wei bing) took some actions such as searching people's houses and confiscating their personal properties (Ch. chao jia), doing demonstrations, or eliminating the "four olds" (i.e. old ideas, old culture, old custom, and old habits; Ch. chu si jiu). In Chengdu, the situation had changed. Their slogan was "to overthrow local tyrants (Ch. tu huang shang) of Southwest China", meaning that their target was Li Jingquan. Li Jingquan was the party secretary (Ch. shu ji) of the Southwest Bureau. Some people announced that they wanted to overthrow Li Jingquan and to overthrow the local tyrants.   

**Q:**  From which place did you arrive at Chengdu at this time?   

**A1:**  At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, I went back to Tibet from Beijing by way of Chengdu. In Chengdu, I saw many activities. Their slogan was to "overthrow local tyrants." ...(unclear 3 sentences, talking about Li Jingquan). Li Jingquan had taken part in the Long March (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> zheng) and during the Long March, he was the political commissar of a political office of...(not clear), so I was very familiar with him, and I knew clearly that he was a good person.   

**Q:**  Did you meet him at that time?   

**A1:**  No, I did not have a chance to see him during that time because Li Jingquan had hidden. At that time, the situation in Chengdu was in a mess. And then, I went to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  How did you go to Chengdu? By airplane?   

**A1:**  Yes, the Central Military Committee dispatched an airplane to send me there.   

**Q:**  Which airport did you arrive? Was it Dangxiong Airport?   

**A1:**  Yes... (unclear)...The airport in Wuhan, whose construction was just finished and had opened. In Tibet, there was also a movement proclaiming that they wanted to overthrow the local tyrants in Tibet, whom they refered to as Zhang Guohua. At the end of that year, the situation became worse. Why do I say that? At that time, some students came here from Beijing. A Red Guards' organization from University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Beijing (Ch. bei hang) that was led by Ye Chong came here. At that time, lots of Red Guards' organizations came to Tibet. They attacked party committees, local governments, and kept some cadres in prison. So according to the instructions given by Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou, we sent Wang Qimei, who was the vice political commissar and one party secretary of party committee of Tibet Autonomous Region, to Beijing. Yet in Beijing, Wang Qimei was criticized and denounced severely, which I didn't know at that moment. Only later on, when I attended a meeting in Beijing,did I know it.   

**Q:**  Was Zhang Guohua in Tibet at that time?   

**A1:**  No, Zhang was in Beijing. Not very long after Wang Qimei went to Beijing, Wang Qimei got a heart disease and passed away. We took measures to protect Zhou Renshan, who was one party secretary of the party committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region. Since Guo Xilan and Yang Dongsheng were not the top leaders, we didn't let them go outside frequently. So those two stayed within their houses, cooking and doing other housework. At that moment, attacking the core leaders was their main principle, so we protected Zhou Renshan. On February 9th of 1967, some, not very many, local students, workers, and peasants and residents who were led by some students of the University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Beijing, began to take some actions. Ye Chong was the leader at that time.   

**Q:**  Did you see him at that time?   

**A1:**  Yes, but later I didn't see him. He was a student from University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Beijing. Ye Chong led the people rushing into the yard; they rushed in from the east gate. At that moment, we had a "Office For Supporting The Left-wing" (Ch. zhi zuo ban gong shi). This office was headed by Yin Fatang, who was just appointed the director of that office (Ch. zhu ren) by the Political Department (Ch. zheng zhi bu). In the morning on that day, after breakfast, 3 vice political commissars (one is Lu Yishan, who was a director before) and I, and one old political commissar...(not clear)...had a meeting. At the beginning of the meeting, the vice political commissar, Lu Yishan, said something wrong. What did he say? He said that there was something wrong with the direction of the things we did, but he could not say what we did wrong. I asked him what kind of fault we had made, but he was unable to explain clearly. Another vice political commissar...(unclear for 2 minutes). The leaders asked me to be the commander to organize the work there... After I checked some work there... There were two teams [revolutionary groups], one was called gyenlo (Ch. zao zong). They wanted me to join, but I told them that I would not. They criticized me about that. I said that I would try my best to do everything I should do, but not something else, and that I would obey the orders of Communist Party and Chairman Mao. I told them that I was in charge of the military issues here and the army was the army of Communist Party and Chairman Mao. After hearing this, many people took part in the discussion and criticized me. There were many people from the Party or government organizations (Ch. ji guan). Some of them were cadre (Ch. gan bu). I argued with them...(unclear 2 sentences)...   

**Q:**  Did Ye Chong go there to see you?   

**A1:**  Yes, he went there from Beijing.   

**Q:**  Was Tang Jiangsu there at that time?   

**A1:**  Yes. I told them all that they could ask me whatever they wanted to know and I would be happy to answer all their questions. We talked about that for almost the whole day and did not eat anything. Everyone was quite nervous. After Chen Shi cooked, we ate something, but he still did not say anything. Then we continued to discuss this until dark. At this time, Yin Fatang came to me and said that he could replace me and let me have a rest...(unclear for 2 minutes)... Some leaders from the Military District called us. They said that it was so important to defend the frontier, and anyone who disobeyed that would be arrested. Some people were arrested at that time. I will talk about that later. And then we made a discussion about what kind of people should be arrested. A committee for inspecting faults was set up. And people working in the committee were asked to report to the Central Committee frequently. Zhou Renshan...(unclearly). Someone said he was going to arrest a director of the Department of Civil Administration (Ch. min zheng bu), who was an old red army man (Ch. hong jun). I asked him several questions. What is a "capitalist-roader" (Ch. zou zi pai][This is a term used during the Great Cultural Revolution, meaning a person in power taking the capitalist road)]? They arrested some people and checked each of them. They set free those who were not capitalist-roaders and sent those who were to prison. During that time, many people were arrested and interrogated. And some people who were not members of Communist Party were also arrested. I supported those right things and opposed those wrong things. I didn't support the actions against the Communist Party and actions to arrest innocent people. But this problem was hard to deal with. At this time, the government was at a standstill. The Central Committee then set up a Committee for Control (Ch. guan zhi wei <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a> hui) to be in charge of the military issues in Tibet. Zhang Guohua was nominated as the chairman of the committee. Chen Mingyi, who was the vice commander (Ch. fu si ling) and director of the Tibet Military District, and I, were also members of the committee. At that time, our task during the Cultural Revolution was to be in charge of the main issues concerning the local army and national defense... (unclearly for 3 minutes)...There were several teams in the committee. I attended several meetings. Zhou Renshan was in Tibet at that time. I was in Tibet too. And Tan Guanshan entered Tibet at that time. We joined the team...(one sentence unclear about Zhou Renshan). Later, we went to Chengdu and Beijing, and then took him to Lhasa. There we worked and held some training programs, and also something else I will not mention. Then a commission for inspecting discipline was set up. At that time, the Tibet Military District was not managed by the Chengdu Military Region, but was directly managed by the Central Committee. Someone in the Party committee (Ch. dang wei) of the Chengdu Military Region and some from the Central Committee wanted me to be the director (Ch. zhu ren). I told them that since previously I was only in charge of the military issues, maybe I would not be competent for this work. The Premier said that he still wanted me to be the director. I told him that I had a requestion...(unclearly for 2 sentences). The Premier said OK and would let Yin Fatang see him immediately. Then he went to Beijing and attended a meeting.   

**Q:**  When did this happen?   

**A1:**  In 1968. Some people in Tibet Military District discussed whether he should be expelled from the Party. At the beginning of the meeting, we mainly talked about this...(unclear 2 sentences). But Li Yingtai didn't agree with either me or him. He did not want me to attend the meeting. Zhang Xiping and his wife came to Tibet Military District...(unclear 1 sentence) In Beijing, the Premier held a meeting. Some important representatives from Tibet Military District attended the meeting. At night, the Premier felt quite embarrassed and called me after 10pm. He said that he wanted me to lead and hold the meeting; and at first he asked the four members of the standing committee (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. 1. ཆང, 2. བྱང] 1. Tibetan locally brewed barley beer. 2. North; nomad areas north of Lhasa in Nagchuga Prefecture 3. ch. 厂 factory.">chang</a> wei) of the Party committee (Ch. dang wei) from the Tibet Autonomous Region (Ch. zi zhi qu) to attend the meeting. And he wanted me to put forward some suggestions about who could be the director. Ling Zhang could not go. Zhang Weiya could not go either, since he was not in Tibet at that time. And he was still on holiday to have a rest and had not been allocated any work to do. He was still in Beijing at that time. The Premier asked me to write a report for the meeting, saying that, Zeng Yongya would be the director of the Headquarters (Ch. zhi hui bu), Chen Mingyi and I, and some leaders of the masses' organizations (Ch. qun zhong zu zhi) from Zaozong (the rebel revolutionary group) and Dalianzhi (Ch. liang pai (the great alliance revolutionary group), Pan Changsong, Liu Shaomei, Yang Zong, Ma Ruihua, to be the vice directors. Siren lanmu [Tsering Lhamo] and Ma Ruihua also attended the meeting. Two directors and two vice directors including me and a cadre (Ch. gan bu) and Miao Peiyi attended as well. Was that Miao Peiyi or Yang Dongsheng? I can not remember it clearly. Maybe it was Yang Dongsheng. There were other people that I can not remember.   

**Q:**  In which year did this happen?   

**A1:**  In 1968.   

**Q:**  In autumn?   

**A1:**  Maybe in summer or in autumn. After I finished writing the report, they asked me to submit the report by 10 o'clock. I went to attend the meeting and right after that I began to write the report. I gave it to the Premier soon after that. After 10 o'clock, the Premier called me. At 2 o'clock, I received a document. At 2 o'clock, when I had just received the document and had not had a chance to open it, I received a call from the Premier again. He asked if I had received the document. I told him that I just received it but had not read it yet. He asked me to read it and to raise some suggestions if I had any. And he said I could just tell him if I had any suggestions. I told him that I agreed with the document after I finished reading it.   

**Q:**  Was that document a comment (Ch. pi zhu)?   

**A1:**  Yes, it was a comment in 1966. It was about two directors from the Central Committee and two vice directors. Chen Mingyi would be the vice director, and there was also another person, who I can not remember. After that, in August, it was announced that a committee would be set up. Maybe on August 21st or September 5th... do you have any relevant document right now?   

**Q:**  Yes, I have. It was on September 5th.   

**A1:**  Yes, that's right. The committee was set up at the end of August. There was also a committee set up in Xinjiang. In this way, the committee was set up. We all felt happy about that. We all supported Zeng Yongya to be the director of Political Department (Ch. zheng zhi bu). Most of people agreed, but there were still some people who did not agree, but they did not say anything, since this was the decision made by the Central Committee. After that, Zeng Yongya began to organize the work in Tibet. He was the director (Ch. zhu ren) as well as a team leader who represented the Party Committee of Tibet. Yes, he was the director. Chen Mingyi was in charge of public security work (Ch. zhi bao). A vice director of the Political Department, Cong Kai<a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 元] China&#x27;s basic currency unit. A yuan is divided into 100 fen and 10 jiao. It is also known as renminbi or &quot;people&#x27;s currency.&quot;">yuan</a>, was also a director from another department. I was responsible for the work with the two masses' groups. From then, my workload became less. At the beginning, it seemed that everything worked well. But later the condition appeared to be more severe and more and more complicated. The situation really became more and more complex. This happened in 1968. In the spring of 1969, a disaster occurred in Tibet, which was a riot. At first, some rebellious events were brought about by a Buddhist nun (Ch. ni gu) who killed many people. 24 army men and more than 10 people from the field army (Ch. ye zhan jun) were killed during that riot. Almost all the cadres in that county were killed during that riot. After that, there was another rebellion brought by frontier guards, which also killed many people. More than 10 army men and 20 cadres from the frontier were killed. Then, another rebellious action happened. Someone said that some local cadres in Guangdong should also be killed and asked them to surrender and lay down their arms. And they said that the life of those cadres were just like the light in the chimney, which meant that their life would be short. If they did not surrender, they would all die. There were also other rebellious actions, which were quite similar to this. During that time, I collected a lot of materials about these actions. After those rebellions happened in Chengdu, many reactionary forces in Yunnan, Qinghai and Shandong also began their rebellious actions during that time. And some rebellious actions also took place in some northern parts. There was a success of a battle in Nagchu. He [?] worked with one officer (Ch. guan li yuan) and one messenger (Ch. tong xin yuan). They were fully armed and rode three horses, going from Shouxian back to the military area, since Shouxian was the military squadron (Ch. wu zhuang bu). They wanted to go back to the military area. On the way, they were killed on the spot by someone with a gun. They went from Shouxian through Laqu, Bangu and Shenzhang, and then from Shenzhang to the town (Ch. zhen) of Ritie, and to Jiangzhe, and went out from Kama. Someone in charge of the frontier defense called Liu Qiyan, in summer or autumn, maybe in 1967 or 1968, I cannot remember, maybe in 1967. Liu Qiyan began to attack us. Some reactionaries (Ch. fan dong pai) in India began to attack us from Laidila and Saidila. They occupied several commanding heights (Ch. zhi <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གའུ] 1. A small box/pendant for keeping religious objects. 2. A small jewelery box worn by women as a necklace. 3 A small box worn on the hair of lay officials.">gao</a> dian). Then we began our counterattack, which made the battle fiercer. This was published in the newspaper later. We wanted to drive them away and the battle became more and more fierce. After attacking them for one week, we made some success and killed a lot of enemies and drove them down from the mountain. In this way, we successfully guarded Chengdu. These rebellious actions were really grave in Tibet. Some enemies incited the rebellion. Another problem here was that before the rebellion, a lama attended a cadre meeting held by the Headquarters of Tibet Military District in the name of a masses' organization (Ch. qun zhong zu zhi). He attended the meeting in the name of the masses' organization. Most of the people did not agree with this. I thought this was not right, since most people did not agree with this. This meeting was held by the Committee of Military Control (Ch. jun <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 师] A division in the Chinese Army.">shi</a> guan zhi wei yuan hui). At last, after their discussion, they decided not to let this person attend the meeting. Last time, we talked about Comrade Zeng Yongya. Soon after that, Zeng Yongya was deposed (Ch. xia tai). He said that someone made a mistake, which became severe later. From then on, we began to put down riots, which lasted quite a long time. By the end of 1970, almost all the riots were suppressed. In December of 1970, I heard that many people in Laqu were arrested. At that time, I did not know the details and was not in charge of that. I heard that a lot of people in Laqu were arrested, which was really grave. I had a discussion with other commanders (Ch. si ling) to talk about that. We found that the situation was indeed very grave. Chen was in charge of that at that time, but he did not feel very well so I said that I could go to deal with it. Indeed, many people were arrested. In December, the snow was quite heavy and the temperature was around -40 degree centigrade.   

**Q:**  Who were arrested? People from the Two masses' organizations (Ch. liang pai)?   

**A1:**  No. Who were arrested? They were from Liangzhu, Daili and also Bosu. And some were from Luzhu and Daili. Not all of them were from Luzhu, and also some people took actions against Communist Party. Now, I want to talk about how I became the leader. At that time, after some investigation I found that it was true that many people were arrested. It was pretty cold and they were imprisoned in a remote place. I was afraid that some of them might die of the cold weather. I told someone who was in charge of this that this was really grave and that the people arrested might die. I asked them to set free those people who did not commit big mistakes and some Lamas who did not do anything wrong. For those who really made some big mistakes and should be investigated more, we would keep them in the prison. But one thing very important was that we should try to improve their living conditions, and provide enough daily necessities, such as food and drink. We cannot let them die of the cold weather. I told those people from the grass-root level organizations (Ch. ji ceng) to set free innocent people right away. In this way, after that, many people were set free. After those people came home, we sent some people to persuade and educate them. And everything went back to normal. Before we solved all these problems, I received a telegram from the Central Committee saying that they decided to nominate me the director (Ch. zhu ren) as the representative of Tibet and to be in charge of the work in Tibet. And they did not assign any work to Zeng Yongya. In this way, I became the director of Tibet. Before this, I did not know anything about this. Only after I received this telegram, did I know this. And they did tell me right after they received the telegram. Later, through telephone, someone told me that something happened at home and let me to go back soon. At that time, I knew the details. In this way, I became the director. From December in 1970, I began to work as the director,and continued until 1976. Was that 1976? Yes, I think it was in 1976, since it was the 10th year of the Cultural Revolution. During that time, I worked as the vice political commissar of the military area, as well as the deputy (Ch. dai li) of the director. I was neither a political commissar nor a commander. I only worked as a deputy and was in charge of the local work. At that time, the condition was quite complicated, under which my thought was to improve unity according to what Chairman Mao said and resist break-ups. After Zeng Yongya took office, he organized some work in Tibet and checked the discipline among army men. He assigned the 52nd Division (Ch. shi) to Sichuan and the 50th Army Corps (Ch. jun) of Sichuan to Tibet. In 1989, when they left Tibet, many civilians felt sad and cried and saw off the army men. This really impressed me a lot. At that time, after I worked as director for 7 years, my work had almost been settled. In June, the organization of the Communist Party, the organization of the Communist Youth League (Ch. gong qing <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 团] Regiment in the PLA.">tuan</a>, short for gong chan zhu yi qing nian tuan), and the political consultative conference (Ch. zheng xie, short for zheng zhi xie shang hui yi) were resumed. Papala and Jiang Qing supported the dictatorship. Jiang Qing and Zhang Chunqiao criticized and denounced people. This happened after I went to Tibet. They blamed those who made some mistakes and assigned work to those who were innocent. But for those who worked as leaders, they were not assigned any work. Some people were sent to Beijing to attend training programs to study the works of Chairman Mao, how to serve the masses and Zhang Side. They learned a lot about the theory of Chairman Mao. They went back home on Saturday, had a rest on Sunday and after the breakfast on Monday, they came back to attend the programs again. If anyone had some emergency, they could go home during the weekdays. By doing this, their normal life had been guaranteed. When they were free, they could also grow some trees and crops. They were all very happy about that. I told them that they could learn something about the history, culture and art of Tibet. When the Cultural Revolution was about to end, I met with almost all the cadres of Tibet, since at that time, I did not have much work to do. After the Party Committee (Ch. dang wei) and labor union (Ch. gong hui) had been set up, the activities of the Communist Youth League and the Women's Federation (Ch. fu lian, short for fu nu lian he hui) began. And the work of the political consultative conference resumed. In June, the National Congress of the Communist Party (Ch. dang dai biao da hui) was held. Was that in June? Do you have the document? It was held in June. In the meeting, someone emphasized that those who worked hard and supported unity could join the Communist Party. During the Cultural Revolution, the program was cancelled. Jiang Qing said that there was a strange thing happening in Tibet which she had never heard of. What was that? Jiang Qing thought that holding the training program was weird and then the program was cancelled.   

