# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0100.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Ren Rong   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**© 2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Wuhan, China  
**Date of Interview:** April 21, 1999  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Ren Rong   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
**Name:** Ren Rong's wife   
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** ??  
**Date of Birth:** ????  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ren Rong was the First Party Secretary in the TAR from 1971-1980. Before that he was a key figure during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet and discusses various aspects of the Cultural Revolution in Tibet in detail. In this interview he discusses the visits to Tibet of Chen Yonggui and Hua Guofeng, and also the important visit of Hu Yaobang in 1980 when he removed Ren Rong from his position and forced him to return to Beijing immediately. Ren Rong criticizes Hu's attitude and comments. Ren Rong also discusses the fall of the Gang of Four the Third Plenary Session of Eleventh Central Committee in December 1978 at which Deng Xiaoping presented his views.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0100_06/H_0100_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A1:**  Comrade Chen Yonggui came to Tibet to inspect our production work and our lives. So I thought we should make a report to him about the general situation. As for the specific or detailed information, it was the Department of Agricultural and Pastoral Work (Ch. nongmu ting) and some other departments who reported this to him, but I am not quite familiar with that. We just reported to him about the general situation. The most obvious problem he had was that... He came to see our Lizhou farm in Pembo. We built a reservoir there, which was the first reservoir built in Tibet. When we built it, we did not have machines, so we had to reply on merely our bodies. After he inspected it... We told him about the plan for the whole project, that is, that this reservoir could be used to produce electricity on a small scale to facilitate our work of irrigating and to protect us from the threat of floods coming from mountains nearby. He expressed his support. He said it is good. And he also said, the workers who built this reservoir had really difficult working conditions since when walking on the mountainside, even without carrying stones or soil, we still felt tired; so those female workers who participated into the building work, should be more tired; and especially in Tibet, where even when staying at home we still could feel it was hard to breathe because of the shortage of oxygen, so the cadres here were really suffering difficult working conditions. So he was moved. As we walked together to inspect the reservoir, we told him all the information about the reservoir, such as its capacity, size, and so on. After seeing it, he was very happy. He told us we should make the farm near the reservoir a barn for the whole of Tibet, and then if some rebellions or invasions happened in Tibet, we could use the area around the reservoir as our base to resist the enemies, a base for both foods and reserves. For example, nearby there is a large flat ground, where the enemy could land from airdrops and then attack Lhasa which is not very far from here. When battling, if we hid our troops in the mountains near the flat ground, when the enemy came here from the air, we could ambush and annihilate them. This was our long-term plan. He agreed with us on this plan, since Tibet is a border area. After his inspection, he did not say too much about our work in Tibet. What he said was only his praise for the people working in Tibet. He told us that since Tibet is a remote area, we should stick to hard work and plain living, and should try to be self-reliant. Besides these, he did not say too much. After leaving Tibet, we did not continue to communicate with each other. We did not hear any of his instructions afterwards. Yet we put forward a suggestion that we hoped the Central Committee could give us more machines, especially tractors and bulldozers. However, after his leaving, we did not hear any response from the Central Committee on this issue. This is about Chen Yonggui's inspection of Tibet. And then there was Hua Guofeng. As for his coming to Tibet, I will tell you the general situation. His coming to Tibet had more social impact, compared to Chen Yonggui's. Chen's coming to Tibet also had some influence, but not very much. We told him the general situation in Tibet, such as Tibet's geography, population, natural resource, social security, as well as our work and achievements in Tibet, including how many "People's Communes" (Ch. renmin gongshe) we organized. In almost all the areas of China, "People's Communes" were established, except in Tibet. Yet, in fact, we also made a try to establish some. During the Cultural Revolution, after making requests to the Central Committee, Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou dispatched people to come to Tibet to make inspections. An old cadre who was dispatched by the Department of Agricultural Work (Ch. nongye bu) to support "the leftist work" (Ch. zhizuo), led some experts and came to Tibet to make an inspection, and then they returned to Beijing and made a report. So Chairman Mao approved that in Tibet, People's Communes could also be established, however, in Tibet, the organization of People's Commune would take a distinct shape. Though the title/name of the organizations was "People's Commune," the content was different from those in inland provinces. As for those in Tibet, they were mostly members in small working units. Except for these, for those who had a good working capacity, collective membership also could be permitted. Yet there was no membership in communes in Tibet. We did not organize the membership of large working units at all. So, though in name they were called "People's Communes," in fact they were still in the form of members of small working units. With this, comrade Hua Guofeng was satisfied and he praised us. He thought our idea was good. Though from the perspective of today's people this was a mistake, according to the background then, I think it was an achievement. And also, we reported to him about the social situation in Tibet. And basically he was satisfied with our work. He stayed in Tibet for several days, and met with some cadres. One day when he was in the Party Committee of Tibet Autonomous Region, he discussed one issue. He told us that his leading a delegation to visit Tibet represented the Central Committee and Central Government's decision. Before his coming here, Premier Zhou suffered a very severe disease and was lying in bed and could not rise up; so Zhou asked him to come to Tibet and convey his greeting to the cadres who were working hard in Tibet as well as his praise for the cadres. Hua also told us that Zhou asked him not to give arbitrary instructions or even criticize the cadres in Tibet. Rather, Zhou asked him to encourage us since the work conditions here were really tough. After Hua's talk, many of our people attending the meeting were moved to tears. We thought highly of Premier Zhou's care for Tibet. After the meeting, comrade Hua Guofeng returned. And then, around 12:00 that day, Premier Zhou called him, asking him to show us a movie, called °raising bees to help to improve the agricultural work" (Ch. yangfeng cunong) because Zhou thought it might do good in Tibet. Zhou told Hua that if we raised bees, besides getting honey, since the insects, the bees, have the ability to pollinate, they might improve the produce of our plants. And also, Zhou said to Hua that when you show the movie to us, you should not say it was Zhou's idea. Rather, you should say that someone from the State Council wanted him to show it to us. Among all the information left by comrade Hua Guofeng, this one was the most important. Then we started to discuss this issue. During the discussion, many cadres were moved to tears. They thought the Party and the Premier were like a merciful mother who took care of Tibet. These cadres' emotions were very passionate. They thought very highly of Premier Zhou since even though Zhou was so busy, and was suffering a severe disease and had never come to Tibet, he was so considerate and still paid so much attention and care for Tibet. Thus, we can say that Premier Zhou was really different from comrade Hu Yaobang. As soon as comrade Hu Yaobang came to Tibet, he behaved as if he was the savior. That was one problem. And also, as for our achievements in Tibet, he talked very little about them. He always criticized our work, and was very pretentious. If we refuted him on some points, he became unhappy. And he did not listen to our reports. Once I said to him that I would like to make a detailed report to him, but he rejected this, saying that since they knew very well the situation in Tibet, it was not needed and that what we could do was to just ask him questions if we were puzzled about something. This is what he did. Seeing this, I really could do nothing. Once when we requested him to have a rest, he also rejected this, saying, "I do not need it! You all should come back to work in the afternoon." As a result, in the afternoon, before he could finish the work, he got a headache... Ha ha. So he was really different from Premier Zhou. Without enough inspection and research, comrade Hu Yaobang still insisted on expressing his ideas, and he never had a correct evaluation about our achievements in Tibet. He never had praise for our hard work in Tibet. For example, he thought that we planted the wrong crops, that we did wrong in the construction of water conservancy works, and that we committed ultra-leftist wrongdoings in educational work, so he criticized us. Especially on the issue of cadres, he said, "Tibet is an area of minorities, so we do not need so many Han Chinese cadres like you! Most of you, should now start to register to go back. Here in Tibet, only 10%-15% of all Han Chinese cadres now can continue to stay. Others all should go back to inland provinces. I think that cadres going back is glorious." So right away, we all felt discouraged. For a long time we had stayed in Tibet to improve the condition of Tibet,and we regarded our suffering and the difficulties as our glory and regarded the border area as our home. And harboring such thoughts, we stayed here to build and protect Tibet as our beautiful home, which was our spirit for a long time. But after Hu's talk, it seemed that staying in Tibet was not glorious at all. Hu also said: the cadres should go back to inland provinces by three groups; the three groups should leave one by one; the next group should follow the last one closely to leave. As a result, very quickly, the morale of the cadres in Tibet was destroyed, to the extent that in some areas the cadres even could not get their salaries. Anywhere that Hu Yaobang's instructions were delivered, the situation would become messy. In many areas like Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Yunnan, and Guizhou, the situation became very bad. For example, during this period An Pingsheng once called me, telling me that the situation in Yunnan had became very messy, as many minorities asked the Han Chinese people to leave and claimed that they needed self-autonomy. So Hu Yaobang was completely different from Premier Zhou. In addition, I want to add one point. Certainly we can not say all the words said by Hu Yaobang were wrong as sometimes he also said some good words. For example, he said the people of Tibet led a hard life, so we should decrease the burden of the people in Tibet and some taxes should be abolished. In the past, Central Committee had decided that all the wool produced in Tibet should be submitted to the state. This wool would be transported to carpet factories in Beijing and Tianjin, where the wool would be made into carpets which could be exported abroad, because the quality of wool produced in Tibet is better than that of those produced in other provinces. That was the Central Committee's decision. And also, since the fur (wool) (khulu) of yaks is very good, the Central Committee asked Tibet to submit the fur to make clothes for the PLA. That was the task given by the state. The requirement was established. In fact, during some periods we had difficulties in carrying out this task, because we did not have enough yaks. So regarding these two points, Hu Yaobang mentioned abolishing some taxes and giving us lots of support. That was really good. And he asked certain provinces to support Tibet specially. All these were good. Not all the words he said were wrong. Yet his main problem was that he did not have a clear understanding of the situation in Tibet. He overthrew all the instructions issued by Central Committee previously. Especially, after his policy of cadres [going home] was implemented, the morale of cadres was destroyed. So afterwards, the people with separatist ideas and reactionary ideas appeared. They even said, "Some people such as Raidi and Basang are all running dogs of the Han Chinese people." I once heard that. At that moment, the relationship between us and them was really bad. I think that very likely the reason why later on some riots happened in Tibet lies here. Hu Yaobang liked to say, "If you have something to say, you should tell me. Even though you do not dare to say it, you still should say it, or write it down and send it to me. That is your freedom. For example, as for me, I have the right to smoke even though you do not want me to smoke." And when saying these, he took out his cigarettes and showed them to us, stressing, "it is my right." He also said, "You can write a letter to me. You can ask others to tell me. You can tell your idea to the officials working for me." Hu did all these in order to mobilize the masses. And his ultimate goal was to mobilize the masses to oppose me. Actually I could see his intention clearly. Hu Yaobang disliked me very much. I think Hu Yaobang regarded me as a member of the rebellious faction (Ch. zao fan pai). Hu Yaobang was an old cadre and an old leader. Yet why did he became this kind of person? I do not know the reason, but I think it is likely that he heard and believed some people's comments. Some of my colleagues were very nervous and said to me that, "Ren Rong, you had better make a self-criticism as soon as possible." I answered them that, "Why should I make a self-criticism? I have not considered it yet. During the Cultural Revolution, I had made too many self-criticisms. So at this time I need more time to consider it thoroughly. Hu Yaobang said to me that, "You should leave Tibet with me, and we together should leave tomorrow." I answered him, "Since I have worked here for more than one decade, I should stay here for more time to finish the handover of my work." He answered, There is no need for that since all your old colleagues as well as our work team will stay here. So tomorrow you should leave with me." I answered him saying, "Dear Party Secretary, since you have come here by your special plane, is it proper for me to leave together with you?" He answered, "There is no problem with that. Tomorrow you should leave Tibet with me." So I had to leave together with him.After arriving in Beijing, the Central Military Committee treated me very well. The chief of the general staff Yang and Marshal Ye both talked with me. And I did not say too much. I said to them that, "I just returned from Tibet, since I did not do a good job in Tibet." They answered that, "It is good for you to return. Where will you work then?" I replied, "I do not know. Perhaps tomorrow they will tell me." In the end, they dispatched me to work in Wuhan until now. I feel it is good for me to be back and I am very happy now. Here the oxygen is enough and I can live with all my family members. So now I am very happy.   

**A2:**  At that moment, they listed many positions of different areas for you to choose, didn't they?   

**A1:**  Ha ha, Do not say that. That is about the internal matters.   

**A2:**  Even though it is an internal matter, we still can say it. They listed many areas for you. And at last you chose Wuhan.   

**A1:**  That's all I want to talk about, what else do you want to ask?  

**Q:**  About working now.   

**A1:**  When we were in Beijing... The Central Committee held a meeting to discuss our work in Tibet. In the meeting we made a report about the situation in Tibet, and also made a plan about what we should do in the future. Before the meeting, comrade Song Renqiong, who at that moment was in charge of the organizing work, went to talk with me because my wife wrote a letter to Deng Xiaoping. She was suffering from cancer. In the letter, my wife said, "For a long time, I worked in Tibet. I worked in Tibet for more than 16 years, so during that period I could not live with my family members, and after the 16 years, my health situation became worse. At that moment, because she was suffering from severe cancer, she wished that I could be dispatched back to work in an inland province. Previously, I also submitted one similar report, actually several reports, to the Central Committee. Yet many times the Central Committee replied to me that since the work of Tibet should remain stable, my request could not be approved. For example, in the 10th meeting (Ch. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 师] A division in the Chinese Army.">shi</a> da), I said that since I have become old and my health situation was not very good... In the 11th meeting (Ch. shi yi da), I also made a request to comrade Hua Guofeng, telling him that I have become old and there were problems in my family... I also talked with some leading cadres of the Central Military Committee, and they all told me that since at that moment I was chiefly in charge of the governmental affairs of Tibet rather than the military affairs, I should make a request to the Central Committee and wait for their decision. And comrade Hua Guofeng and some other cadres all told me that since at that time we should try to stabilize the situation in Tibet, I should not come back. Yet at that moment I was 62 or 63 years old. Among the leading cadres in Tibet, I was the oldest. During that period I suffered from coughs, chest distress, and vertigo. So I made the request to leave Tibet. And also I wanted to look after my family. Yet my request was rejected. During the period of the Sino-Vietnamese War, I also wanted to come back to attend the battle. Some colleagues advised me not to do it, so in the end I gave up. Now I think that if at that moment I had made the request to attend the Sino-Vietnamese War, I would have been back even then. So for a long time I had to stay in Tibet. Yet this time, my wife's letter generated a good response. The Central Committee agreed to dispatch me back, and I was very happy. Comrade Song Renqiong asked me that, "Who do you think should replace you to be in charge of the work in Tibet?" At that moment there were some candidates, such as Tianbao and Chen Mingyi, and others. After considering this for a long time, I said that, according to my idea, I thought Yin Fatang should be chosen, because, first of all, he was much younger compared to other candidates, and also, he was very familiar with work in Tibet, and also, he once served as the political commissar and Party secretary of Jiangzi (Gyantse). So since he was very familiar with the situation in Tibet (though during the Cultural Revolution he was not here most of time, and at the first stage of the Cultural Revolution he also had some experiences), I thought he was fit for this position. As I had said before, during the Cultural Revolution, when the revolutionary committee was established, he was deposed. And then, he was dispatched out of Tibet. So both him and a chief of staff called Li Kailin, were driven away from Tibet. Did I mention this man to you before?   

**Q:**  No, I never heard of it.   

**A1:**  At the moment when the revolutionary committee was established, the cadres asked me to be in charge. That was really a hard period. Though this task was so hard, I still felt happy to accept it, because I wanted to do things to improve the Party and work in the interest of the people. During that period, my health situation became worse... As for Yin Fatang, because of his past experience, someone asked me whether Yin Fatang was reliable or not. I answered that Yin had no problems, and that if Yin was in charge of the political work, he could do better than other cadres. As for comrade Tianbao, he was a good cadre. Yet since he was not young, his health situation was not better than me. So I thought since my body could not bear my work, his body was not able to bear it either. After hearing my words, comrade Song Renqiong said, if so, we should have a talk with comrade Yin Fatang. At that moment, Yin Fatang had just been dispatched to serve as the vice political commissar of Jinan Military Region (Ch. jinan junqu) from the position of director of Fuzhou Military District, so right away he was asked to go to Beijing to have a talk. So later on he went to Beijing to attend our meeting. In fact, this meeting was a meeting for the handover of my work to him.   

**Q:**  When did the meeting happen? In 1979 or in 1980?   

**A1:**  It was in 1980. It was in April. So we finished the handover of the work. The people attending the meeting included Hu Yaobang, Yin Fatang, and perhaps Wan Li... I can not remember it clearly. In the meeting, we were asked to point out whatever hardships or problems there were. So we said, "In Tibet, some cadres should be transferred back to inland provinces since their health was not good, and some new cadres should be sent to Tibet in place of them. When doing economic construction in Tibet, we lacked funding and technicians, and especially, we encountered problems when building a railway. When Premier Zhou was alive, we already had the plan to build a railway from Qinghai to Tibet, which was called the "Qinghai-Tibet Railway." According to our plan, we should finish building the part from Qinghai to Lhasa in 1980. At that moment, we had finished the part to Golmud. We needed to continue to build it to the west. And also, we discussed the issues of machines, technicians, and education. We pointed out lots of difficulties. For the internal problems within us, we had disputes. Some people pointed out that we had planted too much winter wheat. This problem was put forward by a person within us, and the Central Committee paid much attention to it. He said, we planted too much winter wheat, yet it was not fit for the climate of Tibet. The cadre who at that moment put forward this problem has now passed away. He was actually a cadre in charge of our production work. In some areas, the problem was that we planted too much winter wheat indeed existed. Yet this cadre expressed his opinion in an extreme way, so it generated some disputes. And then, comrade Hu Yaobang paid much attention to the disputes, and said, we should be careful in carrying out the policy for minorities, and should respect the customs of the minorities. Later on, when I gave my talk, I tried to criticize that cadre's opinion that it was a mistake for us to plant winter wheat. I said that the situation of Tibet was so hard that many people had no food to eat. Therefore, having winter wheat to eat was better than being hungry, and better than begging for food from the imperialists. I also said, in the inland provinces, the unit price of rice was only 1 dime, yet in Tibet, the price was 5 dimes; so we should do something to decrease the cost. At last, I also said that while some of our cadres now said it was wrong to plant the winter wheat, why did these cadres, who were themselves in charge of our production work then, work so hard to plant the winter wheat? My words made the cadre so angry and the atmosphere of the meeting was highly charged. After finishing the meeting, they started to discuss the issue of my leaving, and asked me whether I had something to say. I replied I was very happy to go back, and asked all the people to say their ideas and to discuss it. After discussion, some cadres did not say anything, and some others opposed my going back. So I explained to them that, since I was very old then, my health problem did not permit me to stay in Tibet. I also said I was more than 60 years old and there was some problem in my family, so I had to leave Tibet. In the end, some of the cadres wrote a letter which I did not know, and sent the short letter to Central Committee. I know this because later on they told this to me. Yet the Central Committee had no reply for it. At last, the Central Committee proclaimed that, "Comrade Ren Rong should go back to inland provinces, and comrade Yin Fatang would go to Tibet to be in charge. I decided to hold a meeting in Tibet, which was attended by all the cadres whose rank was equal to or was higher than county head, to discuss the issue of production and construction work in Tibet. Before this meeting, the Central Committee dispatched a large-scale work team (Ch. gongzuo zu) to go to Tibet. Yang Jieren, leading many people, went to Tibet. After they arrived, though the condition in Tibet was tough, we tried to welcome and treat them well. After meeting with them, we were about to report to them about our work, but Yang stopped us, saying that since you are busy organizing the meeting of the cadres in Tibet, you should continue to do it. Since Party Secretary Hu will come to Tibet later on, after his arrival, you could make a report to both him (Yang) and Hu. After hearing this, I thought it was good.   

**Q:**  Before that, didn't you know Hu Yaobang would come to Tibet?   

**A1:**  Before that moment I did not know. So both of them did not ask me to report, and were collecting information themselves. During a rather long time, they did not communicate with us about what they were doing, and did not tell us about what they had told the Central Committee. However, there is one point I know clearly. Among them, there were several people who had done lots of acts against me during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Were they in that work group?   

**A1:**  These several people were members of the work group, and they avoided meeting me then. Yet I did not care at all. And then, Yin Fatang came to Tibet. During the first three days of his arriving... No it was Hu Yaobang. During the first three days of Hu Yaobang's arriving, Yin Fatang came to Tibet as well, and when we were holding the meeting for the cadres of Tibet, we introduced the situation in Tibet to Yin Fayang, letting him know the general situation. On the third day, comrade Yin Fatang, together with me, went to welcome comrade Hu Yaobang. Yet when I was about to report to Hu Yaobang, he stopped me, saying that they knew the situation in Tibet already. And then, Hu Yaobang asked us to point out whatever problems there were in Tibet, or to express whatever opinions we had. I said okay. Three days later, Hu Yaobang left Tibet, and asked me to leave Tibet together with him. In the meeting in Tibet, we had some disputes, yet the Central Committee did not give us any reply, and did not issue any document. At that moment, the meeting was not called, "The 1st Work Meeting of Tibet." At that moment, there was no such name. So this meeting ended. Afterwards, it is said that the Central Committee issued a document called "The Document of the 1st Work Meeting of Tibet" (Ch. xizang diyici gongzuo huiyi wenjian). Did you see it before?   

**Q:**  I saw it.   

**A1:**  So far I have not read it. I know nothing about the contents of the document. So I did not know why they called the next two work meetings of Tibet, "The 2nd Meeting" and "The 3rd Meeting" respectively. I usually do not like to remember these kinds of matters. In the meeting, there was no big dispute. One of the issues discussed was whether I should be dispatched out of Tibet or not. Actually I thought there was no need to let the attendees discuss this. There were only trivial debates in the meeting. And then it ended.   

**Q:**  During the period when Hu Yaobang was rehabilitated and then worked in the Organization Department of the Central Committee (Ch. zhongzubu), had you ever been in Beijing to visit the leading cadres of Central Committee such as Hua Guofeng, and to report to them the situation in Tibet?   

**A1:**  No.   

**Q:**  Did comrade Hua Guofeng come to attend the meeting in 1980?   

**A1:**  No. He did not come. The meeting was only attended by some of our staff, as well as Hu Yaobang. Others I can not remember. Yang Jieren attended it as well. If there is some document about the meeting, you can read it to know the issues. Yet as far as I know, there were only two issues which were disputed by the attendees in the meeting. Only on these two did we have some different opinions.   

**Q:**  That is to say, after 1980, you went to Beijing and finished the handover of your work in Tibet to others. Namely, the stage of the period from 1964 to 1980 when you worked in Tibet, ended then.   

**A1:**  Yes, in 1980, this stage ended. It was in April. Yet in fact, the date when I left Tibet, was on May 31st. Then I arrived in Beijing on June 1st. I went to Beijing from Tibet by way of Qinghai, where I slept for one night.   

**Q:**  I understand now.   

**A1:**  I did not know the content of the document about the 1st Working Meeting of Tibet. I know nothing about it.   

**Q:**  In the future you can read them. Now the Party Committee of Tibet has made some documents public.   

**A1:**  After I left Tibet, no one sent me these documents. As for me, I have never tried to see them. I have left Tibet and finished the work of Tibet once and for all.   

**Q:**  Now we have almost finished asking all of our questions. Yet there are still several left. One of them is that, "After the "Gang of Four" was overthrown, what was the situation in Tibet? What was the Central Committee's policy toward Tibet at this moment? Another question is that during the period, lots of events were happening. The "Gang of Four" was overthrown, and then Deng Xiaoping was rehabilitated and started to work again, and then there was a large-scale discussion about "practice is the sole criterion for testing truth," and so on, around the 1980s. And also, for Tibet, there was a very important event: the 1st visitors' team from abroad went to Tibet to visit in 1980. Or was it in 1981?   

**A1:**  It was in 1980. You can find the date in The Chronicle of Important Events. Is it the Chronicle of Important Events (Ch. dashi ji) published by Central Committee?   

**Q:**  No, it is the Chronicle of Important Events published by Tibet. It says that on March 2nd in 1979, the Department of the United Front Work office of the Central Committee sent a document to Tibet telling the cadres in Tibet about the activity of Dalai Lama's elder brother. And it said that during the period, lots of people were rehabilitated. On September 25th, 1979, a five-people visiting team (Ch. wuren canguan tuan), including the Dalai Lama's brother-in-law, arrived in Lhasa.   

**A1:**  Was that in 1979?   

**Q:**  Yes, it was in 1979.   

**A1:**  The "Gang of Four" was overthrown, and then Deng Xiaoping rose to power. Do you know the situation about this period?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A1:**  Before the "Gang of Four" was overthrown, we did not know anything about it. After the members of the "Gang of Four" were arrested, the Central Committee sent an urgent telegram to us, asking me and Tianbao, who at that moment was the chairman, and asking we two to go to Beijing right away. Anyway they asked me to go to Beijing. The other people with whom I went together with I can not remember clearly now. After we arrived in Beijing, we went to Yuquan Mountain (Ch. yuquan shan), where we attended a meeting. The people attending the meeting included us, and another group of people who perhaps were from Guizhou province. I can not remember it clearly. Not the leaders of every important Military District went to attend it. Only we from Tibet and the other group of people from another Military District attended it. You can read the documents about this meeting in the future if you want to know it. In the meeting, we were told that the members of the "Gang of Four" were arrested.   

**Q:**  Who was conducting the meeting?   

**A1:**  The vice chairman Ye Jianying. At that moment it seems that Hua Guofeng was only the deputy premier and was in charge of the general work. But he had not been the premier. The attendees included: vice chairman Ye, Hua Guofeng, Li Xiannian, Wang Dongxing, Chen Xilian, and some others. The people attending the meeting were not many. They told us the deeds of the "Gang of Four." At that moment there was an editorial saying that since the reactionaries were making trouble, we should suppress them. The general idea of the editorial was that we should take actions against the reactionaries. Chen Xilian showed the newspaper where the editorial was published to Hua Guofeng and said to Hua that, "Have you read the newspaper? Now do we become the reactionaries? The situation is so urgent and they will take action." Hua Guofeng was very careful, so he replied, "We should go to see Marshal Ye and comrade Li Xiannian as soon as possible to talk with them." So Hua Guofeng asked Marshal Ye and Li Xiannian together to discuss it. At that moment, had Hua Guofeng been appointed the position in charge of the work of Central Committee? Yes, then he was the vice chairman. And they also asked Wang Dongxing to join in the discussion. At first it was the four people, Chen Xilian, Hua Guofeng, Ye Jianying, and Li Xiannian, who had a discussion. And then, they decided to take action first to arrest the members of the "Gang of Four." So they asked Wang Dongxing to meet them to make a detailed plan to arrest them. It was Wang Dongxing who was in charge of the matters for arresting them. Yet it was Zhang Yaoci who led the action to arrest Jiang Qing. Zhang Yaoci was the chief of staff of the garrison regiment. Jiang Qing was their leader so she was very important. And it was Wu Zhong who led the action to arrest Chi Qun and Xie Jingyi. And also someone was dispatched to arrest Gong Yifen. The others, Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan, were asked to go to attend a meeting, so no people were dispatched to go to arrest these people. As soon as they arrived at the place for the meeting, they were arrested. After their arrest, they called us together to tell us the situation. We discussed what we should do next. We decided that our main task next was to try to prevent the leftover members of the "Gang of Four" from making trouble, such as starting riots, doing assassinating, or mobilizing the masses. So we should strictly control the situation. After the meeting, we very quickly returned to Tibet to make the arrangements in case of any accident. After we arrived in Tibet, we spread the news of the arresting of the "Gang of Four" to the people. After hearing this, all the people were very happy, because arresting them was equal to eradicating the root of the trouble. So all the CCP organizations (Ch. ji guan), the troops, and the schools, were very happy and expressed their support for the Central Committee's decision, thinking that it was really a wise action. At that moment, we regarded it as a really important event, and thought that after the action we could solve the problem once and for all. And then it was the time for the Third Plenary Session of Eleventh Central Committee (Ch. sanzhong quanhui). It took place on November 12, 1976 [actually it was December 18-22, 1978] Around then, the Central Committee also held the 11th meeting. But now I will tell you the situation about the Third Plenary Session of Eleventh Central Committee. Before the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee, we held large-scale work meetings. The Third Plenary Session of Eleventh Central Committee lasted for a long time. The main topic of the meeting was that since there were so many problems left, we should solve all of them. We should solve the problems which were a result of the Cultural Revolution. In the meeting, comrade Chen Yun mentioned several problems remaining to be solved. One of the problems was about the Tiananmen Incident (Ch. tiananmen shijian). Another was about the cases in which people were unjustly charged, including the case of Liu Shaoqi and others. Another was about the problem of "the 61 traitors." He mentioned many problems. He also mentioned how we should evaluate the Cultural Revolution. So the people started to discuss this series of problems from the Tiananmen Incident on. The discussions were very enthusiastic because all the people thought these problems should be solved. Our group of attendees put forward two issues: first, it was about how we should discuss the problems; second, we suggested that since the problems were influential, the Central Committee should issue a "decision on the historical issues" so as to let the members of the Party speak with one voice on the issues. This decision should focus on the problems around the Cultural Revolution. One problem happened in the midst of the meeting. It was about the commander of the garrison troop, Wu Zhong. Many people criticized Wu Zhong, saying that during the Tiananmen Incident, Wu Zhong ordered the troops to suppress the masses, and even many people were killed. Wu Zhong, as an army man, was straightforward. In reply to the criticism, he wrote a statement saying that as far as he knew and according to his investigation, no people were killed in the Tiananmen Incident. His statement generated a lot of discussion among the people. We did not think his issuing this statement was a proper action. We thought he should express his opinion in a moderate form, such as saying that, I heard many people were killed, so I wished you could give me information about it and I would start an investigation into it. Anyway Wu Zhong's statement generated negative influence. Though there were some disputes, the meeting ended. The issue about the cases in which people were unjustly charged was also discussed. I need not mention these. After all these discussions, Deng Xiaoping gave a talk. He discussed three ideas. First, it was "to liberate people's ideas" (Ch. jiefang sixiang). Second, it was "to seek truth from facts" (Ch.shishi qiushi). Third, it was "to look ahead in unity" (Ch. tuanjie yizhi xiangqian kan). Deng Xiaoping's talk was very short, but very good. And then comrade Xiaoping's opinions were praised in the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee. After that meeting, comrade Deng Xiaoping was rehabilitated and appointed one of the leading members of the Standing Committee of Central Committee. Deng Xiaoping was also appointed to a position in charge of the military work and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a>'s matters. Also there were different opinions. For example, Hua Guofeng once said, even before the meeting, that comrade Xiaoping had already served in a leading position of the Central Committee. Anyway, in the meeting, all the people supported Deng Xiaoping's serving as the leading position of Central Committee. Another issue discussed in the meeting was about how to deal with the members of the "Gang of Four." We decided that they should first be arrested, and then there should be an investigation of their case. We also discussed issues about how to maintain stability and unity. There are documents and records about the issues of the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party. After the meeting, we returned and spread the three principles: "to liberate people's ideas," "to seek truth from facts," and "to look ahead in unity." Hearing these, the people were very happy, and then we started to work and our work returned to normal. Later on, in Beijing, there was a discussion on "the criterion of truth." However, at that moment in Tibet we did not know about it, because the spread of information was not as convenient as it is now. In Tibet, in the CCP organizations and in the Party Schools, some people knew there was a discussion on "the criterion of truth." However, for us, we did not clearly know the social impact of the discussions. Later on, the Central Committee issued documents on it, after which we started to spread the contents of the discussion according to Central Committee's documents. On this issue, Tibet's actions lagged behind Beijing's. Why were we slower? First, it was because the communication between Tibet and inland provinces was not convenient. The newspapers that arrived in Tibet were usually very late. Secondly, without the Central Committee's definite instructions, we in Tibet would not take actions hastily. There was an old tradition in Tibet: we would not follow the activities of the inland provinces hastily. We would start to take action only after we received the Central Committee's documents, or the leading cadres' instructions. If not, we would rather wait. For example, in the past, when Premier Zhou was alive, if he needed us to do something, he would call us. Sometimes he would contact us by himself, but most of the time he would ask his secretary or other officers of his office to contact us. During the Cultural Revolution, we basically only followed Premier Zhou's instructions. So only after receiving the Central Committee's document, did we start to join in the discussion on "the criterion of truth," which was a little later than the actions by the inland provinces. However, grasping this point, Yang Jieren tried to attack me, saying that I did not implement the decisions of the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party well. I replied to him that it was not that I was not willing to start the discussion, it was just because we in Tibet had this old tradition, that is, without the Central Committee's formal documents or instructions, we could not start; and as soon as we received them officially we started to spread it. Nevertheless, Yang pointed this out as one of my wrongdoings. Here, today, I acknowledge that I knew the discussion a little late. I am a person who is not so sensitive on this kind of matter. Yet I did not have the idea of rejecting to implement the Central Committee's decision at that moment. I do not think that we in Tibet should follow the inland provinces activities blindly. I will give you another example. During a period many inland provinces were very active in arresting the so-call "516 members." Yet should Tibet do it as well? After my investigation, I did not think we had any "516 members." And if so, where could I find these members? What was the criterion of the so-called "516 members"? We did not know. During that period, I went to the Chengdu Military Region to tell them my ideas. As a result, some leaders of the Chengdu Military Region criticized me right away: "There are 516-members all over the country. Why are there no such people only in Tibet? Why don't you arrest them?" The comrade who criticized me at that moment is still alive now. At that moment, he was very angry with me. I answered him that I did not find any such people in Tibet, so certainly I had no one to arrest, since I could not wrong any people who were actually innocent. I had a dispute with him. He was not happy. I know in Nanjing, and in some other areas, in order to arrest the "516 members," lots of people were killed. And how many true "516 members" did they arrest? I never knew. And their arrests ended up with nothing definite. In Tibet, I did not find any 516 members, and so I had no one to arrest. To be frank, I am not the sort of person who likes following the trends. Only after I have realized it clearly, will I do it. For the leaders, I regard them only as colleagues. So if something happens in our work, I will deal with it according to the principle of the work. If not, I will not go to meet the leaders, nor invite them to have dinner, nor give them gifts, nor fawn on them. I am such a person. So previously, when some people accused me of being involved with Lin Biao Incident or some other incident, I replied to them that you could make any investigation, and that I did not care (because I am innocent). That is what I wanted to say. The Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee exerts influence on our liberating the ideas... Just some days ago, some people met me and said to me that, "after the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee, your action of following its decision was too slow. I replied that, yes, at that moment my action was too slow; yet it is not because I was not willing to follow the decision; rather it was because we had not received the Central Committee's document. We in Tibet never followed any trend hastily. If we insisted on following, some accident might happen. So now, I think that Premier Zhou, and some other leaders were always very thoughtful. Even though they criticized us, we would readily accept their criticisms, because they were to the point. When Premier Zhou was alive, we always worked very happily and dared to launch some work with courage. Yet in the midst of the Cultural Revolution, we were scared by frequent yet arbitrary political movements. On the first day Beijing issued information and then on the second day Beijing issued another one, which left us nonplussed and not knowing which one we should follow. Today I will tell you another example. The organization of Zaozong (Gyenlo; "The rebels"), set up an office at Tsinghua University. This office was headed by a person called Wei Zhiping. He and some others were in charge of the liaison matters of Zaozong. If there was some information issued from Beijing, they would convey the information to the people of Zaozong in Tibet very quickly. The reason why in Tibet these people did political movements so energetically, lies in this. They got the information from Kuai Dafu, Nie Yuanzi, Ye Chong. Kuai Dafu, Nie Yuanzi, and a person called Wang... I can not remember his name clearly... they had a close relationship with Jiang Qing and the "Gang of Four." The reason why these rebellious organizations were so powerful and energetic, was because Jiang Qing and others supported them. This issue is so complicated that I did not talk about it. This is what I know so far. In the future if you want to know more you can read the documents. Since now I do not have the documents, I can answer your questions just according to my memory.   

**Q:**  So now, could you please say something about the activities of the Dalai Lama's 1st visiting team who went to visit Tibet from abroad?   

**A1:**  When the 1st visitors' team came to Tibet, no problem took place. Yet according to some internal sources of information, in a secret way they...(not clear), yet in public, they did not do bad things. Now I cannot remember all the details. At that moment when they arrived we did not meet each other. As far as I know, no big problem happened at this time.   

**Q:**  This topic about the visitors' team we can end discussing now. Let's turn to another topic. In Beijing, did you ever meet Chairman Mao? Have you ever reported to Chairman Mao about the work in Tibet?   

**A1:**  I listened to his speeches many times, yet I did not report to him directly face-to-face. Only when some big meetings were held in which he met us did I shake hands with him. Once he asked me what is my name? I answered that my name is Ren Rong. Then he asked me where did I work? I answered that I worked in Tibet. He said the work and living conditions in Tibet were very difficult. I said yes, and said I was willing to serve the people anyway. At last he said it was good to serve the people. These are all the words I talked to him. A journalist took a photograph for me when Chairman Mao was talking with me. Many years later, the journalist gave the photo to me. Besides these, I do not have further communication with Chairman Mao. Yet with Premier Zhou, I attended lots of meetings. And I had lots of talks with Premier Zhou. And also, I met Ji Dengkui, Yang Baohua, Gu Mu many times. Besides these, I have talked with Marshal Ye many times. And also, I have met with Li Xianxian many times. As for the other leaders of Central Committee, I am not very familiar with them. And then, I am very acquainted with Wan Li. Many times when we attended meetings at Jingxi Hotel, we met with each other. Later on, he served as the director of department of railways for a period. For many times we had dinners together. Sometimes we drank alcohol together. I am also very acquainted with Chen Guixian. Besides these, among the old leading cadres of the Central Committee, I am acquainted with Song Renqiong. Among the leading cadres of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a>, I am acquainted with many of them: Marshal Ye, Yang Rong, Yang Chengwu, Chen Xilian, Zhang Aiping, Yang Dezhi, Li Zhimin, Wang Ping, Hong Xuezhi, and also some cadres of older generation such as Xiao Hua and Tan Zhen. Many of them have passed away a long time ago. As for the cadres in the government, I am not so acquainted with them.   

**Q:**  I have a question. In the 1960s and 1970s when you were working in Tibet, since transportation was not convenient, if you wanted to report some information to the Central Committee, how could you send the information? Would you send the information by means of confidential mail, or by means of telegrams? And when the Central Committee issued something to you via telegram, which should be very fast... At that moment communicating via telephone was not very convenient either, because frequently it would cut out ... Could the telephone be used at some certain times?   

**A1:**  No. For a long time, it was always that the telephone did not work. If it snowed or rained heavily, or if there was some strong wind, the telegraph poles might be damaged, and then the telephone would not work. So mainly we relied on telegram to communicate with the outside. For example, when some urgent events happened, the Central Committee would send us a telegram, which was just several characters, telling us to go to Beijing to attend a meeting. In the telegram, they didn't even tell us the issue of the meeting. In the past, when the Central Committee held important meetings, the meetings were usually conducted by Premier Zhou. Sometimes Li Xiannian... Comrade Chen Yun and I knew each other, but I am not acquainted with him.   

**Q:**  In 1964, you went to Tibet. During the period you were in Tibet, you had been to lots of areas. You went to the 52nd Division and Linzhi to inspect. You went to Naidila (Natula). And also, in order to oppose the anti-China forces of India, you went to carry out the military tasks to block them. In 1964, you were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and Linzhi. Had you been to the area of Ngari [far west Tibet]?   

**A1:**  I did not go to Ngari. I did not go to the town of Punan. I went to the area between Tibet and Punan. Yet I did not reach Punan. In 1978, for a time I planned to go to Ngari. Yet the members of the Party Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region did not agree with me on my decision. In order to prevent me from going to Ngari, they even sent a telegram to the Central Committee, and then the Central Committee replied that they agreed with them on preventing me from going to Ngari because all of them thought that since I was old and my health situation then was not good, if I insisted in going there, I might be in danger. Now I regard it as a regret. Ha ha. Now it is even more impossible for me to go to Ngari. In fact at that moment, Ngari was not governed by us. Yet we had communications with them all the time. Frequently they came to transport supplies. Especially in summer, when the weather was good, they would come. Sometimes, some important cadres were transferred from here to Ngari, or from Ngari to here. For almost all the border areas in Tibet, I am familiar with them.   

**Q:**  I have another question. At the early stage of the Cultural Revolution, which areas do you think had the most severe violent conflicts (Ch. wu dou) in Tibet according to your memory? In which areas were the most people killed?   

**A1:**  One area was Lhasa, and the other one was Chamdo. In these two areas, lots of people were killed and the conflicts were very violent. As for the other areas of Tibet, I do not think they had very severe conflicts. Where there happened to be small-scale conflicts, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> would be dispatched to go there to stop them. In Lhasa, the violent conflicts were very severe, and lasted for a long time. In Chamdo, lots of people were killed. In Chamdo, the customs there encouraged a combative spirit. In my opinion, during the Cultural Revolution the reason why so many violent conflicts took place, lies in some Han Chinese people's activities, rather than the Tibetan people's. Only a small number of Tibetan people joined in the conflicts. And also, even though a Tibetan comrade joined in the conflict, if you went to talk and reason with him or her, he or she could be persuaded. For example, in Lhasa, there once been a "hero of mountain climbing" called Gongbu. I had talks with Gongbu many times. He was a very good comrade, and he was very strong. I said to him that it was not good for you to follow those people and wander around and make trouble. He replied that since this movement was launched by Chairman Mao and the Party asked them to do so, he should participate. He was a little naive. So I said to him that you should pay attention to the specific situations, and should not make trouble. So later on he became passive in participating in the movements. Another person was... In the office of the Tibet Daily, there was a Tibetan worker, who previously was very active in the political movements. I had talked with him as well. I said to him that you should not follow those people's actions. You should follow the headquarters of the Military District's actions. So later on, his behavior became good.   

**Q:**  Among all the Tibetan people who joined the rebellious organizations (Ch. zaofan pai); who was the most active?   

**A1:**  According to my memory, no Tibetan cadre was very active. The most active people of the rebellious organizations included: Tao Changsong, Zhu Dingshang, Jiang Yin who was in Golmud, and a person called Cui... I can not remember his name. Now my memory is not very good. In the broadcast station of Tibet, many people joined in the rebellious activities. Among them, there was a person called Zhang Bangwei who was a Han Chinese. He was an important member of Zaozong (Gyenlo; "the rebels"). Also in the broadcast station, there was a person called Ma... As for Zhang Bangwei, in public he proclaimed that as soon as he got the power, he would first of all execute Ren Rong by shooting him. He proclaimed this idea in a public gathering. The members of Zaozong claimed that Ren Rong was a bad guy so therefore first we should try to kill him, and if we could not do that, we should try to drive him away; and if we could not drive him away, we should try to discredit him. However, I am the kind of person who the more you try to do these things against me, the more firmly I would continue to stay here. I did not care about their threat at all. Later on, when holding a meeting in broadcast station, in public I said to them that...In 1991, I returned to Tibet, because they invited me back for the celebration of the 30th anniversary of the peaceful liberation of Tibet.   

