# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0100.02  
##  : with Ren Rong  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Wuhan, China  
**Date of Interview:** 12 April 1999  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Ren Rong  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ren Rong was Party Secretary in the TAR from 1971-1980. Before that he was a key figure during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet and discusses various aspects of the Cultural Revolution in Tibet and his work.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0100_02/H_0100_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I still want to know some details of the problems we talked about yesterday. You were mentioned in the book "Chronicle of Important Events in the History of the Party" (Ch. dangshi dashi ji), as having attended a work conference held by Central Committee in Beijing in 1966. What was that about?   

**A:**  I haven't read it yet. It's quite interesting. From the 9th to 28th in October in 1966, I took part in the Cultural Revolution started by the Headquarters of Tibet Military District (Ch. jun qu), and the Central Committee who had informed me formally that Zhang Guohua and I would go to Beijing to attend a meeting in the Jingxi Hotel (Ch. jingxi binguan). At that time, I didn't know why they asked me to go since I was not a political commissar (I was only a vice political commissar then); and I thought only letting the commander Zhang Guohua attend would be enough. Zhang Guohua said that since this was the decision by the Central Committee, you should go as well. So we went to attend the meeting. In the meeting, our main work was to report what happened during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. The meeting was held by Premier Zhou Enlai. There was a discussion about what everyone reported. The people attending the meeting were from the leaders of every bureau or province of the country, e.g., Li Jingquan from Southwest Bureau, Yan Hongyan from the Yunnan Province, Zhang Guohua and I from Tibet, and so on. Now I could not remember it very clearly. Yet anyway, the key topic in the meeting was to discuss how to launch the Cultural Revolution and how to let more people join in the movement. In the meeting, comrade Liu Shaoqi made a self-criticism during the work. He said that he had made some mistakes and hoped that people could criticize him on his faults and people could check everything he did. Liu Shaoqi also said that he was arrested one or two times (Ren Rong said he couldn't remember the actual times clearly) in the past (before 1949), which he had all confessed to already, and that he never did anything illegal or played any tricks against other people. Yet Liu also conceded that since his work style was too direct, he might criticise other people's mistakes directly without concealing anything, which perhaps made some people unhappy. But Liu still stressed that he was loyal to the Party and had nothing to conceal and only said everything he should say. After Liu's speech, there was no discussion about him. We all thought comrade Liu Shaoqi is really a good person, who is nice to everyone. So in the meeting Liu, made a short talk.   

**Q:**  Did Zhang Guohua and you, as the representatives of Tibet, meet the leaders of Central Committee in the meeting to report the issues of Tibet?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. As far as I know... I'm quite familiar with Yan Hongyan, who was a commander of the 3rd Division of Red Army of Northern Shaanxi Province (Ch. shanbei) and I once did secret information work. After I graduated from ...(unclear, a name of a school), I was assigned to a position in the troops led by him. After the troops of Red Army were renamed, the former 3rd Division was renamed as the 3rd Garrison Regiment, and Yan served as the commander of the regiment. In the beginning, I worked as a propaganda secretary (Ch. xuan chuan gan shi) and then as a propaganda minister or political commissar. I worked with him for really a long time and was quite familiar with him. He said that he supported the Cultural Revolution, but he couldn't bear that some people regarded him as opposing Chairman Mao and the Party, so he said, those people made him quite angry. This impressed me since we were really close to each other. I told him that he should not care a lot about that, since the leaders didn't say anything now, and that he should trust the Party, because the Party would give you a correct judgement. He replied he knew it was the reason, yet he always couldn't bear the situation then. I said to him that he should endure the tough situation since he had already experienced a lot of difficulties throughout these years; and that he should not worry too much about that, since the Party had not said anything against him. Sadly, not long after the meeting, he returned and committed suicide. I thought that his suicide had lots of relationship with something done by Chen Boda, and that he killed himself because he could not bear the pressure and blame from others anymore. And I knew that he really disapproved of some political movements done during the period. I had never told anyone else about this. It really impressed me and made me sad since we were really close friends.   

**Q:**  On October 19th of 1966, you met Premier Zhou Enlai. Sorry, it was on September 18th in 1967, after the War of Nansila, you, Chen Ruyi, Zhang Heting, Zhou Renshan, Miao Peiyi met with the members of The Central Cultural Revolution Group (Ch. zhongyang wenge xiaozu), including Premier Zhou Enlai, Jiang Qing, Chen Boda, and Kang Sheng. What did you talk about at this meeting? Why did you meet them, namely, the members of The Central Cultural Revolution Group? You went there with Zhang Heting, Zhou Renshan, Miao Peiyi, as well as the leaders of the two masses' organizations (Ch. liang pai), to see Zhou Enlai. Was it the first time you met him? What did you talk about in the meeting?   

**A:**  Yes, that can be counted as the first time. I almost forgot that. It was about the Cultural Revolution. I'll check that and answer you later. I will write it down. And maybe I can find the relevant documents. I don't have those right now.   

**Q:**  Yesterday, you talked about the problem of appointing Zeng Yongya as the director (Ch. zhu ren), about which Premier Zhou called you to talk about it. Yesterday you once said that there were three vice political commissars (Ch. fu zheng wei) in Tibet, as well as a commander and vice commanders. You also said that comrade Zeng Yongya, you, and some others, went to Tibet from the Shenyang Military Region (Ch. shenyang junqu). I am kind of confused about why there were so many political commissars and commanders in Tibet, including the people from the 18th Army Corps (Ch. shiba jun). I would like to know how many troops there were in Tibet? Maybe at least two or three army corps (Ch. jun)? Why were there so many vice political commissars and commanders? I don't understand their relationship with each other.   

**A:**  In the past, Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang and Tibet were governed directly by the Central Committee. And also, the military issues were managed directly by the Central Military Committee (Ch. jun wei). During this period, the Central Military Committee managed Shenyang, Nanjing, Beijing, Lanzhou, Chengdu, Wuhan, Fuzhou and other big military regions (Ch. jun qu). The Tibet Military District was quite similar to the military districts of Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Wuhan, Fuzhou, and Jinan. Although the Tibet Military District didn't have a lot of army troops, Tibet has an important strategic status as a province of minority nationality, since it's close to India, Nepal, Burma, Bhutan, Sikkim, and Afghanistan. The provinces of minority nationalities usually have large territories and are full of complicated problems. In Tibet, the reactionary forces were powerful and did actions against the Communist Party frequently. For example, the Dalai Lama had a troop called "Defenders of the Faith" (Ch. wei jiao jun), which was composed of more than ten thousand soldiers [he means Chushigandru]. And the U.S., Soviet Union, Britain, India, and Taiwan were all against China at that time and they wanted to seize Tibet back. They supported and offered weapons to the rebels, since Tibet was a colony of Britain in the past. Once Britain occupied India. So in the Simla Conference, the British Government fabricated a McMahon Line according to which a territory of 120,000 kilometers was given to India. In the past, during a period the British government assigned and stationed some troops in Tibet, and then, the Indian government stationed troops in Tibet in place of British government's troops. In the beginning, they stationed the troops at Lhasa, and then, they stationed the troops at Gyantse. So they always wanted to seize Tibet back and wanted to put Tibet under the control of the British government. That's why the Central Committee paid special attention to Tibet. Also, in Tibet the Dalai Lama played an important role and had lots of influence, which was completely different from the situation of other parts of China. There were a large number of reactionary serf owners and nobles who were against communism and socialism in Sichuan, Gansu, Qinghai and Tibet, and they wanted to maintain their rule of theocracy, with the help of the imperialists. Therefore, under this kind of background, the Central Committee paid special attention to Tibet and Xinjiang. Compared to Tibet and Xinjiang, the situation in Inner Mongolia was better, since the Party had more influence in Inner Mongolia. For example, Ulanhu (Ch. wu lan fu) was there. There were some good leaders in Tibet, such as Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan, both lieutenant generals who had experienced the Long March. They were both nice people and they were not attacked in the Cultural Revolution. The reason why those two were not attacked is as follows. As for Tan Guansan, after the Sino-Indian War of 1962, and actually after quelling the rebellion in 1959, he began to suffer from heart disease, so he went back to Beijing to receive medical care in 1962. From then on, Tan never participated in the work in Tibet. With regard to comrade Zhang Guohua, after the war in 1962, his health problems became worse and he went to Beijing as well. From then on, most of the time he stayed in Beijing. Only in July or in August every year, did Zhang came back to Tibet to attend a meeting. He contacted the people in Tibet through telephone and telegram. But at that time, telephones didn't always work well. During this period, a vice commander, Chen Mingyi, stayed in Tibet. Most of the old comrades working in Tibet suffered severe health problems. There was also a vice political commissar called Liao Buyun who was working in Tibet then he also suffered some illnesses, so he was not able to be in charge of the general work in Tibet. And then another vice Political Commissar was Lu Yishan. He was a kind person and was very knowledgable. He graduated from college. He was also suffering illnesses. Because he worked in non-military organizations for too long a time, if he encountered some complicated issues involved with the PLA, he was not able to handle them well. As for other military cadres, they had difficulties in dealing with the problems in Tibet as well. As a result, since I was younger than them, many times when encountering problems, they asked me to solve them. And I was familiar with the major issues. But to be frank, at first I really didn't want to take part in those issues. I started my career with military troops when I was 16 years old and since then I never left it. So I'm quite familiar with most of the issues in the army, such as training, marching and recruiting. Under the situation then, since I had the experience, they promoted me to the position. So at that time, after I was appointed the leader, I said to myself that although I wasn't outstanding in capacity, I could not give up even facing the tough situation then. And I was in charge of a lot of important issues, and I knew that I should try my best to do them. It was not for myself. Rather, what I did was all for the Party and the masses. And there were a lot of colleagues supporting me all the time, including Chen Mingyi, Lu Yishan and Liao Buyun. But later in the Cultural Revolution, my relationship with some of my colleagues changed. Sometimes we had different opinions on some issues, which made our friendship fall apart finally. For example, Zhang Houtian and Zhang Ruihou, who were very friendly with me previously, were later estranged from from me because we had different ideas on some issues. During the Cultural Revolution, one of the problems was the inconvenient transportation. In this period, Premier Zhou was very busy and he also suffered health problems. The Gang of Four (Ch. si ren bang), namely, Jiang Qing, Zhang Chunqiao, Yao Wenyuan, and Wang Hongwen, did many rebellious things, which exerted very negative influences on our work. In that period there were some masses' rebellious organizations in Beijing. The leaders of them included Kuai Dafu, Nie Yuanzi, and others. Kuai Dafu was the leader of the largest masses' rebellious organization. They had a close relationship with the Gang of Four. Some member of these organizations even came to Tibet. It was really a hard time.   

**Q:**  What did the Gang of Four actually do and what was their specific intervention regarding your work? (unclear)   

**A:**  In a meeting, Jiang Qing criticized me and wanted to overthrow me, saying that I suppressed the masses. She also said I belonged to the group of Lin Biao's followers, and she accused me of organizing factions (Ch. gao zong pai). She wanted to completely denounce me. I do not remember the exact time when she said those words. I can check and then tell you. She was very ferocious when she blamed me. And in one meeting held in Beijing, some masses accused me of being an underground and sinister henchman of Lin Biao in Tibet. They even said Ren Rong was the slaughterer (Ch. gui zi shou) who suppressed the Tibetan people. At that time, a big-character poster (Ch. da zi bao) against me was posted, saying that I bribed Qiu Huizuo, secretly giving 1.5 kilograms of saffron (Ch. zang hong hua) to him, which actually, was not true at all. And some big-character posters also said that since I was close to Liang Xingchu, the commander of the Chengdu Military Region, I even dispatched an airplane to carry dog meat for him, since he liked eating dog meat. After 1969, the Tibet Military District came under the leadership of the Headquarters of the Chengdu Military Region. And also some big-character posters claimed that someone from the Headquarters of the Chengdu Military Region once gave me a suitcase which was full of all kinds of precious things, and no one knew what they were. During this period, lots of big-character posters were posted that conveyed false information. Moreover, some people once said I was a counterrevolutionary (Ch. li shi fan ge ming). They said that in 1935, Ren Rong was a key member of a counterrevolutionary organization in Sichuan called the Group of Anti-CCP and Saving the Nation (Ch. fangong jiuguo tuan), when he killed many Red Army soldiers. They sent this letter directly to Jiang Qing and Wang Hongwen.   

**Q:**  Do you know who wrote that letter?   

**A:**  A leader of one masses' rebellious organization in Tibet. He made the material together with one agent of the Guomindang. Jiang Qing paid much attention to this letter and right away assigned some people to Tibet to check this. At that time, I was in charge of the general work in Tibet so I welcomed them and asked them whether I should make a report on Tibet's situation to them. They said that it wasn't needed, and that they wanted to check something first. After doing investigatios for almost a month, they didn't say anything and left. And then they went to Sichuan, my hometown, to continue to investigate, and also didn't say anything. After the investigation, they left there. After that, they said that according to the evidence they collected, Ren Rong was not a counterrevolutionary. Afterwards, I knew that in fact they found that there was a person also called Ren Rong (another person, not me) who did some rebellious things. I knew this information from someone else. Jiang Qing didn't dare to tell me the result of their investigation. But she wrote a letter to Chairman Mao and to Premier Zhou, telling them that I was not a counterrevolutionary and I was innocent according to the report written by the masses. Afterwards, I went to Beiabout this, which surprised me. Indeed, I committed some mistakes during the Cultural Revolution. I think that maybe because of these they tried to overthrow me. One mistake I did is that in 1967 or 1968, maybe in 1968, I attended a meeting in Beijing where Zhang Guohua once communicated with us, telling me that there was something wrong happening in the navy and air force at that moment. I didn't understand what he meant. I cared about that a lot since I'm an army man; I want the people in the troops to be united. So I asked him about the details, but he didn't tell me and said that it was not the proper time to tell. He was the main person in charge of the work in Tibet. I asked Zhou Xing, the party secretary of CCP committee of Yunnan Province what happened in the army? He served as the party secretary of Yunnan after Yan Hongyan died. He said that I should ask commander Zhang about that. At that moment, Zhang had left Tibet and was in Chengdu. As a result, we asked two people, one commander and one party secretary of a province, yet none of them told us about the problem. Wang Yilong, a vice political commissar of Kunming Military District, also asked me about that. I told him I didn't know either. And he said to me that maybe we together could write a letter directly to Premier Zhou to ask, since this was very important and it was better for us to know the details. Then he wrote a note and showed it to me. I answered that I agreed. And then he showed the note to Liang Xingchu as well. Later, they sent the note to Premier Zhou. After Premier Zhou read the note, he didn't say anything on that day. On the second day, Premier asked Zhang Guohua, Liang Xingchu, Nan Rong and me to go to his place. He said that, I read your note; now within the army, there were some different opinions on some issues among some commanders in the navy and air force, but now the conflicts had ended. He thought that we should not talk about that anymore. So we felt very happy about that. However, later on, the Lin Biao Incident occurred. When doing investigation for the Lin Biao Incident, some people knew that we once sent a note to Premier Zhou, so they blamed us for meeting the Premier without telling them and asked us to confess our "true intentios." We said we only wanted to know the details in order to handle the possible problems; and also, we only asked the Premier and did not tell anyone else. They finally asked us to make a self-criticism. Another event happened in September of 1971, when the Lin Biao Incident took place. At that time, Zhang Guohua was not in charge of the work of Tibet because he was working in the Chengdu Military Region. Yet the Tibet Military District was under the leadership of the headquarters of the Chengdu Military Region. At that time, suddenly, the Central Military Committee instructed us that the headquarters of the Tibet Military District should start the urgent work of war preparations at once. As soon as I heard that, I realized that something unusual must be happening and I should pay close attention to it right away. Yet at that moment, not all the leading comrades of Tibet were in Tibet: only commander Hu and I were there. So we two talked about what we should do. We asked someone at the headquarters of the Chengdu Military Region, since we were under their leadership, but they said they did not know about that. We wanted to ask Zhang Guohua for details, but we could not find him, since at that moment he was in Beijing. I didn't know what to do at that time. Then, I wanted to ask Huang Yongsheng, since at that time he was the general chief of staff of the PLA (Ch. zong can mou zhang), but we could not find him. I thought I should do whatever I could do to understand the unusual situation in order to make specific arrangements. I didn't know how to prepare for a war, if I could not know, for example, whether the problem came from Tibet or from Yunnan, or from some other areas. So I called Premier Zhou for detailed information. Then I was told that Premier Zhou was attending a meeting in the Great Hall of the People (Ch. renmin dahuitang) at that moment. So I called the Great Hall of the People, in order to directly talk to Premier Zhou. Then, Zhou's secretary, who was perhaps Zhou Jiajun, received the call. He told us that something unusual happened, but it was not the right time to tell us the details; we should begin to make war preparation; he would tell the Premier we had called him and he would let us know if there was any new information. So we didn't reach the Premier and got no clear answer from his secretary. After we came back, we began to check the vehicles, weapons and other equipment and told the troops to make preparation in case of war or any accident which might happen. I told the Central Committee that no matter what happened, our people in the Tibet Military District would try our best to overcome the difficulties and handle the problems. And I requested them to tell what I said to Premier Zhou. Afterwards Premier Zhou didn't say anything to us. After a day or two, a journalist from the Xinhua News Agency told us that something happened in Beijing, and that the incident might have something to do with Lin Biao, but he didn't tell us the details. Later on, Jiang Qing blamed us for calling Huang Yongsheng, which she regarded as our action of organizing a faction. Yet in fact she knew our calling to Huang Yongsheng was just because it was us who told her, rather than because she found it by herself. Then she asked me what was the relationship between Huang and me. She said I should not call him, since Huang was a member of the Gang of Four. She blamed me and asked me to confess why I called him. Then I made a self-criticism, since I should not call him. I said: if I knew he was close to Lin Biao, I would not have called him; I called him because I did not know his conspiracy with Lin Biao; after I called Huang, right away I also called Premier Zhou, which could be witnessed by Zhou's secretary; I just wanted to request him to clarify the instruction for war preparations. They doubted me because I was from the 4th Field Army. However, when Lin Biao was the commander of the 4th Field Army, I was just a vice political commissar of a division and actually had no chance to meet with Lin Biao, because in the meetings only the officials with ranks higher than mine, or even more higher, had the right to attend. Some people said that I even posted a picture of Lin Biao on the wall at home, but that was actually not true. And even so, just one picture could not prove that I was close to him. After I finished my self-criticism, Jiang Qing and Zhang Chunqiao still didn't give up and continued to criticize me. They did not believe what I said at all and didn't think I was honest. I said that I had never met Lin Biao before, and even in a meeting for political work held in Harbin, I didn't meet him. I only saw Lin Biao via photographs and so on; and I hadn't talked with him and met him before. Later I worked in Tibet, where I still had no relationship with him at all. Huang Yongsheng was my superior, because he once served as the commander under whom I worked. At first I was not familiar with him. Yet later on, under his command, our troop won three main battles, which boosted the morale of our soldiers. In the battle of Jiuwentuan, he was the commander and our troop killed all the division commanders (Ch. shi zhang) and chiefs of staff (Ch. can mou zhang) of our enemies. It was the first time, when all the commanders from the enemies were killed. This kind of performance we had never had in the past. So I really thought Huang Yongsheng was a good commander and had outstanding military talent and intelligence. During one fierce battle, I was in the battlefield at that time. He called me and asked who I was and where were the troops. I told him my name, where I was and that I was the political commissar of the 66th Regiment (Ch. tuan). He told me that I should try to defend the highland southeast to make sure of the advance of the main force. I said at that moment I had only one regiment and one company (Ch. lian). He told me to dispatch more people to join in the battle and should defend a highland southwest so as to facilitate our attacking the enemies. Then I organized the troops and told Huo Zhenda, who was the political commissar of one regiment, that we should guard the highland area, and that I would dispatch more troops there. Our troops managed to defend this position for a whole night. On the second day, though, the enemies attacked us several times, but they all failed at last. Huo Zhenda was injured in the battle. Finally, after 12:00, we began to counterattack the enemy and won the battle. We drove away the enemy and intercepted the enemy who had run away. In this way, almost all the enemy were caught. In the second and third battles, we also won and disabled almost all the division commanders and chiefs of staff of the enemy. I really admired Huang Yongsheng's military talent, but I was not close to him. I had seldom seen him after that. I only met him when I had to consult him. So, I didn't have any close relationship with him. Qiu Huizuo was the ...(not clear)... when Huang Yongsheng was the commander. I could not remember that clearly. I was not close to him at all. And someone also said that I was a member of the Central Committee of the 9th National People's Congress. I said that was not true, and they could check that if they don't trust my words. I was the representative of Tibet in the 9th National People's Congress. And then they began to investigate and check what I did. Some members of the standing committee (Ch. chang wu wei yuan) from the Party Committee also thought that I did something wrong, so did some people from local committee. Some of the leaders of Central Committee were not in charge of this at that time. So they asked one party secretary, Yang Dongsheng, who once was a Red Army soldier and a very righteous man, to investigate what I did. After investigation, he didn't find anything that I did wrong, but he did not dare to tell the truth to others. I said to him that now that I was innocent, he had no reason to fear telling the truth. But he still didn't have the courage to tell the truth. Then he gave the documents to a Tibetan comrade called Ba Sang. Ba Sang was a comrade who was quite silent usually. Yet this time he said that he would tell the truth to others. So in one meeting, Ba Sang gave a speech telling the fact that I was innocent. But Jiang Qing still assailed me and wanted to overthrow me. Premier Zhou knew that I was innocent. When the Cultural Revolution was about to end, and during the period when Jiang Qing attacked me intensely, I attended a meeting in Beijing and met with Marshal Ye Jianying, Li Xiannian, Ji Dengkui and Hua Guofeng. I made a self-criticism at the meeting and at last they accepted that I am innocent. I managed to clarify my real relationship with Lin Biao as well as his followers. Yet during this time, Jiang Qing still kept assailing me. Jiang Qing and Zhang Chunqiao still didn't give up their goal of overthrowing me. That night, after I came back from the meeting, it was almost 12:00 am. Li Xiannian called me and said that the atmosphere at today's meeting was quite strained and after I left they made some discussion, yet at that moment Premier Zhou was not there. Maybe the Premier was suffering a very severe illnesses. Li Xiannian said they would like the representatives of Tibet to attend the discussion in the meeting, and asked me my opinion. I answered that I would be very happy if they could come to attend our discussion. I also said we were very glad to hear their instructions. He said he would tell me their decision after their discussion. And then, after 12:00 am, Marshal Ye Jianying called me again and told me that today's meeting was held in a highly charged atmosphere and said that I didn't have to be anxious. He also told me that I could call him anytime or we could meet together. He tried to comfort me, saying that they knew clearly I am innocent, and he told me that if I wanted to say something, I could contact him directly.   

**Q:**  Did he call your home or call Jingxi Hotel?   

**A:**  Yes, it was to my home. I was living in Beijing at that time.   

**Q:**  Where is your home?   

**A:**  No.1 Apartment in Bei Chang Street. Do you know that? It is located in a place very near to Zhongnanhai. There are a lot of newly built houses there now, many of which I have not visited. After that, on the next day, when we attended the meeting, Li Xianjian and Hua Guofeng came to meet us to talk about how to carry out the work in Tibet and emphasized that comrade Ren Rong was innocent and didn't do anything wrong. And they also talked about how to carry out the important work in Tibet and how to be united. However, later on, someone from the headquarters of the Chengdu Military Region still held a meeting in which they criticized me, saying that I did something wrong. They asked all the leaders of Tibet Military District to go to attend their meeting, in which they discussed some of my previous activities.   

**Q:**  Was Zhang Guohua there at the meeting?   

**A:**  No, he had passed away a long time before.   

**Q:**  Where was the meeting in Beijing held? In the Great Hall of the People (Ch. ren min da hui tang) or in Jingxi Hotel?   

**A:**  We lived in Jingxi, but the meeting was held in the Great Hall of the People. It was a meeting about the work in the Tibet Military District.   

**Q:**  Who from Tibet attended the meeting? Are there these people? Was it held on June 25th, when you (Ren Rong), Chen Mingyu, Tian Bao, Yang Dongsheng, Redi, and Ba Sang, all attended it?   

**A:**  When did this meeting happen?   

**Q:**  On June 25th of 1972.   

**A:**  The meeting I am talking about is not that one. The meeting I am saying was held much later.   

**Q:**  In 1967, Lin Biao died in the air crash.   

**A:**  No, I think it was in 1971. And the meeting I am talking about was held in 1976 or in 1977. The Cultural Revolution was about to end at that time. I think the attendees of it included, Tian Bao, Chen Mingyi, Redi, Ba Sang and some members of the standing Party Committee of Tibet. I was the political commissar of Tibet Military District at that time. This meeting was held under a highly charged atmosphere. After attending the meeting on Tibet we went back to Tibet. Yet later on, the headquarters of the Chengdu Military Region held a meeting in order to continue to criticize me. The meeting was regarded as a serious event. In the meeting, once again I had to make a self-criticism, as I did earlier in Beijing. Since I had nothing more to say. I had to repeat what I already said. At that moment Liu Xinyuan was the commander of Chengdu Military Region--no, he was the vice commander--sorry, I can not remember it clearly. Yan Zheng was the political commissar. Chen Hong was the vice commander. And the party secretary of Sichuan Military District was Li Dazhang, who was also the political commissar of Chengdu Military Region. After I came into the meeting room, they told me who Li Dazhang was and asked me why I made some private documents about commanders. I said I didn't do it. I thought the reason why they asked me this may have something to do with a problem in the Cultural Revolution, which was quite complicated. Comrade Chen Mingyi once said that there were some people in the local area collecting documents against him. I said it was not true and I knew nothing about that. He said that someone told him about it. I said I did not know anything about it. What I knew was only that according to some people, once in Tibet, one leader of a masses' rebellious organization from Tianjin helped you write some lecture notes (Ch. jiang gao). I heard it from some others, so I didn't know its details. And I had no idea if that was true or not. I said that I only heard this but didn't see any materials about that. But the vice commander Chen Mingyi regarded it a serious problem, so he started an investigation, forbidding other people to access the documents of the Headquarters of Tibet Military District and the government of Tibet. And he asked his secretary to take all the possibly useful documents to the headquarters of the Tibet Military District and started to examine the documents by himself. At last they found nothing. Then I thought this matter should be finished. I thought that even though he wanted to check those documents, at least he should first report his actions to the Party Committee of the Tibet Military District. He should not do that privately. Although he was the commander, he still should have told that to the members of the standing committee (Ch. chang wei) beforehand. After checking the documents for quite a long time, he didn't find anything, so he had to send the documents back... In the meeting held by the headquarters of the Chengdu Military Region, the attendees were asked to give speeches on the second day to criticise me, which seemed like I really had made some big mistakes. I didn't care about that, since I did not think I had done anything wrong. I did not know they would hold such a meeting against me. At that moment, even those people who were my close friends before, did not dare to talk with me any more, since they thought I would be criticized and denounced in the meeting. In the meeting on the next day, Duan Shiyi, who was the vice political commissar of the Chengdu Military Region, and Wang Chenghan, the vice political commissar of Tibet Military District, who entered Tibet almost the same time as me and later served as the political commissar of Academy of Military Sciences (Ch. jun shi ke xue yuan), said that, the Central Committee sent a telegram here which should be spread among the people; only after learning the Central Committee's spirit, should we continue the meeting. Then, Wang Chan stood up, saying that I support this suggestion. He said that according to the Central Committee's telegram, comrade Ren Rong did nothing wrong, so we should stop criticizing Ren Rong. So he managed to change the topic of the meeting and then the attendees of the meeting began to talk about how to handle the work in the Tibet Military District. After that, the meeting ended.   

**Q:**  You have talked about Zhou Renshan several times. We still want to know more details about that. For example, on June 7th of 1966, Zhou Renshan became the acting 1st Party Secretary on behalf of Zhang Guohua. How did it happen? Why did he frequently communicate with the two masses' organizations? Can you talk about this as far as you know?   

**A:**  These things all have passed and have ended. In the past, we observed one principle, which is that we should support what people did right and oppose what they did wrong. Why did Zhou Renshan do these things? I think the main point is that at that time he supported gyenlo (Ch. zaozong). So Zhou relied on gyenlo all the time, which was his problem. I will give you some examples. We really respected him. Even the commander of the Military District, Zhang Guohua, respected him and tried to protect him, and tried to prevent the masses from attacking him. In the Cultural Revolution, the main problem was that the masses were asked to attack the leader who played the most key role in work, which is really a tough problem. In the future, when I write my autobiography, I will once again criticize this problem: why did the masses insist on attacking the main leaders who were in charge of the general work (no matter whether the leaders committed some mistakes or not)? Why were all the leaders criticised and denounced and humiliated for no reason? I think this was a big mistake and should not be forgiven and allowed. If some leaders had their own faults, of course people could criticize them, but I can't accept that all the leaders were denounced or even killed. Therefore, Zhou Renshan feared that the masses' actions could be very extreme and radical. So he had to consider how to face such a situation. After leaving the hospital, Zhou Renshan went to the headquarters of gyenlo in the western suburb of Lhasa, where he started to command the Military Fighting (Ch. wudou)(between different masses' organizations). And then, Zhou avoided meeting us, and even organized a new government there. And we could not find him. We completely lost contact with him and could not find him anywhere. Then the situation became more and more difficult to handle. During the period when the military conflicts between different masses' organizations in Tibet escalated even more, he ran away to the northern area of Gansu province and then was found by some organization of the Lanzhou Military Region. Then they reported that to the Central Committee. At that time, we did not know anything about that. The headquarters of the Lanzhou Military Region sent him to Beijing, and then the Central Committee told us to take him back to Tibet. So we took him back to Tibet and criticized him. But later, he still supported gyenlo. In 1968, a study-class (Ch. xuexi ban) for cadres was held in Beijing. Liao Peiyi, Yang Dongsheng and someone else from the Party Committee (Ch. dang wei) attended the study-class. And some people from the the Military District, like me, and Chen Dengzhi, who was a vice chief of staff (Ch. can mou zhang), also attended the study-class. Some representatives from the two masses' organizations also attended it.   

**Q:**  Where was this study-class held? In the Jingxi Hotel?   

**A:**  No, it was held in the College of the Air Force (Ch. kong jun xue yuan?) in Beijing.   

**Q:**  How long did it last?   

**A:**  Quite long. We learned the works of Chairman Mao, and also how to be united to work better. The list of the people who should attend the class was drafted by the Central Committee in Beijing and was checked again and again by the Central Committee. Zhou Renshan was not on the name list. We didn't report his name to the Central Committee, and gyenlo didn't report him either, since we all thought that Zhou's position was too extreme. However, some people of gyenlo helped put makeup on him. As a result, no one could recognize him. I didn't recognize him at the airport of Lhasa and also did not recognize him when we arrived at Chengdu. We stayed at Chengdu for one night and had dinner, but we still didn't see him. When we were about to arrive at Beijing, the leader of gyenlo, Tao Changsong, told me that Zhou Renshan was on the plane to Beijing too. I asked why he took Zhou Renshan with us, since Zhou Renshan was not even on gyenlo's name list. But he answered that now that he had come already, we could just let Zhou attend the study-class. After we arrived at the Western Suburb Airport (Ch. xijiao jichang), I told the people who picked us up that we had one more person coming to attend the meeting. They asked who he was and since he was not on the list, why we still let him come. I told them that it was Zhou Renshan, who was in charge of the main issue in Tibet. They told us to go to the study-class first which was located in the College of the Air Force, and to just leave Zhou Renshan there. And then we were sent to the College of the Air Force and Zhou Renshan was taken away by some other people dispatched by Central Committee. I didn't know where he was sent to. Then the Revolutionary Committee (Ch. ge ming wei yuan hui) was founded, and I still did not know where Zhou Renshan was. In 1971, in a meeting of the CCP, according to the Central Committee's regulations, almost all the attendees supported expelling Zhou Renshan from CCP membership. Finally, though we discussed this issue and many people strongly insisted in expelling him, we still didn't do it. Then after he went back to the city, he left to receive medical care and to have a rest. And then, the Revolutionary Committee was established. After comrade Zeng Yongya left, I took over his work in charge of the Revolutionary Committee of Tibet. In 1968 (it should be 1978), Zhou Renshan was rehabilitated (Ch. ping fan). After that, the Central Committee assigned him to new work in Xinjiang as a vice party secretary. There, he continued to be involved with factional troubles and his actions made the situation in Xinjiang in a mess, which upset the people there. So in the end he was sent back to Beijing, where he was asked to rest. Several years later, he died. Zhou Renshan was an intellectual and had graduated from a college. His main problem was that he was always involved with factional conflicts, and in the conflicts between the masses' rebellious organizations, he always sided with the radical one against the conservative one. Another problem of his, was that once, as the chairman of the Tibet Autonomous Region, he had lots of opinions against the Party; in some matters he thought he was not treated fairly and he suffered some undeserved criticism. And since he wasn't promoted to a higher position, he was not satisfied and became unhappy. As a result, he tried to get revenge against the headquarters of Tibet Military District, and he even spread the rumor that the headquarters of Tibet Military District was planning to rebel, and so on.   

**Q:**  Was him from the 18th Army (Ch. shi ba jun)?   

**A:**  No, he wasn't. He was from the government, rather than PLA system. He was from the Northwest Bureau.   

**Q:**  Was he from the northwest?   

**A:**  I think so, yet I didn't ask him about his background. So I don't know it clearly. During the Cultural Revolution, we all felt nervous and exhausted so we didn't have time to talk with each other. Everyday we had to deal with the criticisms and attacks from the masses. Besides, we had to deal with the conflicts within the headquarters of the Tibet Military District, where different people sometimes had contradicting opinions. Within the headquarters of the Tibet Military District, there were two factions who fought against each other. It was really a hard time for everyone during the Cultural Revolution. At that time, many people didn't dare to express their true thoughts.   

**Q:**  I still don't understand well what you talked about yesterday. At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution in 1966, as far as we know, the big-character posters (Ch. da zi bao) appeared, and the first group of Red Guard (Ch. hong wei bing) came to Tibet. And then, two masses' organizations, Gyenlo (Ch. zaozong) and Nyamdre (Ch. dalianzhi), were established.   

