# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0100.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Ren Rong   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**© 2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Wuhan, China  
**Date of Interview:** April 21, 1999  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Chinese. The audiotaped interview was transcribed and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Anonymous  
**Name:** Ren Rong   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 82  
**Date of Birth:** 1917  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ren Rong was Party Secretary in the TAR from 1971-1980. Before that he was a key figure during the Cultural Revolution in Tibet and discusses various aspects of the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. In this interview, he talks about the problems regarding Fan Ming in Tibet and other internal problems and movements such as the "eliminating the hidden organizations" (Ch. wa yinbi zuzhi) campaign and about the issue of rehabiliating cadres. And he talks about Yin Fantang and the 1980 visit of Hu Yaobang, and about a battle between Indian troops and the PLA at Nathula Pass in 1967.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0100_07/H_0100_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  Later on, I went to Shigatse. There I visited the Tashilhunpo Monastery. And then I inspected their work of "Project of One River and Two Lakes" (Ch. yijiang lianghu gongcheng). Within one day, I went to Namu, Bailang (Penam), Jiangzi (Gyantse), and after having lunch and having a rest, I came back. And also I spent one day to visit the Tashilhunpo Monastery. So in total I spent two days there. On the third day, by automobile, I departed from Shigatse toward Lhoka. I stayed at Lhoka for one day where I inspected their work of building a new bridge there. And also I went to Qiongjie (Chongye), to visit the tomb of Songtsen Gampo. I didn't know whether it was in good condition or not (so I visited it). When I visited it then, it was protected very well, just like before. At that moment I had a plan to build a reservoir nearby, so I made an investigation around the area. Now I hear that they have built a reservoir there, in the valley of Bailang county. No, it is not Bailang. It should be Qiongjie. As for my old wife... which year is it... That year I returned to Wuhan... 1986... No it should be in 1987. In 1987 she passed away. Before she passed away, during two or three years, I spent most of my time looking after her. Besides doing my work... (I used most of my time to look after her)... I even stopped my previous habit of walking. She was not able to move during that period, so she could not live independently. Also there were some workers helping me to look after her, but I couldn't travel during that period. On May 4, 1988, my wife passed away. At that time I had to work... Though I had been married with my wife for a long time, because of my work, I didn't live together with her for a very long time. My wife had suffered lots of difficulties. She did her best to take care of the whole family, when I had to work in frontier areas. Now I feel that I owed her very much and am deeply grateful for her. I feel that as a husband and a father I did not do my responsibilities very well. For a long time I spent all my time working (and therefore had to ignore my family). Chairman Mao once taught us that, we should "serve the people wholeheartedly," so now I feel that, even though I myself sacrificed some part of my family life, I don't regret it. In my heart anyway, I feel at ease and happy. After my retirement, according to regulations and policies, the leading comrades gave me lots of help. They offered me a position among the members of the standing committee of Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference... My new wife is a really nice person. She is healthy and educated. We have very good relationship with each other. Both my children and her children treat me very well. So I can say that I lead a happy life in old age. Now when I recall my past, I will say I had an uneventful life. Though I have some shortcomings and have committed some mistakes, I have a clear conscience, for both the Party and the people. In this year I am already 82 years old, yet I still try to learn new stuff in order to improve myself. I try to be a healthy old man, healthy not only in body, but even more important, in mind. I will try to follow our Party's new route, guidelines, and policies. If so, I can be a good example for my children, my relatives, and my friends. Today I will tell you that I am very happy and entirely free from worry. Previously I wanted to do nothing. I thought that, since I had an uneventful life, I didn't have very many things to be written in my memoir and perhaps no people would want to read it, so I didn't want to write my memoir. Yet they continued to say to me, trying to ask me to write one. And when I told them some of my past experiences, they felt thy were very interesting so now I have decided to write a memoir. As for the title of my memoir, I haven't decided it yet. Perhaps I can call it "An Uneventful Life", and so on. I haven't decided yet. Now I want to show it to you... What time is it now?   

**Q:**  It is at 5:30.   

**A:**  5:30? I have to leave shortly. These are the drafts of my memoir. I wish that in the first half of this year I can finish the fourth part. The fourth part is about my experiences in anti-Japanese war. The fifth part is about the civil war. The sixth part is about the war to resist US aggression and aid Korea. The seventh part is about the 50th Army and the 38th Army. The eighth part is about my work in Tibet. The ninth part should be about my late years, or I can add something else into it. I have not made the decision yet. My wife told me that you two want to see it. So today I will give you these three parts and welcome you giving me feedback.   

**Q:**  Thank you so much.   

**A:**  These are just drafts, through which you can know my past. I plan that in the winter of this year I will finish writing all the drafts. And then I will invite some comrades to modify them. That is it. Now I am about to leave.   

**Q:**  It's alright. (another talk starts)   

**A:**  ...you can go to Tibet to ask the staff there...   

**Q:**  OK, I got it.   

**A:**  The details I am not very sure because they are so many.   

**Q:**  I have another question. After the democratic reforms and quelling the rebellion, in general the rebels were suppressed. At this moment, however, the economic constructing had not started. Is it true?   

**A:**  Yes it is true. At that moment, we all were very busy trying to solve the severest problems such as war. So we did not have time to deal with this kind of specific problems. I have something to tell you.   

**Q:**  Can I record it?   

**A:**  After the big issue (Ch. da de shiqing), several very severe problems took place in Tibet. These problems are all about internal affairs. One of them, is about Fan Ming. The problem of Fan Ming had lots of social impact, and lots of people were involved in it. Many northwest cadres were involved. Finally, Fan Ming was labeled as an "ultra-rightist." And then he was arrested and kept in prison for a long time. Fan Ming didn't think he had done anything wrong. When I went to Tibet, this problem had already happened. However, because this problem was solved by the Central Committee, and also because the Central Committee never asked me to solve it, I did not look into it. This was the first problem. Another problem was about "the clique of Fan, Bai, Liang and Gu." During this period, some people said the members of this clique had close relations with Fan Ming. so after Fan Ming was arrested, these people who had been involved with Fan Ming were also attacked. So for a long time these people were criticized and denounced. Later on, the "Incident of Mu Shengzhong" happened. This incident happened very late. It was after 1959. Some people made the accusation that Mu Shengzhong had a close relationship with Peng Dehuai, so he was criticized. Besides all that I have mentioned, within the Tibet Military District, another big event happened: the so-called "Submitting A Written Statement by Four Departments of the Tibet Military District." The four departments included: the Headquarters of the Tibet Military District, the Political Department, the Logistics Department, the Production Department. The leading comrades of the four departments wanted to put forward a suggestion to the Central Military Committee and the Central Committee. The general idea of their suggestion was that: the living and working conditions of Tibet were so hard; many of their family members and children were not able to go to Tibet to visit them; many of the comrades suffered diseases and were not very healthy because of the tough environment of border area. At that moment, the situation was really bad compared to what it is now, as you may have known. For example, at that moment, if we wanted to go to Tibet from Chengdu, it would cost us half of a month if we went by large automobiles, or more than one week if we went by small automobiles. Because the condition of the roads was not good, it was not convenient for the automobiles to travel. And very often landslides would happen, which would block the roads and therefore make them unavailable. As for the other direction, the road between Golmud and Tibet had been built, yet its condition was bad as well: there were lots of pot holes on the road so it was bumpy. It crossed a large snowy area of the Kunlun Mountains and the Tanggula Mountains and the environment there was very tough. If the comrades' family members were in Chengdu and they wanted to go to Tibet, first they had to go to Xi'an or Baoji, and then, from there, by way of Gansu and Qinghai, they should go to Golmud. And then, they had to cross the area of Tanggula Mountains. It was so difficult. Therefore, at that moment, these cadres wanted to put forward their opinions and they wrote a report and submitted it to the Central Committee. However, their action brought a disaster for them because later on they were criticized for being "people who had rightist ideas and feared to endure difficulties."   

**Q:**  What was their request when submitting the report?   

**A:**  These comrades working in Tibet thought that since the difficult climate in Tibet made their bodies really suffer, they wished that the Central Committee could transfer new comrades from other provinces into Tibet in place of them; namely, they wished different groups of comrades could work in Tibet by turns; if so, they could look after their family members who were in other provinces as well as solve their health problems; and also, if so, the work in Tibet could continue. I think their suggestion can be justified. Yet during that period, as the result of the influence of ultra-leftist thoughts and also because some of the leading comrades did not know the real difficult working conditions in Tibet, the comrades putting forward the suggestion were criticized and punished.   

**Q:**  Which year did it happen?   

**A:**  It happened before I went to Tibet. After I entered Tibet, the severest problem was the conflict between us and our enemies. In 1959 we did the battles of quelling the rebellion. In 1962 we focused our attention on the war between India and China. After these events, the situation became peaceful for a time. And then, I came to Tibet. Since the situation became peaceful, the democratic reforms started in local areas. The main content of these reforms included: the lands were distributed to the people; the livestock were distributed to the people; the policy of "buying the cattle and the sheep from the owners" was implemented; and so on. And then, a movement called the "Four Clean-ups Movement" was launched in Tibet. The aim of that movement was to clear away the obstacles in local areas so as to further the work of the democratic reforms. During this period, a new problem emerged: the movement of "eliminating the hidden organizations" (Ch. wa yinbi zuzhi) started. Zhou Renshan launched this movement. Certainly it was approved by the Party Committee of Tibet Autonomous Region, yet all the specific work was conducted by Zhou Renshan. The main goal of this movement was to try to find and eliminate "hidden organizations or hidden enemies" within us; if some people could not find any of this kind of hidden organizations or enemies within themselves, they would be regarded as not doing a good job. As a result, we started to look for the so-called hidden enemies in Tibet, and lots of people were kept in prison or even killed because of this movement. That is to say, there was a severe problem in launching this movement. There are some documents and records on this event that are kept by CCP organizations in Tibet now. And then, during the years at the end of the Cultural Revolution and those after the Cultural Revolution, many Central Committee's policies were implemented by me. I have very deep impression on one thing happening in a very large village in Youxi county. There was a Party branch secretary of that village who was a very active participant during the period of democratic reforms.   

**Q:**  Where is the village? In which county is this village?   

**A:**  A county called Youxi... I can't recall it clearly. Later on I can check it. There are many hot springs in that area; it is next to Chamdo. The branch secretary of that village was labeled as a "bad activist" (Ch. huai fen zi) by some people for many years. After hearing from others about his case, I went there to make a lot of investigations. In the end, I found that this cadre was innocent. He was unfairly treated. So later on, I proclaimed in public that he was rehabilitated, and his former position as a state cadre was restored, which made both him and the masses there very happy.   

**Q:**  What is the name of that Party branch secretary?   

**A:**  I can't remember it. All these prove that, at that time, in Naqu and Chamdo... (unclear), and there were also these sorts of cases in Lhasa and Shannan. The roots of these problems existed before I became the person in charge. When I was working within PLA, I did not deal with these kinds of matters. I tried to solve the problems in a fair way. During the period of the Cultural Revolution, there were so many of these sorts of problems. Since all these were problems about work, I dealt with them publicly. That is it. Which question did you ask a moment ago? The rehabilitation? Today I will discuss this topic seriously. The cases of rehabilitating during that period were very many. There were really a large number of people who were treated unfairly both in and before the Cultural Revolution. Now I can say that during that period, the work of rehabilitating cadres in Tibet was done faster and better compared to many other provinces. To be sure, our work then was not done very thoroughly and more work in this aspect remained to be done. For example, there was a problem in Tibet that some cadres were regarded by the masses as having committed wrongdoings in the past, yet we thought these cadres in fact were innocent. So what should we do? It was hard to collect evidences to prove these cadres' innocence and to convince the masses within a very short period. Thus, we made a principle: the cadres should first return to work, though not all the cadres returned to their previous positions at that moment; after returning to work, these cadres would receive examinations at the same time; according to the examinations, if they were found truly innocent, they would be restored to their previous positions right away. This is what we did then. According to my memory, among the cases of Tibetan cadres, there was only one person, called Taxin... Do you know Taxin? On his case we spent a longer time to examine it. Why? Taxin once studied at Political University (Ch. zhengzhi daxue) in Nanjing in the past. He had a communication code (Ch. tongxin de fuhao) that we had to investigate carefully. At that moment, lots of people said that Taxin was an KMT agent and he used this code to contact the KMT. So we had to spend lots of time to investigate this. And also, since during this period he was receiving medical care, he had to rest, and had to wait for a new job, so it took a longer time for us to rehabilitate him. Other cases were rehabilitated faster, though there were still some cases remaining to be solved. We held lots of meetings to discuss rehabilitating the cadres, and we even established a special work group to deal with this problem. This working group was led by the Organization Department (Ch. zuzhi bu) and was headed by Yang Dongsheng, who at that moment was the Party secretary of Tibet Autonomous Region. The main work of Yang Dongsheng was to be in charge of matters concerning the cadres. He served as the Party Secretary of the Tibet Autonomous Region then. Maybe now you don't know him. His main work was to implement the policies about cadres because he was very familiar with the situation then. This comrade was a very nice person and never behaved in an extreme way, which was acknowledged by all of us. And also, some people from Group of Political Work (Ch. zheng gong zu), the Organization Department, the Public Security Department, and the Procuratorate (Ch. jian cha yuan), participated in this work group. Regarding this, if you want to know more, you can read the chronicle of important events of Tibet, the documents of the Tibet Autonomous Region, and so on. To be sure there may be some mistakes in these documents, yet you can pay attention to the general ideas [rather than the details].   

**Q:**  In 1977, the Party Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region sent a report to the Central Committee. It was about speeches on Tibet issued by the "Gang of Four." According to the report, there were 8 records of speeches made by the Gang of Four on Tibet during the Cultural Revolution. The first speech was issued on September 18, 1967. The second one was on June 6, 1968. The third one was on August 17, 1968. The fourth one was on August 26, 1968. The fifth, the sixth, and the seventh ones were in 1969. And the last one was in 1972. What are the topics discussed in these 8 speeches? These all happened during the period of the Cultural Revolution. I think you are familiar with the background of the Cultural Revolution.   

**A:**  I can't remember any of the details. But I can recall that Jiang Qing once said: there was a strange thing in Tibet, namely, why one colleague in Tibet was moved to Xianyang, Xi'an, an area of an inland province? Jiang Qing said this was really odd; and that the colleague should return. That is what I can recall now. Other speeches made by the Gang of Four, I can't remember now. In the future you can inquire about them in those materials.   

**Q:**  On April, 27, the Party Committee of Tibet sent this report to the Central Committee. And on October 22, the Party Committee of Tibet sent another report to the Central Committee in which it was reported that more than 130 followers of the Gang of Four in Tibet had been eliminated, and especially, 16 key members were eliminated. Who were those people?   

**A:**  Which year did it happen in?   

**Q:**  It was on October 22, 1977. This report examined the followers of Gang of Four in Tibet which had 16 core members.   

**A:**  Does the record mention the names of these people?   

**Q:**  There are no names in this record.   

**A:**  Ha ha I can't remember.   

**Q:**  OK... Yesterday, you mentioned that Hua Guofeng and Chen Yonggui came to Tibet once. Besides their formal speeches at the meetings of cadres, had those two expressed their feelings to Tibet in informal conversations with you?   

**A:**  According to my memory now, they did not talk too much with me in informal conversations.   

**Q:**  What about the two comrades' private feelings about Tibet?   

**A:**  They only expressed their ideas at formal meetings. They did not talk with me about that in private. Along with Chen Yonggui, we visited the Pembo (State) Farm and the reservoir. We did not talk with each other very much in private. Several people usually visited and talked together. There was no private conversation.   

**Q:**  I am interested in these matters... For example, Hu Yaobang dispatched his son to do some investigations. I want to know whether they expressed their private opinions on Tibet?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. When Hu Yaobang came to Tibet, I should have met and given a report to him. Yet this never happened. Why? The first reason is that, Hu needed rest after arriving in Tibet. The second reason is that usually several people together met him. Only one time, before holding the meeting, did I go to his room and asked him whether I should make the report to him. He replied that it was not needed to make a report, since he had already known the situation. What he wanted was just to let the attendees of the meeting put forward whatever issues to discuss, so as to solve the problems. Earlier when I was in Beijing, I had made a report about the situation in Tibet. Later on, he dispatched a very big work group headed by Yang Jieren to go to Tibet to make investigations. At first I wanted to make a report to Yang, but Yang Jieren rejected this. He said, there was no need to make a report only to him and that after the General Secretary came to Tibet, I could make it to both of them. Lots of people attended the meeting, including all the members of the standing committee of the Party Committee of Tibet Autonomous Region, the chairman and the vice chairman of the government of Tibet, and the General Secretary of Central Committee as well as many other leading comrades. So in the meeting, first, I made a very brief report to them, and then, I asked the attendees to put forward any issues. Then, Yang Zongxing made a speech, introducing our situation in Tibet and the difficulties we had to face in economic construction such as those in industry. Yang Zongxing also told about our plans to do economic construction in the future. Yet when he was saying this, his speech was interrupted by some people. They asked the attendees to put forward problems and then, Yang Wenlin, the Party secretary of Naqu, wanted to say somthing. His speech was very passionate. He said, "I want to say my opinions!" And it was permitted. He complained that in Naqu, there were not enough depots; without enough depots, the grain which was transported to Naqu from outside could not be kept in storage; they wanted highland barley, rather than wheat; and so on. When he was complaining, I did not interrupt his speech to make any explanation, since I thought it was not good to interrupt a comrade's speech. He gave his talk complaining for a long time. He said there were not enough depots; the grain had to be put in the open air; some people had to be dispatched to look after the grain; lots of grain was eaten by mice; and many other difficulties they had to face. He also said, the people wanted to eat highland barley, yet they couldn't get enough highland barley. He also mentioned the difficult living conditions in the pasture areas. For example, the transport conditions and the communication conditions were both not good. His speech was very passionate, which I found a little odd. I didn't know why he was so passionate in saying this. After his speech, several other comrades also gave their talks. In general, there were not very many problems put forward in the meeting. To be sure, comrade Hu Yaobang did point out several problems. This meeting was held in the afternoon. After less than two hours, comrade Hu got a headache, so he had to take a rest and so it was planned to continue the meeting on the next day. However, on the second day, Hu was too sick to conduct the meeting. As a result, the meeting had to end. So Wan Li went to visit the Jokhang Monastery, the Potala Palace, and urban Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Did you accompany Wan Li to visit these sites?   

**A:**  Wan Li?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I did not accompany him, because at that moment, I had already proclaimed that I would leave. Yin Fatang had arrived in Lhasa. Yin came on the first day. He (Hu Yaobang) came on the third day. Now it was the fourth day. After that, they did not ask me to attend the meeting, since I had resigned.   

**Q:**  I would like to ask a question about the details then. At that moment, was there a ceremony or something like it to finish the work handover between you and Yin Fatang? At least, according to our understanding, there should be some proclamation in front of either you or Yin Fatang through which Yin Fatang was appointed in place of your position...   

**A:**  No, never. There was nothing like that.   

**Q:**  If so, how could he announce that you would resign?   

**A:**  They didn't announce that, but in fact I was dismissed. First, when Yin Fatang came, Hu Yaobang had not arrived in Tibet. Yin Fatang came to Lhasa first, and at that moment we were holding a meeting for cadres who were at or higher than the rank of county head. In the meeting, I introduced Yin Fatang to the attendees of the meeting.   

**Q:**  When you introduced Yin Fatang to the attendees, did you tell the people he would come in place of your position?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time I told the people that the Central Committee had appointed him to take over my work. But it was only an oral appointment, not a written one. I told the people that he would replace me in my position, and I would return to the inland area. And also, when introducing Yin Fatang, I praised him highly. I said, Yin Fatang was able to read Tibetan, and he once worked in Tibet for some time. I made an introduction to Yin's basic background, and said he was a good person and I asked the people to welcome him. I also said that under the leadership of Yin, since he had the talent and experience, Tibet's future would be better. After my introduction, Yin Fatang made a very long speech. I can not recall clearly what he said. Anyway it was a very long speech, talking about many issues. And then, since it was me who conducting the meeting, I asked the attendees if there was any other issue they wanted to discuss, and if not, the meeting would end. No one put forward any other issue, so the meeting ended. That is the situation when Yin Fatang came to Tibet. On the second day, since Hu Yaobang was coming, I had a discussion with Yin Fatang. I said to Yin that, Hu would come, and I thought it was better for you to welcome him at the airport rather than me, since I would resign. However, Yin replied that since I was the old Party secretary, I should go to airport as well. So in the end, almost all the members of the Party Committee of Tibet went to the airport to welcome Hu Yaobang. When Hu Yaobang arrived, it was at noon. At about 1:00 pm, he had the lunch and then we made an arrangement about the schedule of the activities Hu would attend. At that moment, I put forward a suggestion to Hu Yaobang. I said, since the altitude of Tibet is very high and there is not enough oxygen, was it needed that you take a rest in the afternoon? If so, I said, we could hold the meeting in the morning on the next day after having breakfast. At that moment Yin Fatang was also there. However, Hu Yaobang rejected this. He asked the main leading comrades in Tibet, the members of Party Committee of Tibet, and the chairman and vice chairman of the government, to attend the meeting in the afternoon. In the meeting, he asked the attendees to make reports. I am not that sort of person who will carry very many materials (to attend meetings) so I just made a very brief outline. Yet when I was about to report to him, he rejected it. He said there was no need for me to make the report; rather, what he mainly wanted to do was to hear the problems from the people because he already knew the situation in Tibet. Hu said, first, in Beijing, he had heard about it; second, the working group had reported to him lots of information. So he just asked the attendees to put forward problems.   

**Q:**  Can you make a summary about the problems they put forward in the meeting?   

**A:**  I could not understand the problems they put forward. They were neither political problems, nor military problems, nor diplomatic problems, nor ethnic problems, nor religious problems. The problems they put forward were all in a mess. The activities done by Yang Jieren in Tibet were also very odd. They were extremely abnormal. For example, since Yang Jieren was from a department of the Central Committee, and Tibet is a province, if he came to Tibet, he should first have some communication with us, according to common sense. Yet he never did it. Even though we wanted to report to him, he rejected us.   

**Q:**  Did Yang Jieren come to Tibet 10 days earlier than others?   

**A:**  No. He came to Tibet one week earlier.   

**Q:**  That is to say, he spent only one week in Tibet to collect information for his report to Hu Yaobang?   

**A:**  Yes. He just stayed within Lhasa. He never told us whom he met and with whom he talked. He did his activities in a stealthy way. In my opinion, even before they came to Tibet, they had still known lots of information about me, and they had disliked me for a long time.   

**Q:**  Later on, when Hu Yaobang came to Tibet to attend the meeting, was Yang Jieren still there?   

**A:**  Yes, he still stayed at Lhasa. He also gave a speech at the meeting which I did not hear. I heard from others that his speech led to lots of different opinions. Yet I did not care. I don't want to be involved in these kind of matters any more. And also, at that moment, it was hard to explain all the things. Actually my transferring to another position to work was a very ordinary appointment. So it would be reasonable that the main leading comrades within the Party should discuss and communicate with each other on it beforehand if they had their own opinions. However, their actual actions contradicted the common sense and could not be justified at all. To be frank, I can't agree with what they did and I dislike their actions. I always felt something odd had happened. We were not ...(unclear). Rather, just because too many people were dispatched into Tibet, we strongly wished that the Central Committee could know more about the situation of Tibet. Many people advised me to make an explanation to the Central Committee when I was back. To this I could only reply that it was not possible for me to do so, because since he was the highest-ranking leader of the Central Committee, if I went back to complain to the Central Committee, it would cause more troubles. Anyway, he put forward some problems against me. For example, when I met the chief of the general staff, Yang Dezhi... I was acquainted with Yang Dezhi for a long time. When he served as the commander of Chinese troops during Korean War, I served as the vice director. During the Korean War, at first I was the director of the Organization Department, and then I was promoted to vice director of the Political Department. When Yang Dezhi served as the commander, I served as the vice director of the Political Department. In 1958, when withdrawing from Korean, who was the commander then? It was Yang Yong, with whom I was acquainted. Yang Yong and Wang Ping. When Yang Dezhi served as the commander, the political commissar was Li Zhimin. When I served as the director of Organization Department, Li Zhimin was the director of Political Department as well as the political commissar of the corps. We were all familiar with each other. When we met, Yang Dezhi asked me: "Comrade Ren Rong, I hear that the General Secretary, comrade Hu Yaobang, plans to send lots of cadres out of Tibet, which triggered a lot of different opinions. Do you know that? " I replied to him: "Of course I know it. " He then asked: "Why did he make this decision?" I answered: "He said that since Tibet is an area of ethnic minorities, there is no need to leave so many Han Chinese cadres here; we should let the cadres of minorities govern Tibet; all the Han Chinese cadres in Tibet then should make the application (to leave Tibet), and finally only 10% to 15% of them can be permitted to continue to stay in Tibet (others should leave); the Han Chinese cadres will be dispatched out of Tibet in several groups within a short time. That is to say, Hu will make huge change to our organization in Tibet." I think that Hu Yaobang's order will cause great setbacks and withdrawals for our work in Tibet. I said to Yang Dezhi that I thought it would be very difficult. Yang Dezhi asked me: "What about your opinion about this order?" I replied to him that: "To be honest, I can not understand his order." In the past, the cadres were dispatched by the Central Committee to enter Tibet. It was Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou who made the decision to dispatch the cadres into Tibet. We all followed the Central Committee's order to enter Tibet. To be frank, from the viewpoints of leading a stable life, of living together with family members and children, of giving the children a good environment to study, no one wants to stay in Tibet. My condition was not very bad... So I said to him that about this matter, I could not give a simple judgment, yet I thought we should consider this matter from the perspective of history and fact; and we should not make any hasty judgment. I think I know the truth clearly. So in the conversation, I said nothing about it. Some people advised me to complain. I replied I was not able to do it, since Hu Yaobang was the chief leader in charge of the CCP. And also, if in the end it is found that Hu is right while all of us are wrong, what should I do next? Or, if some people insisted in persecuting me, making complaints would be meaningless. So I did not make any complaint. I just keep silent. Also, some people advised me to go to meet Deng Xiaoping (to complain that I was treated unfairly). I have never gone to meet Xiaoping for personal matters. Yet I thought, there were two possibilities: the first possibility is that those two have different opinions abour me; however, the second possibility is that, if those two together want to persecute me--if so, certainly I should not (go to meet Deng Xiaoping too) make this sort of trouble. Today I tell you my true ideas, ha ha. So in the end I decided that I would not go to meet any people to complain. Later on, Marshal Ye called me, asking me to see him. So along with one secretary, I went to meet Marshal Ye. After I arrived at Marshal Ye's house, he was receiving medical care. After he finished it, he started to talk with me. He asked me, what about the situation in Tibet? So I told him the general situation in Tibet in brief. He did not mention Hu Yaobang in our conversation. And I told him that, now I was dispatched back. So he asked me, after I returned, what new position would I take? I answered that I did not know. He asked me about my health condition. I told him that my body was OK. He said, when you were in Tibet, you led a hard life for so many years, so after returning, you should have a sufficient rest. This is what we talked about. I did not tell him anything about Hu Yaobang. I didn't make any complaints. I didn't tell him any details about Tibet. He asked me, what about the situation of PLA in Tibet? I answered that the PLA troops in Tibet were still very good. In the past, if there were something important happening in border areas, I would call Marshal Ye to tell him the situation. During that period he was in charge of the work of the Central Military Committee. So about these sorts of matters sometimes I would consult him. However, as for "arresting people on February 9th" (Ch. er jiu zhua ren)... Just on that day, I was sick. At that moment, I was suffering a gastric spasm. As a result, Yin Fatang, in place of me, received the criticism. They held a large-scale meeting for criticism in the big yard of the headquarters of the Military District, which was attended by more than 10 thousand people. It was held on the very large playground just in front of our east gate. Many people from both the headquarters of the Military District and the government gathered there. The playground was full of people. The meeting for criticism lasted for one day. ..(some sentences unclear)... After entering the east gate, I looked for a doctor. The name of that doctor is Chen Jianxiu. He did a medical examination for me. And then, he gave me an injection of pain killer. After the injection...(unclear) Later on, before I could have breakfast/lunch (Ch. hai mei chi fan)[not sure whether it refers to a breakfast or a lunch], I heard the voice from the loudspeaker: "according to a telegram from Beijing, all the masses who have entered the headquarters of the Military District should exit as soon as possible." Yet some people refused to exit. And then, I heard the sounds of telephones. At that moment I didn't know what had happened. After I returned to my dormitory, I met Zeng Wenya, and I asked him what was happening? ...(unclear)... I asked him who reported it? ...(unclear)... For a whole day I did not see them. On that day, after having the breakfast... At about 9:00 am, the meeting started, and then, it didn't end until night. In the meeting, the masses criticized and interrogate the cadres.   

**Q:**  During that period, did Marshal Ye give specific instructions about the work of the PLA troops in Tibet?   

**A:**  After entering Tibet... Many guidelines... Another one was about the security in border areas. We should try to maintain a peaceful situation there. Another one was that we should try to annihilate all the enemies who entered our territory. These are what he instructed. He did not mention very many instructions about the work of the PLA troops in Tibet. During that period, we were not able to pay sufficient attention to improving the living condition of the PLA troops in Tibet. One advantage of our troops lives was that we had a very strong CCP organizations. Our PLA soldiers can endure any difficult conditions. This factor of our troops, I think, is really valuable at any time. I feel that our cadres really have passion. At that moment, the living conditions in Tibet were very tough. Our soldiers in every platoon, in every company, in every sentry post, were stationed along the border which is more than 2,000 kilometers long. If this similar situation happened today, very possible lots of accidents would occur. Yet during that period, almost no accidents took place.   

**Q:**  Around the end of the Cultural Revolution, in 1970s, or after 1975, when you were in charge of the work of the government, what was the situations of PLA in the border areas regarding the struggles against Dalai Lama and India? Did some change happen after 1975?   

**A:**  After 1975, in general, the situation became peaceful. No very big events took place. In 1967, we had a battle against India in Naidui La (Nathula Pass), which was not even reported in the newspapers. We did not spread the news about this.   

**Q:**  Do you mean to say that after the 1st war between Indian and China, there was another war?   

**A:**  Yes. There was another battle. And besides that, for some time, the enemy entered our territory, and then we destroyed them.   

**Q:**  We did not report the battle in 1967, but can we now find the documents about it?   

**A:**  Yes. The documents were kept in the headquarters of Tibet Military District. No newspaper reported it. Why? Because at that moment, the relationship between China and foreign countries was not good.   

**Q:**  Can you say something about the battle against India in 1967? Can you tell us the general situation then?   

**A:**  At that moment, seeing that the Cultural Revolution had caused internal conflicts in China, India wanted to have a try. And at the same time, the Dalai Lama's troops tried to fight back into our territory, namely the troops called the "Tibetan Volunteer Defenders of the Faith" (Ch. wei jiao jun). In the meantime, Indian troops tried to attack us in order to exacerbate our internal conflicts in Tibet. So their troops went forward toward us. Near Naidui La, there were a small number of our troops stationed. Indian troops started small-scale attacks against us in the area of Naidui La.   

**Q:**  How many Indian soldiers were there?   

**A:**  They had one brigade. (one sentence unclear)...They occupied a tall mountain in front of Naidui La. The mountainside was very steep. They climbed up the mountain and occupied it.   

**Q:**  What is the name of the tall mountain?   

**A:**  I can't remember it now. You can read the relevant materials in the Headquarters of the Military District. Another site is Zeli La (Jelap Pass). In front of it there was a large mountain pass. The Indian troops approached it, yet our troops did not withdraw. There were only tens of meters between the two sides. And then we started to fire at each other. After firing, the Indian troops prepared a large number of cannons, attempting to drive our troops away. Yes. After seeing that their artillery troops were very threatening, we also dispatched our artillery troops there. And then, both sides fired at each other with cannons. We dispatched all the main artillery troops in Tibet there. This battle between the artillery troops of both sides lasted for one week. We also dispatched the troops of one regiment to attack them. And then we destroyed all the fortifications they had built on the mountainsides around the area for two or three kilometers in front of us. These fortifications were built very firmly, yet we destroyed all of them. We killed lots of enemies by means of the cannons. We killed many of them yet did not capture very many. Our shooting then was very fierce.   

**Q:**  At that moment, which two regiments were dispatched there?   

**A:**  At that moment, it was the 53rd Division. I can't remember which regiments.   

**Q:**  What date did it happen in 1967?   

**A:**  Around the July and August in 1967. There are materials about it (so you can read them). In this battle, our troops did a good job in fighting back, against lots of enemies. However, we did not capture very many enemies alive. Our cannons were very fierce. We had 575-style cannons, which had very fierce firing capacity.   

**Q:**  In 1980... No, in 1979, the Dalai Lama's sister... Was it mentioned yesterday?   

**A:**  At that time, it should not be the Dalai Lama's sister... In their first visit [Tibetan delegation from India] they only said some reactionary words; no big event happened.   

**Q:**  What about their visits later on after this time, when you were in Tibet?   

**A:**  The only time they came was during the period when I was in Tibet. If you want to know more about it, you can read the relevant materials.   

**Q:**  I would like to ask a general question. During the ten years when you were the leader of Tibet, what were your most important contributions for Tibet? What are the things you did in Tibet which give you the highest pride? Since you worked in both the PLA of Tibet and the government of Tibet, first you can talk about the work you did for the PLA.   

**A:**  First of all, when I worked in both the PLA and the government of Tibet, I did not have ideas about pursuing my own private interests. I went to Tibet to work not in order to get promotions or get rich, nor in order to enjoy life there, and not in order to be famous. I wanted to contribute to the interests of the Party and the people as Chairman Mao had taught us: "we should serve the people wholeheartedly." I don't dare to say I had achieved this thoroughly, yet to be honest, I was trying my best to accomplish this goal and to follow Chairman Mao's teaching, "to serve the people wholeheartedly" and to do something for the people. When I worked in the PLA in Tibet, though the situation then was very tough and all kinds of problems arose, I insisted on one principle: I did not care about my personal political future or some people's objections; rather, I resolutely followed Chairman Mao's guidelines for the PLA, observed the requirements for the PLA, implemented the tasks we should do to protect every part of our territory. No matter what difficulties I had to face, I would insist in doing this. When I served in the position of being in charge of the work in Tibet, in a period when lots of commanders and political commissars were appointed or deposed, I insisted in adhering to this principle resolutely. In Tibet, I did the work not by means of my power. Rather, I worked according to Chairman Mao's thoughts, guidelines, and principles. These I really relied on. I am not talented, yet I relied on these. Without Chairman's guidelines, no achievements could be made. I really did my work according to these, so no big problem took place within the PLA. In general, I can say that the PLA troops stationed in Tibet inherited and developed the glorious tradition of the PLA. That is the first point I want to say. Second, when I worked in Tibet, I did my best to serve the people in Tibet. Though I was not very familiar with the government work because in the past my work was only with the PLA, I observed what Chairman Mao and the Central Committee had instructed: to insist on the equality of all the ethnic groups. I both loved and relied on the Tibetan people. I respected the Tibetan people. I think, for the Tibetan people, I did my best to serve them. Though the situation was very tough, I tried my best to defend the reputation of our Party among the people of Tibet by means of my specific actions. What I just said is about my attitude to Tibet and the Tibetan people. Besides this, I think that except for the Cultural Revolution, the biggest difficulty in Tibet was the problem of internal conflicts. Today, I will say that the problem of internal conflicts was really severe. Today I don't want to make complaints in front of you two comrades, haha. We really did not have ideas to solve the problem of internal conflicts. During that period, in the daylight we had to deal with the struggles against foreign forces, and at night we had to hold meetings in a stealthy way to discuss what we should do next. Where could we hold the meetings? We had to go to the vegetable cellar of the garrison battalion. Or we had to go to the office of the headquarters of the airforce located in the western suburb of Lhasa to hold the meetings there. Why? If we stayed in the headquarters of the Military District, it was impossible to hold a meeting normally without being disturbed by the internal conflicts. We didn't have ideas to solve the problem. There were not only threats from abroad, but also conflicts from within. We had to be very careful in dealing with the internal relationships, because if not, some people would accuse us of being "the cruel killers who suppress the masses." During that period, if you were accused of being "a cruel killer who suppress the masses," it was equal to accusing you of being a counter-revolutionary and being guilty of the most heinous crimes, which would bring very severe outcome for you. For the masses who joined in the internal conflicts, we the PLA could only try to reason with them, because we could not arrest or punish these people directly according to the regulations of the PLA. During that period we were not able to do so. And also there was this problem: we did not have enough authority. Therefore, I want to say, under such a messy situation, I was able to maintain a stable Tibet, to accomplish stability and unity, to let the people lead a normal life, and to improve the friendship and unity between ethnic groups. I think that, in this aspect, I had made some contributions, though I didn't do it perfectly. And then, another issue was about the economic work. During such a difficult period, the work of agriculture and animal husbandry even advanced. The people's lives even improved. And the social order became stable. The works of industry developed a lot, especially the transportation industry. Lots of bridges and roads were built, and even two airports were built in Shigatse and Bangda. To be sure these tasks were led by the Central Military Committee, yet we in Tibet also did a lot of work, such as selecting proper sites, migrating the residents, doing the persuasions, mobilizing the workers, and offering support in logistical matters. There were many kinds of work like this. Almost all the logistical work was done by our PLA troops in Tibet. We also did the work of finding firewood. These tasks were hard to do. We built many power stations, solving the problem of the shortage of power in Shigatse, Shannan, and Linzhi. We also built oil-conveying pipes. To be sure these are not my successes. Rather, they are the successes of the leading comrades of the Central Committee and the Party, and of the engineering and technical staff. These engineering and technical staff, criticized and resisted the wrongdoings of the Cultural Revolution by means of their concrete work. Thus, I said many times that we should praise these people. That was my opinion: though the Cultural Revolution was wrong, and Chairman Mao as well as the Central Committee of the Party were wrong on this point, the vast majority of the Party members, the cadres, and the masses, were right. They still insisted in doing work to build our country. Thus, I think that not all the people were wrong during the period of the Cultural Revolution. Some people may say the Cultural Revolution is right. I don't think so. We committed some wrongdoings or said some wrong words during the Cultural Revolution. However, the vast majority of the people, the workers, the cadres, and the Party members, did not commit this sort of wrongdoing. They never beat other people, never attacked the CCP organizations, never participated in strikes, never joined in military conflicts, never did the activities such as beating, smashing and looting. They did not agree with the principles of the Cultural Revolution, and they continued to do what they should do. Let me tell you the work done by Ren Zongjie (unclear), as it impressed me greatly. During this period, some people criticized and denounced Ren Zongjie, but he didn't care. Leading the grass-root masses and carrying their own food, he and his people went to the area of snow mountains to work to build the irrigation system for agriculture. That was really a tough work. He really deserves our praise for his work of improving people's lives and developing the agricultural production. Another example is Duojie from Naqu. According to my knowledge then, though some people criticized and denounced him, he insisted in doing works to facilitate the development of animal husbandry. And also, he led the work of building irrigation systems for the pastures. Though some people criticized, denounced, and persecuted him, he still insisted in doing his work. Namely, he tried to resist the wrong things during the Cultural Revolution by means of his concrete work. Tibet began to be able to support itself at that time. Although I know many Tibetan and Han cadres had difficulties, we used them well used and promoted them. We did good work promoting good Tibetan cadres, as well as the cadres who would not leave Tibet. I always urged that we should educate and promote those cadres and technicians who would not leave, because that would in the long term benefit Tibet. As for myself, I had no corruption and no waste in Tibet. I didn't do something under the table, nor did I think about it. You can check that. For example, when I went to the army (to examine them), we had some compensation for travel. I never claimed that. Why did I do that? The public had already paid me the salary, so why should I claim some extra compensation at the same time? Also, another achievement is that wherever we went, we had the meals in the canteen along with other cadres. We never asked for an extra dish. Sometimes they asked me what I liked to eat, and I would tell him I like potatoes. There are a lot of potatoes in Tibet. So they made steamed potatoes and fried potatoes for me. Besides these things, I don't have much to say. I am not a very capable man, and I did some things wrong in the Cultural Revolution. I supported the Cultural Revolution at the beginning. I supported the movement to "destroy the four olds" to eliminate feudal and other old thoughts. I also exclaimed slogans like other people. Lin Biao proposed "Four First Priorities" and we agreed with him. Lin Biao said that we must listen to Chairman Mao's words, must follow his guidance, and must be his good soldiers, and we agreed with him. However, I objected to beatings, smashings and looting. I objected to armed fights. I couldn't agree with that. Besides these, I don't have anything else to say about it.   

**Q:**  Can you talk about the policies of cadre rotation?   

**A:**  About this issue I have to say first that indeed many older cadres had bad health. Also, their family life was affected too much. To solve this problem we preferred candidates who would stay in Tibet in the future. Some cadres were determined to leave the plateau. Although their health was not in good shape, actually their ideas were not progressive. In these cases, we selectively relocated some of them; we arranged their living and work properly and gave them a warm farewell. This arrangement benefitted those cadres and Tibet as well. It was not the method comrade Hu Yaobang proposed. Looking back from today we can say it was still a wise solution. On the other hand, rotation is a necessary method; otherwise all those sick and old cadres would be left in Tibet, claiming the plateau standard salary, but not being able to work well. Let me give you an example. There was a head of the surgical department in our Tibetan army hospital whose name was Wang Yuzhu. She was a female, but was the number one surgeon of Tibet. She became the head of the surgical department. Her husband was a surgeon in Tibet as well. Her husband was in critical condition several times and almost died. He was sent back to inland. He had rheumatism and heart disease, and his hands and feet were distorted like this. They had two young kids, and were quite desperate about life. Wang Yuzhu reported all the way up to each levels of leaders (about her situation), and because of her fame as the top surgeon of Tibet, they wouldn't approve her request properly. Eventually her report came to me and I approved her relocation back. I discussed this with some other cadres and approved her request so she could be reunited with her family. This was a family matter. Another reason was that many cadres were getting old and their health wasn't as good as when they were young. We relocated those cadres back in several batches. Here is another example. Chen Zhuo, who is in Beijing and you can visit him some time, was a very good comrade. His wife had some disease in the nervous system and could not manage her life. Their kids were still in school, but were not looked after properly. He had a serious heart disease as well. We had to relocate him back to inland. Take a look at the principal of the Party school, who is also the head of propaganda department. Although he never requested relocation because his heart wasn't in good condition, we felt relocation was necessary because we cannot let him die in Tibet and do nothing. His last name was Chen. His wife never went to Tibet with him so, he had been living on his own for a long time. He had been in service for many years industriously and was a man of great party spirit. One day, when all the paperwork was processed and his stuff was packed, he decided to go jogging after breakfast and fell unconscious. He was immediately sent to the autonomous region hospital, which was closest to the department of propaganda. He was in critical condition then. We heard his news after breakfast, and immediately we gathered to visit him, and to see how he was doing. His name was Chen Wei. Everybody cared about him. He was in the emergency room when we hurried to the hospital. We waited outside for a long time, but unfortunately he wasn't able get revived. His wife was very sick too; and his kids' study was influenced by this. It was quite cruel to keep all those cadres in Tibet for long times. Eventually, we planned to relocate them back to inland areas on a schedule, which was not like comrade Hu Yaobang's plan. Looking back from today, I still feel we were doing things the right way. At the same time, I think the same could be applied to the Tibetan cadres as well. Some of them were too old and in too bad health condition so they should have stepped down and had a rest. If their health condition recovered well we could use them again when they recovered well. I started leading the government work in Tibet since 1971. Life in Tibet was really tough. There was insufficient food to eat, wood to burn, and it was hard to even keep living. Our idea at the time was to develop production and try to support ourselves. This does not mean we were smart enough to predict the importance of production; we had to do that.   

**Q:**  So it was not necessarily after 1978 that this point was realized.   

**A:**  That's correct. During the most difficult times we tried all means to improve production. We were just more self-conscious about doing this after 1978. People benefited from the ideas in 1978 and supported that afterwards. At the same time, we requested that the Central Committee support us as well. The Central Committee didn't realize that (the difficulties of Tibet). For example, I once asked the Central Committee for 20 tractors, and would pay for it. But they refused our proposal, and at last gave us only a few tractors. It was granted by State Planning Commission. In 1979 we suffered from snow hazard and in the next year a disastrous drought. Many places were not able to collect the seeds, which was quite dangerous situation. If not for some grain reserve from previous years, some people would have starved to death. For that problem, I personally went to Beijing to lobby, and I made numerous calls and telegraphs, and sent someone to Beijing, trying to ask for some disaster relief funds. We only asked for five million yuan, since we were afraid that the Central Committee would turn us down if we asked for too much. Some people said we should ask for ten million and then it would be more likely we could receive five million. We didn't do that, considering the difficulties of the state. We corresponded (with the Central Committee) many times, and eventually received one million yuan. You will know the details about it if you talk with Hu Zongli. Do you know about him?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  He is in Ximianqiao (Ch. ???), Chengdu. Those comrades in Chengdu knew about this thing very much. Another comrade was Liu Guohua(Ch. liu guo hua or liu kui hua), who is in Xiaogan (Ch. xiao gan), Wuhan. He knew about it, too. Eventually, we had some restrictions about the one million yuan we received. The first was that it must be spent on hazard relief; the second was that we could not spend more than that amount. We had to take more out our own resources. To be honest, at that time I was not quite happy about it. I talked with the Central Committee, and the government departments, but much functionality of the government was lost. When Prime Minister Zhou was alive, due to his prestige, his words would be carried out smoothly. But after him, things changed. The benefit was that comrade Hu Yaobang's big mistake in Tibet had aroused the attention of the Central Committee. It was good, and was worthy of being continued. I don't think Hu Yaobang had any personal resentment against me, since I didn't have any with him. I was in the army and he was in the local government. He was even a leader in my hometown. In north Sichuan, he had been the secretary of the local administrative office. So why would he do that to me? My thinking was there were too many complaints about me. Those complaints were not put on the table. He must have heard too much of it. He must have thought I was a rebel who gave cadres a hard time. He strongly disliked me. I could not claim something to clear my innocence because I didn't know what they were saying about me. The man who really knew about me was Prime Minister Zhou, who had passed away. Marshall Ye also knew about me. And there was Li Xiannian. They had all stepped aside and were not in charge anymore. He (Hu) was just promoted, and everybody was supporting him and would not listen to me at that moment. About the matter of right or wrong, we have seen the results in recent years. To avoid any hassles to the Central Committee, I didn't say anything. I didn't report it to someone, or talk about it with someone. But right now, as I'm writing a memoir, I will put the truth into words. Let me just mention another thing, would that be all right with you?   

**Q:**  Sure, please go ahead.   

**A:**  Is it 10 o'clock?   

**Q:**  Yes it is.   

**A:**  Please wait for one moment; I have to talk with my driver. What do you want to say?   

**Q:**  You go ahead first.   

**A:**  You go ahead, please. I want to hear your questions.   

**Q:**  Time is running out soon. Overall I was very satisfied with this interview. First of all, we have recorded seven tapes as of today. We have acquired a great amount of information from you. We were not so prepared, because we should have sent you an outline of the background about the talks before the interview so you could review it and get prepared. Our thought now is to go back and arrange the notes and recording, mainly the tapes. Afterwards, in July we will go to Tibet.   

**A:**  Are both of you going there?   

**Q:**  Yes, both of us. First of all we want to go to archives administration and see if we could find some related materials. Then we see if we can find anyone on the name list you gave us.   

**A:**  Is there Tu Zhongren(? tu zhong ren, or maybe ? hu zhong ren).   

**Q:**  No, but I knew him. I interviewed him before.   

**A:**  He knows a lot about Tibet.   

**Q:**  I have one more request. Before it was compiled I might have some questions that I hope I can discuss with you, by mail or by phone.   

**A:**  Sure, of course you can reach me when you deem it necessary.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us where can I find some materials that could support your narration?   

