# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0074.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Dorje Tseden [Tib. rdo rje tshe brtan  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Dorje Tseden  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca 68  
**Date of Birth:** ca 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dorje Tseden was a senior Tibetan cadre in Tibet who was originally from Qinghai Province. In this interview, he discusses his education and how he was sent to Beijing to make connections by his school. He discusses his work in the Nationality Administration Committee in Beijing, the preparations for signing the 17-Point Agreement and his trip to Xian to work as a guide for the Panchen Lama. He details his trip to Tibet as a member of the Work Team and talks about the CCP giving loans to the Tibetan people and eliminating the old loans. He also talks about working in new Seshin Primary School in Lhasa, including what they taught and did not, the four levels of students based on their incomes, and why many switched from private schools to the Seshin school. Finally, he talks about Chairman Mao's plan about the liberation.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0074_01/H_0074_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Please tell us about how you came to Tibet at first?   

**A:**  In 1949, Beijing was liberated. I was studying in the Beijing Teachers College [Tib. དགེ་འོས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ; Ch. shi fan da xue].   

**Q:**  Where are you from?   

**A:**  I am from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཚོ་སྔོན] 1. Amdo. 2. Lake Kokonor.">Tsongön</a> [Tib. Qinghai]. Before the liberation, I had many friends in the college and some of them were working for the revolution. At that time, the Guomindang was in power and Chairman Mao had written some books like the "Coalition Government [Tib. མཉམ་འབྲེལ་སྲིད་གཞུང]", but we couldn't buy them in the market and I used to get them from the people I knew and I was reading them surreptitiously. So at this time, I understood the policy of the CCP in a rough way. At the time of the liberation in Beijing, in 1949, there were some middle school students in Beijing University and also in our Teacher's College. These students were kind of different because they were the offspring of the chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] of Ma Jicang [Ma Bufang] and they said that they were going to Silling (Shining). If they didn't go, Ma Jicang would make their family suffer. So I discussed with the people who liked the revolution and I also went to Silling with those students. I went to propagandize secretly to the people who I knew. At that time, in Silling, they had set up an organization of all the trades and the professions and the nationalities to jointly welcome the revolution. And I was to make the connection between them and the Central Committee.   

**Q:**  How did you get to be in Beijing.   

**A:**  I was a student there studying in the Teacher's College.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there many Tibetans there?   

**A:**  No, not many.   

**Q:**  How did you get the chance to go to Beijing?   

**Q:**  When I was young, at first, I was in Silling at the Tibet Mongolian School [Tib. བོད་སོག་སློབ་གྲྭ], and at that time, I was with Taklha Phüntso Tashi. In the beginning, Ma Jicang didn't have much knowledge and he just put the Tibetan and Mongolian children in the school and educated them to serve himself. The head of the school was the Tibetan Lobsang Changchub [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བྱང་འཆུབ]. He would tell us to study hard so as to be able to serve our nationality and be beneficial for the nationality. I had an older brother who was a teacher in the school. Before the resistance war against the Japanese had started, my brother had gone to study in the Nanjing Tibetan Mongolian School. He studied veterinary medicine for cattle. When I was in Silling, I had a great enthusiasm for going to college. At the Silling Tibetan Mongolian School, trouble occurred at the time I graduated from the primary school. The General Secretary [Tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] of Ma Jicang was a Chinese who was educated and he understood things easily [Tib. མགོ་ཚོད་པོ]. At this time, my standard of living was poor, and Ma Jichang gave us food and clothes. At that time, the General Secretary told Ma Jichang, "You have started this school with the hope that it would be beneficial to serve you, when I look at it I think that when these kids graduate, they will oppose you instead of serve you." [Laughs] Like this he put forward an evil plan. So at this time, they decided to have the school change it's name into, "Training class [Tib. སྦྱོང་བརྡར་འཛིན་གྲྭ]" and changed the nature of the school. I hoped to be able to move up to the middle school and the university. Therefore, I ran away from that place with the help of my older brother. At that time, in Silling there was a middle school which was directly set up by the Guomindang. This school was the best in the Northwest area. At the time, when they were making war against the Japanese, there was Beijing University, Qinghua University. In Tianjin, there was Nankai University. These three universities set up a school in Kunming. When they took an exam in the Northwest area, only three students were enrolled in this school. In the Northwest area, there were five provinces; Shanxi, Gansu, Xinjiang, Qinghai and Nyingxia. From our Silling School, two of them were enrolled. There were no teachers from Silling. All of them were from Beijing, Shanghai, Nanjing etc. They were very good. The principal of the Silling school graduated from Berlin University in Germany and he had two degrees. One in culture and the other in dialectics and those things. Since he was great, all the teachers were very good. Therefore, I ran away and went to that school and I studied in the lower [Tib. དམའ་རིམ] middle school and the upper [Tib. མཐོ་རིམ] middle school for six years total. In 1948, the Teacher's College was recruiting students.   

**Q:**  What was your family like at that time, was it a cadre family or a farmer family?   

**A:**  They were farmers. My older brother and his wife farmed and we had two hired hands. In 1948, I went to the Teachers College in Beijing. As I mentioned above, after I went to Qinghai, I was sent back to Beijing to make the connections with the organization.   

**Q:**  Who sent you to Beijing?   

**Q:**  It was mainly the principal of the Primary Tibetan Mongolian School called Lobsang Changchub [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བྱང་འཆུབ], and he had an organization. They sent me to Beijing to make the connections. When I came to Beijing, I came as a student, but when I went back to Qinghai, I couldn't go as a student, so they made [me] a certificate as a Muslim trader in Tianjin and I was dressed as a trader with a western <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་མོ; ch. 戴帽] 1. A regular hat, cap. 2. A common political slang term (label) used for people who were classified as class enemies or reactionaries. It was used politically as, &quot;They put the hat on him,&quot; or &quot;They never took his hat off.&quot;">hat</a> and a long gown.   

**Q:**  How old were you then?   

**A:**  I was 23. On the certificate it was written that I was in my 30s since if I said I was younger, I would be conscripted in Ma Bufang's Army. I also grew a beard to seem older. I went via Hohhot in inner Mongolia. There were some Guomindang spies who were checking people and they almost searched my shoes and said, "You are a communist spy and you come here all the time. We know you." I said, "I'm not a spy, I'm a trader and going to Tianjin to do trading." They held me there for a day and said they would checked me again tomorrow. At that time, when I came from Lanzhou, there was a real trader and I told him that I was a trader, and we kind of became friends. At that time, in the place between the territory of the CCP and the Guomindang, we had to travel for a day in carts and nobody took care of that place. So we hired a cart and came over in the early morning. The leader of the school was Liuren in the Beijing Municipality [Ch. shi wei]. Later, he became the Second Party Secretary [Ch. shu ji] of the Beijing Municipality and he suffered and died in jail during the Cultural Revolution. I met him and submitted a written report to him about the organizations that existed in Silling and what we were doing. After I reported this, I said that my work was done, so I was going back to the school. The leader said, "Well, first, you shouldn't go to the school. Stay here in the reception center [Tib. སྣེ་ལེན་ཁང]." Then they started the National People's Congress in Beijing. I was invited to be in that, though I was not a real deputy. After the meeting, I still kept saying that I was going to the school to study. But I was still told to stay there for a while. Then in September 1949, the first meeting of the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས] was held. I was also asked to participate in that meeting. In this I was a minority nationality alternative member [Ch. hou bu wei yuan; Tib. འོས་སྒུག]]. In case the main member got sick, the alternate would be a substitute for him. The meeting was held in Zhongnanhai and there were about 10 or so minority nationality deputies in this. The head of this was a Muslim called Liu Geping. The second was a Yi nationality called Zhangchong from Yunnan. The Muslim Yang Jinren was the deputy. Then there was a Mongol and Zhu Dehai from Korea. And there was the History Professor Bai Shengyi who was also a deputy. There were also two Tibetan deputies, the main one was Tian Bao or Sangye Yeshe [Tib. སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས], who was with the Red Army's Long March [Tib. དམར་དམག་རྒྱང་སྐྱོད] and I was the alternate member. There were two alternate members, one was a Mongol. After the meeting, many national governments were establishing and the Nationality Administration Committee [Tib. མི་རིགས་དོན་གཅོད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] was set up. In the beginning, Liu Bochen and Deng Xiaoping who were the leaders of the second frontline [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས་གཉིས་པ] of the People's Liberation Army said that they were going to take Tian Bao with them to the Southwest.   

**Q:**  Where is Tian Bao from ?   

**Q:**  He was from Kham Tempa from the Ganzi area. He was one of the great persons among the Tibetans. He was the Chairman of the Tibet Autonomous Region just before the end of the Cultural Revolution. Now he is in Chengdu. After he went, I was told to stay in the Nationality Administration Committee. This was at the end of September in 1949 when the meeting was over. On October 1st, when the new government began, we were on the platform at Tiananmen at the ceremony. When the preparation was done, there were only three of us in the office: Liu Geping, Yiang Jinren and me. I told them I didn't want to stay in the office, I wanted to go to the school. Yiang Jinren, was the director [Tib. ཞུརེན] of the main office - The leader of the Nationality Administration Committee was Li Weihan. Liu Geping was doing the regular work. There was also one Vice Director, Wulanfu. Yang Jinren said that "We can't confirm you to go study. You must make a petition and we have to make a report." Then after 4-5-6 days he said, "I have submitted your petition to Premier Zhou and he said, "You don't need to go to the school. You can study your practical work in the office." Like this, I couldn't go to the school. Then in 1950, in Warsaw, Poland, there was the 2nd World Peace Conference. A group of delegates was sent from China. I was sent and at that time our main leader was Guo Moro, who was a scholar and a poet, and among the vice leaders there were people like Liao Chenzi and so on. I was young then and I just watched for fun with them. At that time, we left Beijing for Moscow and from there we went by train to Warsaw for 11 days and nights. At that time, the weather was cold. After the meeting, we returned to Moscow and went for a tour of Leningrad in Pitipur. In October, when we were in Moscow, it was announced that Chamdo was liberated. After we came back, in the beginning, we set up an Investigation Team [Tib. ཞིབ་འཇུག་ཚོགས་ཆུང]. The Team Leader [Ch. zu zhang] was Yiang Jinren and I was the Vice Team Leader [Tib. གཞོན་པ]. There weren't many people in this office in the beginning. At that time, there were many stores which sold old books, and I bought all the Tibetan woodblock scriptures and studied them. Then Ngabö, with the delegation, was coming to Beijing, so I had to make some preparations. Then the Panchen Lama was coming and I and Yang Jinren went to Xi'an to welcome him at the airport and take him to Beijing. He stayed in the place called Chang Guanlou located near the zoo in the western area, in the palace where the Empress Dowager used to stay. I was the Panchen Lama's kind of guide. Then after the signing of the 17-Point Agreement, on May 28th, I think, the Nationality Administration Commission called me and said, "You have to go to Tibet as part of a Work Team [Tib. ལས་དོན་རུ་ཁག]." In the beginning, our leader said, "We were going to send a Mongol because, at that time, you were the only Tibetan in the Nationality Administration Committee. But now we think that you should go to Tibet for half a year because you are young." I was very glad to go to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Before that, you had been to Lhasa, right?   

**Q:**  No, I hadn't. Then I accepted to go to Tibet, saying that it would be good. When I look back, in the Work Team there were many of us working on natural science and geographic investigations. There were many experts on this in this group and there were 48 people altogether, and these included about 28-29 different branches of science.   

**Q:**  Was Huang Yuanzhang from the Tibet Academy of Social Sciences [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཚན་རིག་ཁང] with you?   

**A:**  Yes, he was. At this time, there was a team of social scientists which consisted of 8-10 people working on history, mapping, and language. The Team Leader [Ch. zu zhang] was Liu Yuanhua, who studied at Harvard. You probably know him? And I was the Vice Team Leader. Before we left, they gave us military uniforms. Then in 1951, on June 4th, I left Beijing with the group for Tibet. First we went to Wuhan, then we flew to Chongqing. At this time, in Chongqing, the Southwest Military Administration Committee [Tib. ལྷོ་ནུབ་དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] was established. The heads [Tib. འགོ་གནང་མཁན] of this were Liu Bochen and Deng Xiaoping. When we arrived, Liu Bochen had gone to Nanjing and Deng Xiaoping was there. At that time, He Long was also a leader there. We stayed there for a few days. Then we went via plane to Chengdu. From there we went by car and arrived in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ ] The prefectural seat of Ganzi Prefecture in Sichuan. Also known as Kangding and Tachienlu.">Dartsedo</a> on July 1st. Then we went by car to Ganzi. Then from Ganzi, there is a high pass called the Chala [Tib. ?] Mountain Pass between Ganzi and Derge, and then we arrived by car in Heten. There the car road ended. Then we went by horse and arrived in Derge on August 1st. The scientists were not able to go well since they were not soldiers. And we were not able to manage well because there was a big group and when we held meetings, it was kind of scattered. When the 18th Corps marched forward, they had tens of thousands of soldiers, but we could not go well even we though we had only about 40 people because all of us were intellectuals. We had soldiers and cadres serving as cooks and looking after the horses, but still they weren't able to go well. Some went in the front, some came from behind. Some left in the morning while others were yet to get up. So I told them to stay in Derge. The Derge Queen and Jagö Tomden [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་སྟོབས་ལྡན] were there then. At this time, I was told to stay back for a while because they were going to hold a meeting for friendship [Tib. མཐུན་སྒྲིལ] and I was told to attend it as a kind of mediator [Tib. བར་འདུམ]. I stayed for 40 days in Derge. The leaders in Beijing had told me go to Tibet and after six months, I could return to Beijing. I thought of going to Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ] since I hadn't been there. I had a cadre and a clerk with me then and we had four horses when we left Derge for Jyekundo. We arrived on October 1st in Jyekundo. Then we went to Chamdo via Nangchen. From Chamdo, the three of us and one geology professor who was in Chamdo left, and via the northern route, we reached Khyungpo Tengchen [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ་སྟེང་ཆེན]. It was very cold then, so we were told to stay in Khyungpo Tengchen and to spend the New Year there. We stayed a little less than one month there. We left there in 1952 on January 4-5th. From there we went to Sog Tsenden [Tib. སོག་ཙན་དན] Monastery, then to Shagchukha, then Nagchuka. Then from Nagchuka we went to Phembo Gola and then arrived in Lhasa on the 15th of February. One part of our group had already arrived in Lhasa, some were yet to arrive. At this time, they had established the Lhasa Municipality Committee [Ch. shi wei; Tib. གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. At this time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung had 18 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> under it. They said that they were going to give interest-free loans to the people in these 18 dzong. We went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> across the Kyichu [Tib. སྐྱིད་ཆུ] and Liu Dzong and Jünba [Tib. འཇུན་པ], and then we crossed the sandy pass [Tib. བྱེ་ལ] and went to Dorjetra [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་བྲག] and Tranggo [Tib. འཕྲང་སྒོ]. At this time, I saw Gyalo Thondup in Zoning from a distance, as he had an estate there. We didn't talk. We would give to the poor <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> to buy seed interest-free.   

**Q:**  How much money did you take to give as loans?   

**A:**  We had about 3,000-4,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> to give out. Each box contained 1,000 dayan and each yak could carry two boxes. At this time, Gyalo Thondup came.   

**Q:**  Did you know [him] before that?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. I just heard about him.   

**Q:**  Since you spoke the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> dialect, could the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> understand you?   

**A:**  They could understand a little bit, though my pronunciation was not that correct. Gyalo Thondup was giving orders to his steward telling them to eliminate the old debts and give grain from our stores to those who didn't have enough seed to plant. So I thought that since we came to give interest-free loans, Gyalo Thondup was trying to challenge us. [Laughs] We had as a helper a clerk from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> Legung because it would not do without a helper and we were not allowed to push away the local government. Some of the poor <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> wanted to take the loans but also were afraid, thinking that we would say something if they took the loan from the CCP. We hired a translator who used to be a telegraph operator for the Guomindang, who was married to a Tibetan. He spoke fluent Lhasa dialect and we explained through him. Anyway, some of the miser took the loans.   

**Q:**  Did you lend out all 3-4,000 of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>?   

**A:**  We went all over the area and lent it all out. It was winter and cold, so we had a hard time. We got a receipt from each household we lent to.   

**Q:**  What was the attitude of the masses at this time?   

**A:**  We started lending loans at Ramagang. We first came into contact with a young farmer irrigating his fields. When he saw us, he ran away. [Laughs]   

**Q:**  Were you all wearing military uniforms?   

**A:**  Yes, all of us were wearing military uniforms. I heard that this was the first they saw of the Communists because this place was on the other side of the river. Then I thought that there would be no problem if I were to follow him slowly. When I followed him slowly, I found him standing at the corner of a wall. I was just kidding and said, "You look at me, are we humans or not? Are we as same as you or not?" Then he laughed and said, "We are the same." Then I said, "You don't have to run away. Irrigate your fields." So he went to irrigate. We carried our own food and bedding. When I came from China, I had 1 or 2 horses. But, I mostly came on foot, I didn't ride the horse. From Ganzi to Tibet, it was a long journey. If the horse became exhausted, it would be very difficult. We had a round tent to use on the way from China. On the first night, there was heavy rainfall and the canvas got wet and leaked, and then the next day it was wet and heavy and the horse couldn't carry it. I thought, the soldiers didn't know the situation [environment/climate] of Tibet and made that kind of tent. The tent had a pillar in the middle which was so thick and two arms stretched long. When it rained, the horse couldn't carry it. And my partners were all intellectuals, so they didn't help much to carry the pillar. If we didn't carry that, we would not have been able to pitch the tent. I was a Tibetan and young, and also a Communist Party member. So I took it on my back and carried it by myself and we reached the Dzogchen [Tib. རྫོགས་ཆེན] Monastery. Later, some of them said that they still remembered me carrying the pillar.   

**Q:**  When did you join the CCP?   

**A:**  It was in December 1949 when I was in the school. Before reaching Dzogchen Monastery there was a big post station [Tib. སྦྲག་ཚུགས] and we stayed there; the drinking water was melted snow. My partners couldn't bear the hardship. Then we went on and had to cross a stream to get to the monastery. The Chinese crossed the stream riding the horses even when the horses could barely carry them. So I told them, "If the horse were to become exhausted. What would you do? You couldn't go to Tibet." So I hoisted up my pants and crossed the stream on foot. The next day, my joints hurt a lot and I couldn't get up. So I got arthritis at this time. I should have gotten prepared and first taken a rest on the bank and rubbed my legs, then crossed the stream. Then I wouldn't have gotten sick, but I was young and kind of upset and just crossed the stream. The water was extremely cold, so I got sick the next day.   

**A:**  When we went from Chamdo, I was given a lot of things, like pants and shirts and boots. But I couldn't take all these things and left most of the things in Chamdo, although I had a horse to carry things as the soldiers had to carry their own things. They gave me a white shirt like the soldiers wore and this I wore and didn't take it off. At night, we couldn't take off our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> because we would get cold. When I reached Lhasa and took it off, it was so dirty that it stood up straight and it became kind of yellowish with the sweat. When I washed it, it had holes all over and became useless. One day, when we reached Shagjukha [near Nagchuka], there was a tent in which a monk was performing a ritual. This was in January and very cold. I asked him to let us stay in the tent and he said no. Then I told my partners that it must not be okay to sleep in the tent and we slept outside the tent that night. The next morning, the temperature was quite warm and I found it had snowed that night. Normally, it would have been minus 30 degrees celsius. One of the Chinese was screaming saying he has a stomach sickness and he bought a fox skin to keep him warm. If we had to cross a pass, we would mix some <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and butter and put it in our mug and carry it, and as we approached the pass, if we ate two balls of this, we were fine.   

**Q:**  Did the Chinese eat <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> and butter?   

**A:**  Of course, they did. At first, they couldn't, but later they were able to. When we first came from Ganzi, they couldn't drink Tibetan tea. Among the soldiers, there were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བརྒྱ་དཔོན་ཐོ] A military officer in charge of a unit of 100 soldiers.">gyagpön</a>, the platoon leader and the squad leaders, and first they would drink the butter tea. Later, they were really were accustomed to drinking it and they liked Tibetan tea, and would ask the leaders for butter to make the tea. At this time, there was not much butter. After giving out the loans, we returned to Lhasa in May (1952).   

**Q:**  Did you propagandize the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> in communist ideology?   

**A:**  At this time, the main propaganda was the nature of the 17-Point Agreement. We were not allowed to talk about class struggle. This was the discipline.   

**Q:**  When you reached a village, did you call the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> together and give a speech?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, we first had to make contact with the high levels [Tib. མཐོ་རིམ] and then with the local levels [Tib. གཞི་རིམ]. We were not making relations directly with the local level without contacting the higher levels. And we didn't tell them that one person should come from each household to the meeting. If we didn't contact the higher levels, then it wouldn't have been in accordance with the 17-Point Agreement and we were not allowed to do that. The 17-Point Agreement said that it would leave the previous government and the officials would have their titles as before. So we had to act in accordance with this. We did things through the estate managers and stewards, and quite a lot of people would come and we would tell them what was in the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  Did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> ask you any questions?   

**A:**  No. They just stood (and listened) at the meeting. If we met someone one on one, they would ask things, but not in a group. For example, one said, "In the past, I heard that the Communists were like ghosts, but they are not. They are the same human beings as us." A few would say, "Chairman Mao is probably a deity because he knows our economic situation. If he didn't know that, he wouldn't send you people to give the money loans." One day, I met two people. One was a düjung. He said, "Since I was born, I have never eaten bag kneaded in a bowl. I eat only paste, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩམ་པ] The traditional Tibetan staple food that consists of grain that is roasted (popped), usually in heated sand, and then ground into a flour.">tsamba</a> mixed with buttermilk and the liquid left after cheese has been extracted [Tib. ཕྱུར་ཁུ] (the whey)." When we asked them, there wasn't a single household that didn't have loans. The farmers all had debts. When we asked them, "Do you get scared of the loans?" They said, "We are not scared of the loans. If we dared to, we could take as many loans as we could get." When I asked them, "If you have many loans, won't your children get into trouble?" They said, "We shouldn't think in that way. The loans that I have are from my previous generations to generations. I don't know when we got the loans. If I take on more debt, it will make my livelihood become okay. So I am going to take as much as I can get and I can't think of my children." [Laughs] I arrived back in Lhasa on the 4-5th of May 1952. After I arrived in Lhasa, one day I met Zhang Guohua. He said, "We are starting a primary school in Lhasa. You have been to the Beijing Teacher's College. Can I borrow you from the Nationality Committee for one year to help the school?" [Trindor note: Dorje Tseden would teach politics at that school--one class as political teachings--it was mostly on the 17-Point Agreement]. I said, "If you are starting a Tibetan school, I am a Tibetan, so I don't have any thought to refuse it. You, the higher up, can make whatever decision you want." Then he said that they would send a telegraph and they got a letter from the Nationalities Committee saying that I could stay for a year and a half in the school. In June, I went to Seshin [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ], the place where the new school was located, and started making preparations for the school.   

**Q:**  Where did you stay in Lhasa?   

**A:**  In the beginning, I stayed in Sandutsang. Then I stayed in a house near Tsarong. Then I stayed in a house near Dongtsesur [Tib. གདོང་རྩེ་ཟུར] which was bought by the [Chinese] government. Then in June, I stayed in Seshin.   

**Q:**  At this time, what was Lhasa society like?   

**A:**  I thought that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> were poor.   

**Q:**  How about compared to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>?   

**A:**  Lhasa was much worse than Amdo. It was incomparable with Amdo. There were many beggars. At this time, in Lhasa, at the Stone Lion, Dosenge [Tib. རྡོ་སེང་གེ] where the Amban used to stay and later where the Gyantse Regiment was, and at Ramoche and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྦྲ་ནག་ཞོལ] A neighborhood in the northeast section of Lhasa inhabited mostly by Khambas.">Banagshöl</a> and Thelphungang [Tib. ཐལ་ཕུང་སྒང], they were all filled with small beggars' tents. Most lived in Dosenge. Most had no tents, just inferior gunny sacks with many holes. When I saw them I almost burst into tears from sadness. When I arrived in Lhasa, the Mönlam had started and after that, the Butter Sculpture Festival, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅོ་ལྔ་མཆོད་པ] The festival on the 15th of the first Tibetan month when butter sculptures were exhibited.">Jönga Chöpa</a>, was held. At this time, the People's Liberation Army and people like us were not allowed to go to the Mönlam unless they were giving alms to the monks. If they had no work, they couldn't go. For example, there were a number of corpses left outside near the Mosque and the Magar Sarpa [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ] [the place where the Chinese Military Headquarters was built], and nobody took care of them for 2-3 days. There was a tremendous difference in wealth in those days between aristocrats and beggars. The aristocrats rode horses and wore satin <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and had many servants. I had traveled a lot and never saw such poverty. There were also some [beggars] by the Broadcast Office [Tib. རྒྱང་གྲགས་ལས་ཁུངས] [on the west side of the Potala].   

**Q:**  Did you try to make friends with the aristocrats and traders at this time?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. After the school was started, then I had contact with a lot of them. At the time when the school was started, we set up the Board of Directors [Ch. dong shi hui]. The chairman [Ch. dong shi zhang] was Zhang Guohua, and the vice chairmen were Trijang Lama and Ragashag.   

**Q:**  At that time, was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>?   

**A:**  Probably, and there was Ngabö and Tsarong.   

**Q:**  Was he the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a>?   

**A:**  No, Tsarong Dzasa, because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རིམ་བཞི] A fourth rank official in the Tibetan government.">rimshi</a> would not get such a post. From the CCP side, there was Phünwang and Lin Liang, who was the Party Secretary of the Lhasa Municipality [Ch. shi wei shu ji]. Those were the Vice Chairmen of the Board of Directors. In the past, I wrote in Chinese about setting up the Tibetan Culture Research Center [Tib. ཀྲུང་གོའི་བོད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རིག་ཞིབ་འཇུག་ལྟེ་གནས].   

**Q:**  When you first went to the school, did you tell the kalön and those people that you had such a thought?   

**A:**  Yes, we did. In the beginning, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> opposed it and said, "You shouldn't set it up. Our culture is famous and outstanding and we don't need your help." But the kalön and people who had the thought of setting up the school said that we should set up the school because the children could study in it. So in June 1952, after the sitsab were demoted, there was nobody stopping it, and the Board of Directors was started and there were many directors [Ch. dong shi]. From the Tibetan side, there was Lhautara, Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད] Dzasa, Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན], and there was Tangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད], whose rank was the lowest. Under them there were some kudrak. The main principle of setting up the school was decided at the meeting. There were three senior principals [Ch. xiao zhang]. The first was Trijang Lama, the second was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>, and the third was Lhautara. There were also three vice principals. The first was Janglojen Gung [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་གུང], the second was Li Hanzhe, as for the third, it was Le Yuhan, who was then the Director of the Secretary Department of the Tibet Work Committee of the PRC [Tib. ཀྲུང་གོའི་བོད་ལས་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ཁང་གི་དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆུ་ཡི་ཆུ་ཞང]. After a while, he left and I was his substitute. We got 7-8 teachers from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> (monk official) ranks and from the lay official sid, we got Maya [Tib. རྨ་བྱ] and Khana Depön [Tib. མཁར་སྣ་མདའ་དཔོན]. After the school was started, we sent two Chinese teachers to go to each student's household to learn of their economic situation for running the school jointly. The Tibetan teachers were not sent much to do this. From the CCP side, they sent some Chinese teachers.   

**Q:**  What was the curriculum like? How was it decided?   

**A:**  In the beginning, they differentiated the student's Tibetan standard. Some who had returned from India from the English Schools, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> Pema [Tib. གླང་མདུན་པད་མ], Ngabö Thudo [Tib. མཐུ་སྟོབས], Rinchen, Numa and many others, they had a special class. The main subject was written Tibetan and this was taught according to their Tibetan standard. The next subject was arithmetic and then natural science. The three Tibetan directors said at the meeting of the directors that it was the Tibetan custom to start school with a prayer for taking refuge in the Three Jewels, Kyamdro [Tib. སྐྱབས་འགྲོ], so we said that this was allowed and the prayer was done for 20 minutes in the morning. At that time, Zhang Guohua told us, "You have to run the school well and you have to be alert to avoid defects." After the CCP arrived in Lhasa, they set up a clinic in the People's Hospital [Tib. མི་དམངས་སྨན་ཁང] and gave out interest-free loans and started the school.   

**Q:**  Did you teach about the Communism Party in the school?   

**A:**  We made a little bit of an introduction, for example, about Chairman Mao, Commander-in-Chief Marshal Zhude, and the People's Liberation Army. If we tried to teach too much about the CCP the young kids wouldn't understand. We mainly taught culture and a little bit on maps.   

**Q:**  Did you teach Chinese?   

**A:**  No, we didn't. Some students who had gone to the Guomindang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> [Tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] School knew some Chinese. They got a special class where they were taught Chinese for 1-2 classes. Otherwise, not. Li Hanzhe taught them English.   

**Q:**  Did Li Hanzhe write a book on this?   

**A:**  No, he didn't. After a year and a half, Zhang Guohua told me, "How about if we borrow you for one more year?" I said that "I will do whatever you leaders decide." At the end of 1952, Zhang Jingwu and Fan Ming went to a meeting in Beijing via India.   

**Q:**  They went down before the Dalai Lama went down in 1954, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they went and reported to Chairman Mao and then came back. Then in 1954, the Dalai Lama went to China. When they came back, Zhang Jingwu asked me, "How about you working in Tibet during your lifetime?" I said, "I don't have any comments on this." Then he said that he was going to send a telegraph to Zhang Guohua, and the Nationality Committee agreed to this. In the beginning, I was told to go for eight months. But it took me about eight and half months to get to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did some of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> oppose the school or did some of them want to have the reform?.   

**A:**  At this time, we were not allowed to discuss the system of Tibet. If we talked about the system, then we would have to talk about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲལ་རིམ; ch. 阶级] 1. A social class. 2. A class enemy.">trerim</a> (classes). At that time, it was a different situation with the trerim because the condition was not ripe in terms of the people's mental understanding. At that time, among the directors, there were lamas like Trijang Lama and there were also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</a> among the teachers, but with the school, they had some apprehension thinking it might not be good if the students were to get brainwashed with communism. At that time, we didn't need to explain to them clearly in the school because we knew the situation when we went to their home. The parents of the students liked us very much and they would invite Professor Li and all of us on New Years and holidays and give us a party. So when we went to the market to buy things, I would not bargain and all the dealers knew me as Gen Dorjela and would charge me only the cost price. When Tibetans go to buy things, they have to bargain.   

**Q:**  At first, how many students were there?   

**A:**  In the beginning, there were 300-400 and gradually it increased. We also gave relief to the poor. There were some children who were beggars or homeless and orphans. We gave them food, dwellings, clothes and everything. There were four levels of students based on their income. Some of them were fully supported by the school. [this was the first level] The teachers would go into the household to investigate their situation. On this basis, we decided what kind of support in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> should be given. [As for the second level] they would get 7-8 dayan per month and the third level would get 12-13 dayan. [The fourth level] would get 18-20 per month. At that time, we were not allowed to use the paper currency of the renminbi [Tib. མི་དམངས་ཤོག་དངུལ].   

**Q:**  How many students were there in each of the four levels?   

**A:**  About one-third of the students would get the livelihood supplement [Tib. འཚོ་བའི་ཁ་གསབ]. At this time, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> and soldiers used to called it the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> school "dayan slob grwa."   

**Q:**  Were there <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> kids in the school?   

**A:**  Yes. A lot. But, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a>'s kids weren't there. Yuthok's kid Sichöla [Tib. སྲིད་ཆོད་ལགས] - Most <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> brought their kids back from India, but <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Taktse, Yuthok and probably Surkhang didn't bring their kids back.   

**Q:**  When did it start?   

**A:**  August 15, 1952.   

**Q:**  How many classes were there?   

**A:**  There were seven classes. The first class was the alphabets, ka kha. The seventh was highest. We put kids in classes in accordance with their level of knowing Tibetan.   

**Q:**  How did you teach Tibetan? Did you use the wooden board?   

**A:**  Yes, they were using the wooden board [Tib. སྦྱང་ཤིང]. It was as in old society because in the past, they were emphasizing handwriting and how we shouldn't get rid of it. So they were taught from the ka kha, the second smaller script, tshugring and the third smaller script, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚུགས་ཐུང] A type of &quot;headless&quot; script in Tibetan that is larger than cursive script, but smaller than the block print script. It is a type of Ume script.">tsugtung</a>, and cursive. Then we made them write on paper. But from fourth grade, we also taught grammar [Tib. སུམཏག]. Traditional Tibetan schools didn't teach this. In the seventh grade they taught a little bit of poetry [Tib. སྙན་ངག]. [Trindor says there was no poetry.]   

**Q:**  In modern society, when we spend the expenses for the poor kids in school, sometimes it wouldn't work out. What about the poorest kids in your school then? Were you successful?   

**A:**  It was up to their choice. If their parents brought them to us, we admitted them, but we didn't try to publicize and call them to the school. One poor household had three of their kids in the school. One kid had TB and we supported the parents also. At this time, many kids switched from Tibetan to Chinese schools.   

**Q:**  Why? What was the difference?   

**A:**  They don't teach grammar and math, and they beat kids a lot. And as you might know, they hit them with canes on their cheeks. At that time, Shölkang's crazy son had a sore on his cheek when he came to our school and they said he got hit with a cane. So many switched to the Chinese school. [Trindor also said he switched since there were no expenses and it was much more complete in maps, math--but virtually none at the school liked the Chinese]. There was also music and singing in the Seshin School. At first, we heard that people said there would be a competition between the government Seshin School and the private schools, but later they couldn't challenge us. Now, among the cadres, those who were good in Tibetan and Chinese were mostly from the Seshin School. [Trindorla: This is true.] At that time, Tsarong's son Phüntsola also came and I remember he was a left handed and he liked drawing. At that time, the wife of Khentsab Lobsang Samden] was in the middle school. What's her name?   

**Q:**  Namlha [Tib. རྣམ་ལྷ] probably.   

**A:**  She was fast at running.   

**Q:**  Now, she is the leader of the hospital in Dharamsala.   

**A:**  At that time, we used to mobilize them saying that they should the learn culture well. There were the kids of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and the kids of the ordinary people were in the same class, so we told them, "In the future, it would depend on your capability and knowledge. It would be difficult to say that I am a kudrak." We also used the saying, "There is no owner for the throne of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་པ] The chief abbot of Ganden Monastery. He is considered to hold the throne of Tsongkapa, the founder of the Gelugpa sect.">Ganden Tripa</a> [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཁྲི་ལ་བདག་པོ་མེད]." In general, the study was good, but the sons of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> were not good. The son of Göshampa [Tib. རྒོད་གཤམ་པ] was quick-minded but naughty. Normally, sometimes, the parents would have an audience with the Dalai Lama, but they said that since the school had started, they didn't have much time to do that. Therefore, Trijang Lama and Lhautara said that the students would have one or two audiences in a year and they took all the students to have an audience with the Dalai Lama. This was well done for the religious way of thinking of the parents. At that time, at the meeting of the Board of Directors, a few of them said, "Among the students, there are 2-3 girls who were probably prostitutes in the past. So it is not good to have them in the school." But, we didn't expel them right away. We just advised them saying that you have reached this age and you can't study. So it would be better to go home.   

**Q:**  For how many years did you work doing this?   

**A:**  I worked from 1952 till May in 1956. At that time, I was young and I was patrolling around with the students from morning to evening. One day, Ngabö Rinchen, Thudo and Kapshö Jamyang Chögyal [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་ཆོས་རྒྱལ] ran away. Usually, Ngabö's sons were good at adhering to discipline, but on that day, they ran away to a park to drink Indian tea and didn't come back. [Laughs] I rode my bike and went to search for them everywhere, but I couldn't find them. After I came back I punished them and made them sweep the toilet. [Laughter] Then they said that they would not do that again. If you are writing something, I think this would be important to you. In 1949, Chairman Mao talked a lot about liberating the whole nation. This first came out in the New Year Statement in 1949. The headline of the statement was, "We should do the revolution to the end [Tib. གསར་བརྗེ་མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱེད་དགོས]." In this it was said that we should liberate the whole nation and then there were many other things said. The main were these three: 1. To change the nature of the semi-feudal society. 2. To oppose semi- feudal and semi-colonialism. 3. To destroy the Guomindang government. The former two were the original, basic thought of liberating Tibet. If you want to read about this in detail, there is the book called, "The history of Tibet's revolution" [Tib. བོད་ཀྱི་གསར་བརྗེའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས]. The defect of this book is that they didn't write about the nation nationwide, but only about Tibet. According to my point of view, nationwide is the main nucleus [Tib. སྲོག་ཤིང]. Chairman Mao and the Central Committee had considered about things according to the situation. For example, in April and May in 1949, it was said, "There are three methods for the liberation; 1. To make war in Tianjin and fight. 2. To liberate Beijing. 3. To take over Suiyuan, Hohhot and Hunan." So it seems liberating Tibet was probably like the third method. This was for the general situation and in detail, the plan should be made according to the actual situation of the Tibet. You consider this.   

**Q:**  This is useful.   

