# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0074.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Dorje Tseden [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་བརྟན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Dorje Tseden  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca 68  
**Date of Birth:** ca 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dorje Tseden was a senior Tibetan cadre in Tibet who was originally from Qinghai Province. In this interview, he describes the policy of Chairman Mao that confirmed the nature of society in Tibet as the serf system. He discusses Chairman Mao's talk about the status difference between the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama, how the Emperors supported the Tibetan Lamas titles in the past and how they will continue their support in the future. He continues to speak on the difference between the Emperor and the Chinese Communist Party in dealing with their subjects, and gives his own opinions on the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama. Finally, he discusses his meeting with Khentsab and Gusung Depön, their conversation on Tibetan independence, what he thought about the Guomindang in the beginning and how he liked the Chinese Communist Party.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0074_02/H_0074_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  This is just about the general situation. Nowadays, Deng Xiaoping is talking about "The big atmosphere and the small atmosphere [Tib. གནམ་གཤིས་ཆེ་བ་དང་གནམ་གཤིས་ཆུང་བ]." Actually, he meant to say to look at the situation from a wider perspective or from a narrower perspective. I think when we analyze liberating Tibet at the beginning, we will get a deeper understanding if we can analyze it with the situation of the whole world and of the nationwide situation. In 1953, when Zhang Guohua came to Tibet, in general, the work style of the Communist Party was that when they arrived at a place, the most important thing was to inquire about the nature of the society of the local place. Chairman Mao had been analyzing the society of the PRC. The nature of the society in Tibet was confirmed in 1953 through discussion.   

**Q:**  Did they hold the discussion in Tibet or in Beijing?   

**A:**  They investigated in Tibet and the meeting was held in Beijing. I heard that Chairman Mao called historical experts and discussed what the nature of Tibetan society was. At the end of this, the experts confirmed that it was a serf system [Tib. ཞིང་བྲན་ལམ་ལུགས]. Chairman Mao had said, "The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> [of Tibet] were neither in accordance with the nature of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྲན་གཡོག] Hereditary servants who were fed and clothed by their lord and did whatever work the lord assigned in the house or in the fields. They worked 24/7.">trenyog</a> [hereditary servants] nor the miser who had the freedom." So when we look at it, it was probably a serf system. It was similar to the social nature in China at the time of the "The Spring and Autumn Period (770-476 B.C) [Ch. chun qiu zhan guo]." This was very important.   

**Q:**  When did he say that?   

**A:**  He said it in 1953.   

**Q:**  When was that Spring and Autumn Period?   

**A:**  This was before almost 3,000 years ago.   

**Q:**  Was the system in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> similar to this serf system?   

**A:**  It was slightly similar in the nomad's area, but it was not that similar in the farming area. For example, it was not similar in the homeland of the Dalai Lama. They had the ownership of one's fields and they were allowed to sell these and others were allowed to buy them. In Tibet, it wasn't like this. In that area, there was no system where the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> belonged to someone. In the nomads' area there were the tribes or deshog [Tib. སྡེ་ཤོག], and they were not similar to the farmers.   

**Q:**  What differences were there in the deshog?   

**A:**  They had the system where the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> belonged to such and such a chief [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] or such and such a deshog. But they didn't need to pay the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་བོགས] A status wherein a peasant &quot;leased&quot; his/her &quot;freedom&quot; from his/her lord to live and work where he/she wanted. The peasants with human lease status still belonged to their lord and were required to pay an annual fee (&quot;human lease fee&quot;) to their lord. The children of human lease peasants inherited this status from parents of the same sex (i.e. sons of a male belonged to their father&#x27;s lord).">mibo</a> (human lease fee). This is the second. As for the third, in the beginning, there were a lot of debates when the 17-Point Agreement was signed regarding the position of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama. They were the leaders. Therefore, the debate was whether the Dalai Lama should be placed higher or if the Panchen Lama should be placed higher, or if they should be placed equally. Finally, Chairman Mao said, "Some of you people are saying that the two of them are equal. It is not like this." It was clearly written in the Revolutionary History of Tibet [Tib. བོད་ཀྱི་གསར་བརྗེའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས] about the policy work lines in Tibet. The important thing is that it was confirmed that we must mainly develop good relations with the Dalai Lama group. And we must also develop good relations with the Panchen Lama group in a stable manner. This seems like empty talk, but it is very important. If the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama were equal, then there would be a lot of trouble in Tibet. I think there would have been disturbances long before 1959.   

**Q:**  Some people said that there was the debate where some people said that the Panchen Lama should be placed higher and some said they should be equally placed, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the main thing was that the Panchen Lama was staying in [exile in] China and he was close to the Communist Party. In the policy of the Communist Party, it was said that if there were two objects of the united front [Tib. འཐབ་ཕྱོགས] in Tibet, if we took countermeasures [Tib. ཁ་གཏད་གཅོག] against one side and took sides [Tib. ཕྱོགས་ལྷུང] with the other, this would violate the policy of the united front. They should be treated equally and the Communist Party should place themselves in a lower place. Chairman Mao said, "The Manchu Emperors et cetera had used the policy of 'Divide and Rule'. We shouldn't do this. The Tibet Work Committee [Ch. gong wei] is the united leader of all the areas of Tibet, and Chamdo will also gradually belong to it." Mao in general said that the Emperor and the CCP's policies should be different and he said that "The Dalai Lama should be the main [Tib. གཙོ་བོ] and the Panchen Lama should be the secondary [Tib. ཕལ]. They were all objects of a united front. So we should not show favoritism and all of them should be treated equally. We should be fair and should not take sides. We should unite with them and we should not divide and rule them." The difference in nature between the Emperors and the CCP was that since the local officials listened to the orders from the Emperors, they could do whatever they wanted to do to the subjects. Since the local officials didn't oppose the Emperor, they didn't care what the officials were doing to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>. The CCP was saying that we should develop good relations with the chiefs and we should mainly work according to the benefit of the majority of the miser. The miser should do revolution and liberate themselves.   

**Q:**  Did they say that in 1953?   

**A:**  This was said before that. The system of the Emperors and the Communist Party was absolutely different. To tell you frankly, according to my opinion, both the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama are high lamas, and they are political and also religious lamas. For example, at the time of Emperor Shunzhi, and after that it was the Khangxi Emperor - He was an extraordinary person and he had four lamas. He said, "If the lamas get separated, their strength would scatter." In 1651, he gave a title of a high lama to the Dalai Lama. In 1693, he gave a title to the Jetsun Dampa [Tib. རྗེ་བཙུན་དམ་པ]. In 1706, he gave a title to the Jangya [Tib. ལྕང་རྒྱ] who was the lama in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and Inner Mongolia. In 1713, he gave the title to the Panchen Lama. I think the Emperor was confused when people asked if the 6th Dalai Lama was the real or the fake. So he said, "If we leave the Lamas alone in Tibet, it would be difficult. When there would be some trouble, there wouldn't be any kind of law [Tib. ཁྲིམས] [for the Lamas]." It was because the Emperors supported them. Otherwise, two of the lamas [the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama] wouldn't have political authority, and they were also religious lamas. So the two of them could develop in regards to politics and also with religion. We shouldn't say that religion is not the main thing. Politics and religion were combined together. The reason why the Europeans couldn't deeply analyze the history of China is because they were analyzing it based on the culture of their own country. For example, after the Manchu Emperor was destroyed, all the areas of China were ruled separately. Zhang Zuolin, the father of the Zhang Xiulan, ruled the provinces in the northeast. Yan Xiran ruled the Taiyuan of Shanxi Province. Chen Jichang et cetera ruled Guangxi. Longyun ruled Yunnan. Liu Xiang and Liu Wuhan ruled Sichuan. Ma Pengyi ruled Nyingxia, Siling was ruled by Ma Qicang. Ma Qicang was said to belong to the Guomindang and his power couldn't get into the Guomindang. In the meantime, Xinjiang was ruled by the Qing Shikai. It was impossible to have unity in such a large area with the feudal system. They just remained like independent. Sometimes, it seemed that it was united and also they had some kind of freedom. In 1979, Khentsab Lobsang Samden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན]] and Jebula [Ch. jie fu; Tib. ལགས] [Gusung] Depön [Tib. སྐུ་སྲུང་མདའ་དཔོན] came to Tibet. We knew each other in the 1950s and attended parties many times, and we were also from the same homeland. So I went to see them to their residence. I just told them in a joking manner, "You guys went abroad for about 20 years, but did you get any result regarding independence?" They said, "It is difficult. The governments of the foreign countries verbally and secretly were saying that they would support us. But, when the time came for them to actually support us, they were not doing that." At that time, Jebula told me, "When I went to Japan and read some of the books of the Tang Dynasty [Ch. thang shu], it was written that [Tibet] was regarded as independent." I said, "Of course it was. At that time, Zhong Yuan [China] and Tibet were equal. But, later, was there a single government of a country that accepted Tibet as independent?" At first he said, "No." Then he said, "There is." I asked, "Who is that?" He said, "It is Outer Mongolia. This was in 1913." Then I told him in a joking manner, "If you look at the situation of all of China then, it is very clear. At that time, they rebelled against the Manchu in Yunnan and there were many provinces saying that they were independent, and many of them were also accepted. Actually, Outer Mongolia kind of became independent in 1921, and the world recognized it in 1947 and made the announcement. After 1913, the soldiers of the Beiyang were sent to Outer Mongolia. At that time, Jetsun Dampa [Tib. རྗེ་བཙུན་དམ་པ] said that he was not going to be independent and Beiyang subdued [Tib. འདུས] it. When you analyze it, it is complicated.   

**Q:**  In the early times, most of the Tibetans were shying away from the idea of Communism. But, you liked Communism from the early times. In the beginning, what did you think when you were in the school? Did you think that the policy of the Guomindang was not good and the Communist policy was better? Tell me about your thinking.   

**A:**  At that time, the teachers and the students in the middle school knew about the policy of the Guomindang. It was a school directly set up by the Central Committee [Ch. zhongyang] of the Guomindang. It was not under Ma Qicang. So at this time, the teachers came from outside provinces. We had only one Tibetan teacher. The attitude of the Guomindang was not good. Many people didn't know how Ma Qicang set up the Tibetan Mongolian school [Tib. བོད་སོག་སློབ་གྲྭ]. Actually, he gave orders to many different tribes [Tib. སྡེ་ཤོག] [for recruiting students] and he requested the Guomindang to set up the school continuously. The principal of the school and my elder brother requested the Guomindang in a secret manner. But the Guomindang was not that attentive. Therefore, when I was studying at the middle school, I thought that I shouldn't rest my hopes with Guomindang. When I went to the university in Beijing, I read the works of Chairman Mao like, "The Coalition Government [Tib. མཉམ་སྦྲེལ་སྲིད་གཞུང]" and the "Commentary on New Democracy." In "The Coalition Government", there was a chapter for the minority nationalities. I was very glad to read that part because I had never heard about that. From the beginning, I knew about the Guomindang and I also read the books of Mao Zedong. When Beijing was liberated, I saw all the good conduct of the CCP. So when I was working in the Primary School in Lhasa, at this time I worked tirelessly from early morning to late at night. I did this because of my loyalty and responsibility to the Tibetan nationality. The correct policy of the CCP made my mind [influenced me] to implement the policy with determination.   

**Q:**  After 1956, did you stay in Lhasa till the revolt took place?   

**A:**  I stayed in Tibet for 35 years. In 1956, I returned to China and attended the meeting for a while and went back to Tibet. Then in 1958, I was again sent to China to study in the Central Committee Party School [Ch. zhong yiang dang xiao] At the time of the Great Leap Forward [Tib. མདུན་མཆོང་ཆེན་པོ] in China, they said they would not enroll new students and I went back to Tibet. In 1961, when the Panchen Lama, Ngabö and Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] went to China, I accompanied them and helped them. I just went on some vacations and to some meetings in China. Otherwise, I stayed in Tibet the entire time. In 1959, on the 13th of March, they said that I was a member of the National Sports Competition [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ལུས་རྩལ་ཚོགས་འདུ] and I was told to go as the head of the Tibet Sport Group [Tib. བོད་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་པ], but I told them I was not going there in this disturbing situation because I stayed there for my whole life and I wanted to see what really happened in Tibet. They told me that I could go in an armored car, Zhuangjia Che [Tib. ཞུཨང་ཇིཨ་ཆེ] to the Damshung ['dam gzhung] Airport from Lhasa, and I could travel by air to China. But I still refused and until Oct 24th, 1985, I remained in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Thank you so much. Your memory is like watching a movie.   

