# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0432.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Surkhang, Chunden Drokar [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་ཆོས་ལྡན་སྒྲོལ་དཀར], Yuthog, Dorje Yudron [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག, རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན་གཡུ་ཐོག], and Surkhang, Jamba Tseden (J.T.) [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་བྱམས་པ་ཚེ་བརྟན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** USA  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein [Q]  
**Name:** Surkhang, Chunden Drokar [A]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 53  
**Date of Birth:** 1940  
**Name:** D.Y. Yuthog Lhajam [A1]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1912  
**Name:** J.T. Surkhang [A2]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 49  
**Date of Birth:** 1943  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee [A] was born in an aristocratic household in the old society. She spent most of her childhood in a Christian boarding school in India and later attended school in Tibet. She finished her education in India in 1954 and returned home with interviewee [A2]. In Tibet, she enrolled in the Society School. After the Society School was dismissed and replaced by the Lhasa Middle School, she enrolled in the teacher training school in 1955. Throughout the interview, all of the participants discuss spirituality and the clash between the old society and the new customs. All interviewees talk about their experiences during the 1950's, such as the changes in Tibet over the decade, the apprehension to Chinese rule, the tension building between the Chinese and Tibetans, and the revolt in 1959. More personally, interviewee [A1] discusses the public opinion about the Dalai Lama, interviewee [A] describes the problems with giving up traditional Tibetan writing, and interviewee [A2] explains the threat from Khampas on students attending Chinese schools in 1958. The interviewee [A] left Tibet for India in 1958 where she heard and discussed possible foreign interventions, particularly in the CIA, and the politics of this foreign aid.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0432_01/H_0432_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Do you remember anything about when the Chinese invaded in 1950? Where were you then?   

**A:**  I was in India.   

**Q:**  Did you remember anything about that though it was long time ago?   

**A:**  I remember we were discussing about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a>'s babysitter [Tib. ཡབ་གཤིས་མ་མ་ལགས]. She told us that they sent three witches to defend against the Chinese. She said those witches would take care of them. Don't worry. That was what I really believed.   

**Q:**  She was in the school in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  No, she was one of the servants of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Langdün family [Tib. གླང་མདུན]   

**A2:**  She was the maid servant of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> Paljor, [Tib. དཔལ་འབྱོར] the author of the Tibetan novel called Tsugyu [Tib. གཙུག་གཡུ] that you want to translate. He was studying in the Convent at that time.   

**Q1:**  Were you in India before the invasion or after?   

**A:**  It was before. I came back in 1949.   

**Q:**  Then you came with the Chinese. That was the time when the Chinese came to Tibet. When the Army was lost and Ngabö was captured, was that like a big gossip or big talk in Kalimpong?   

**A2:**  The only thing I remember was a large number of Chinese soldiers died on the way because of all our protective deities [Tib. ཆོས་སྐྱོང] and witches [Tib. འབར་མོ] were very effective and there was a lot of snow storms where thousands of Chinese soldiers died. That's all about it really. But, I think deep down inside, there was some sort of apprehension I felt. I am sure you felt too.   

**A:**  I can't remember anything.   

**A2:**  Some sort of fear that something was happening [answer not finished]   

**A:**  I remember that the nuns used to look at us and say, "You poor children." Mother Terisa particularly. I used to wonder why she was so sorry for us.   

**Q:**  ...'s [A2] father was there?   

**A:**  My father Rimshi [Tib. རིམ་བཞི] was with us all the time. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Chemmo was in Tibet in the year 1950-1951.   

**A1:**  My brother was with the Dalai Lama in 1951.   

**A:**  When the Chinese actually came to Tibet and my aunt and we were staying in Hygerbasi and my uncles came to Yadong. What year was that?   

**A1:**  That was in 1951 and my brother was with the Dalai Lama. At that time, I was in Kalimpong.   

**A:**  When we were all staying in Hygerbasi, they were keeping some secrets and I remember clearly that one of my brothers died at that time. I remember that more than the Chinese coming.   

**Q:**  How did he die? Was he sick?   

**A:**  When my mother came to Kalimpong, two of the small kids were left in Tibet. My younger brother Tsering Norbu, [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་ནོར་བུ] died all of a sudden and my mother went to Tibet.   

**Q:**  Did you remember that there was a group who went to Beijing to negotiate?   

**A:**  I didn't know about that. I was just thinking about India because I was young.   

**Q:**  You are not to be blamed. According to Tibetan custom the older don't talk a lot with the kids. When the Chinese came, you must have been aware of that because in 1951 towards the end of summer the Chinese General came from Beijing to Kalimpong and there were some kind of party, do you remember that?   

**A:**  No, I don't remember.   

**Q1:**  That was Zhang Jingwu?   

**A:**  How could I know the names. When the Chinese first came to Tibet, my grandmother had not come to Kalimpong. I heard when the Chinese came to Lhasa, my grandmother was alone in the Surkhang's house. At that time, when Bapa Phünwang, [Tib. འབའ་པ་ཕུན་དབང] came to our house, my grandmother was there. We heard that Lhasa was filled with the Chinese.   

**Q1:**  . In 1951, when Zhang Jingwu came to Kalimpong, they had a great reception in Teesta.   

**A:**  We were not involved in that. In what year was that?   

**Q:**  That was in 1951.   

**A:**  What month was that?   

**Q:**  That was in July or August.   

**A:**  At that time, I was in the boarding school. If it had been during the winter holiday, I would have known that. In 1951, I didn't have any idea about those things.   

**Q:**  What did you think when all are happened when you were in the school? When did you go back to Tibet? Was that after you finished your Senior Cambridge degree?   

**A:**  It was before finishing the Senior Cambridge that I went back to Tibet. Trepal La, [Tib. བཀྲས་དཔལ་ལགས] Thubchö, [Tib. ཐུབ་ཆོས་ལགས] and I went back to Tibet together. Probably, that was in 1952. At that time, the Chinese were giving parties and I felt kind of happy. We went to the dance parties and the Chinese gave a very big party. On that party, we had to sign our names and I wrote Tibetan and Trepal la and Thubchö la wrote English. They were saying that it is good to write Tibetan, so I felt kind of glad. At that time, I knew how to write my name in Tibetan. After that, they told us that the girl students who came from the foreign countries should play basket-ball with the Chinese. At that time, Desi La was also there and we were wearing Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</a> and caps. That was in winter. That was really strange.   

**Q:**  What kind of caps did you wear?   

**A:**  We were wearing the fashionable fur cap called the Nyangsha [Tib. ཉང་ཞྭ] which was made from brocade.   

**Q:**  For how many years did you came back?   

**A:**  We were supposed to stay in Tibet, but I went back to India, right? JT   

**A2:**  What was the reason for you to go back to India?   

**A:**  Probably, at that time, the Mothers had told my uncle Rimshi to send me back to India because they were going to promote me.   

**A2:**  I mean what was the reason for going back to Tibet? I myself didn't go back to Tibet.   

**A:**  I am not sure what the reason was. Sometimes we were going back during the winter holiday. Probably, at the beginning, the reason for taking us back to Tibet was that they were planning for us to leave the school in India [answer not finished]   

**A2:**  I think there was a certain amount of pressure being exerted. Some of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> families; and during that time the Ngabö's children were enrolled in the Convent [answer not finished]   

**A:**  Everyone went back, Ngabö, Sampbo, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Langdun, all the Tibetan children went back.   

**Q:**  Probably, that was in 1952.   

**A:**  Probably, it was in that year.   

**Q:**  Was that before Mr Yuthog went back? He stayed behind in Kalimpong for quite some time.   

**A:**  Probably, that was in the winter of 1951. In that month the Chinese came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  That was in August-September.   

**A:**  When did the Dalai Lama return from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>?   

**Q:**  That was in July 1951.   

**A:**  So it was in that winter when we went back.   

**Q:**  The Chinese gave a party for all the students who came back, right?   

**A:**  At that time, they were giving a lot of parties and dances. At that time, JT was not there. I just stayed for only 2 months in Lhasa. At the beginning, we were supposed to stay in Tibet for good. But, the Mothers might have told my uncle that I was studying very well so they were going to promote me to the 7th class. At that time, the 7th class was the Junior Cambridge and it was said that it would be good to have the Junior Cambridge. At that time, Ngabö Pema La, [Tib. པད་མ་ལགས] and Lungrig La, [Tib. ལུང་རིག་ལགས] were with me in the 5th class. I was going to get promoted to the 7th class so I went back. After that, I stayed in the school till 1954.   

**Q:**  For the two months, what was it like in Lhasa? Were people angry? What did you see?   

**A:**  No, I was not angry. When we went to the dance party in Yuthog , I remember I rode a horse and went there and we had servants with us.   

**Q:**  Who would you dance with then?   

**A:**  At that time, all of our uncles; Khenjung and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> were dancing. At the Mönlam Prayer Festival of that year all of our uncles were singing Chinese songs and I felt really happy because there were new Chinese songs. At that time, my uncle Khenjung and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> Jedrung [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང ] and my uncle Jigme La, [Tib. 'jiga med lags] were all young. I think they were in their twenties.   

**Q:**  At that time, did any of the Tibetan or Chinese officials say to stay and work or something?   

**A:**  At that time, I hadn't reached the age of working.   

**A2:**  At that time, you were about 15 years old.   

**A:**  At that time, according to the Tibetan custom, girls had to braid their hair in a single braid. Usually, in Tibet in the beginning, the girls would braid their hair into a single braid and put a Gau on the braid. Once they started wearing the Patrug, [Tib. སྤ་ཕྲུག] headdress, they had to have two braids. During the Mönlam Festival, I braided my hair in a single braid and I felt very happy.   

**Q:**  Was the Mönlam the same as before with the shengo and the assistant of the disciplinary offcer, Geyog [Tib. དགེ་གཡོག] and these monks?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, it had been quite a long time since I had not seen the Mönlam. At that time, my uncle Khenjung had a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ལྡབ་ལྡོབ] A mildly deviant type of fighting or &quot;punk&quot; monk who engaged in fighting and other unusual behaviors for monks in traditional Tibet&#x27;s large monasteries.">dobdo</a> monk with him when he was going out. At that time, the dobdo used to go at the front and take us around the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street. I felt very happy. In that period, the old Tibetan customs were there and the new customs had also started, So I felt kind of happy. I don't remember any bad things occurring at that time. Actually, the elderly were not telling us much about the situation. They were talking in a low voice secretly to each other.   

**Q:**  Do you remember that there were a lot of Chinese everywhere? I mean like Lhasa had changed from when you left? How many years did you live in India?   

**A:**  Like three years.   

**Q:**  Were there big changes in the street?   

**A:**  There wasn't. It was just like before. Sometimes, when the Chinese were marching in the streets, the Tibetans were stoning them and provoking [Tib. བརྙས་བརྐོ] them, but they were not doing anything in response. At that time, it was the time of the liberation, so Chinese were like very upright. At that time, the Tibetans were pinching the Chinese girls in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> Street, but they did not saying anything and they were laughing. Actually, they knew deep inside that they are going to get the power. At that time, it appears that the Tibetan were more bossy or powerful [Tib. དབང་ཆེ]. In fact, the Chinese had come to Tibet, but the Tibetans were doing whatever they like to the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Were there any like fights at that time?   

**A:**  Probably, at that time, there weren't any fights. Unless there were some fight at the borders. The Chinese who came later were different from those Chinese who came earlier. At that time, probably, they had a kind of very good organization.   

**Q:**  Then you went back to India and what did you hear between the next few years? How long did you stay then?   

**A:**  Then I stayed three years.   

**Q:**  Did you go back to Tibet at the end of 1954?   

**A:**  Yes, I went back with ...[A2]. At that time, I had finished my Senior Cambridge. After that, we were told to go to the "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] A new school jointly started by the Chinese and the Tibetan Government in 1952 that was open to students from all classes in society. Thus the name.">Society School</a>" [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ]. That was a newly established school.   

**Q:**  You went there as a student?   

**A:**  Yes, in that school, even adults could attend and learn Tibetan. At that time, JT, Dündül La, [Tib. བདུད་འདུལ་ལགས] and I were enrolled in that school. We were in the lowest Tibetan class.   

**A2:**  It was not the lowest. It was the second from the lowest. They were teaching Tibetan alphabets in the 7th class and we were just above that class. We were in a higher class for learning math. At that time, we learned math and Chinese.   

**Q:**  Were the math teachers Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes. Except for the Tibetan language teachers, all of the teachers were Chinese.   

**A2:**  The Chinese math teachers had also learned Tibetan language very well. They were writing the problems in Tibetan when they were teaching math.   

**A:**  I remember a teacher called Yang Huaquan and Ma Bojan.   

**Q:**  How did you learn Chinese, or it was like a joke?   

**A:**  Oh! We were learning. Our teacher was a very good one. He also knew a little bit of English. At that time, they were teaching the pinyin bo, po, mo, fo.   

**A2:**  That was romanized pinyin.   

**A:**  The teachers were very enthusiastic. What were the ages of the students?   

**A2:**  There were a lot of wives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, traders, and ordinary adults from Lhasa. And there were young students like us.   

**Q:**  When did they start the school?   

**A:**  It has been quite a long time when we were in the school. Probably, it was started in 1952. I heard that at the beginning, Thubchö La went to the Seshim Lobdra [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ]. At that time, probably, Seshim was a kind of grade school. The students who had finished that school were joining the Society School. Probably, it was a kind of secondary school.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there any kind of political propaganda regarding history?   

**A:**  At that time, they were teaching the so-called "politics." I didn't understand that at all though they were teaching a lot of about it. It seemed to me that they were not talking Tibetan. Probably, that was because I stayed many years in India and I couldn't understand very well. Furthermore, they were using so many new terms. All of the students were taught politics together.   

**A2:**  We couldn't understand when they were giving lectures in Tibetan.   

**Q:**  Were they speaking Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were those people Chinese or Tibetan?   

**A:**  They were Tibetan who were teaching the politics and some of the Chinese were also speaking Tibetan. At that time, among the students, there were many Tibetans whose political standard was high. For example, in our class there was the teacher Champa Trinley, [Tib. བྱམས་པ་འཕྲིན་ལས] of Gyantse Tshongkhang, [Tib. ཚོང་ཁང]. I heard that now he is the head of the Mentsigang.   

**Q:**  I heard that he is good and decent. Now he wears beautiful suits.   

**A:**  He was one of the good teachers. In the beginning, he was young and studying well and probably he got introduced to the new ideology of communism from the beginning. There were a lot of people embracing it like the Kujar Phüntshog [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར་ཕུན་ཚོགས] La and those people had become high officials. Kujar Phüntshog La was among the five Vice Chairman [Ch. fu zhu xi] of Tibet.   

**Q:**  You don't seem to remember any of the Chinese you studied in the school, right?   

**A2:**  ...[A] La studied at the University of Washington.   

**A:**  Kujar Phüntshog la was the leader of all the workers.   

**Q:**  Did you talk with those people about what they were thinking? There is difference between the thinking that communism means modernizing Tibet and really eliminating religion and so on?   

**A:**  At that time, they were saying that foreign countries were bad instead of saying that Tibet was bad. One day, we were told to give a lecture and they asked us, "Did they brainwash you when you were in the Convent in Kalimpong and did they teach you Christianity? How did the nuns treat you?" I said, "The nuns had never done anything bad to me and they didn't tell us to practice the Christian religion. I can't say that they had done anything bad to me. I told them that I am not going to give the lecture and ran away home that afternoon. Actually, I would be ashamed to give a talk on the meeting because I didn't know Tibetan well. After that, they didn't tell me to give talks.   

**Q:**  At that time, your home was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a>, right?   

**A:**  No, our new home was just near the school. When we were going to the school, Wangnam la, [Tib. དབང་རྣམ་ལགས] was always teasing me [Tib. བརྙས་བརྐོ] and he was throwing stones at us. When we go through the back door, we have to go at the front of Janglojan's, [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] house. At that time, Wangnam-la was very naughty.   

**Q:**  He used to be wild until recently. Even when he went to the nomad's area, he was shooting guns.   

**A:**  At that time, when he was teasing Thubchö la and me and when we told him that we are going to tell our mother, he ran away. Probably, he was about 8-9 years old. He was not in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] A new school jointly started by the Chinese and the Tibetan Government in 1952 that was open to students from all classes in society. Thus the name.">Society School</a>. After that, many students of the Society School went to China in groups to the Nationalities Institute [Tib. མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ]. I also wanted to go to China. Probably, at that time, my grandmother didn't send us to China.   

**A1:**  Probably, my mother thought that the girls would be spoiled if they were sent to China.   

**A2:**  At that time, the worst thing was that when the school started we have to go to see our grandmother. At that time, I was about 14-15 years old but my grandmother used to tell me, "What is the use of learning the Chinese language. Instead of that you should keep your hair long and put the hair knot on [Tib. སྤ་ལྕོག]. Your father was a government official at your age." At that time, I felt very bad because she was telling me to keep my hair long.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did your father and mother say?   

**A2:**  My father never said anything. It was just my grandmother's wish.   

**Q:**  In those days, in your family, did you meet and talk with your father or it was like a separate generations?   

**A2:**  I think I talked more with my uncle Khenjung. He was much younger. At that time, I met a boy from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> called Gömpo, [Tib. མགོན་པོ]. That was in 1955. After he came from Amdo, he told us that he had suffered quite severely in Amdo under the Chinese and he had a lot of things to talk about the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Was that about the Chinese made them suffer?   

**A2:**  They made them suffer in their homeland. He told me about this and probably my uncle knew about that. At that time, I wished to go to India and I didn't have any thought about learning Chinese. I was always thinking about my future in India. In those days, I was talking with my uncle all the time about going to India. Probably, you [A] also talked about that?   

**A:**  Yes   

**Q:**  Did Khenjung have the same thought?   

**A2:**  Yes, my uncle wanted to go to India. Khenjung went to India in 1956 and he didn't come back at all.   

**Q:**  He went to India at the time of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[hind. Buddha Jayanti] The 1956 celebration in India of the 2,500 anniversary of the death (nirvana) of the Buddha.">Buddha Jayanti</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes. At that time, all of us went to India. After that, uncle Khenjung and JT didn't go back to Tibet.   

**Q:**  How many years did you stay in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] A new school jointly started by the Chinese and the Tibetan Government in 1952 that was open to students from all classes in society. Thus the name.">Society School</a>?   

**A:**  At that time, there were a lot of changes. How did they dismiss that school all of a sudden?   

**A2:**  The main reason for dismissing that school was that they established the Lhasa Middle School. [Tib. ལྷ་ས་སློབ་གྲྭ་འབྲིང་བ].   

**A:**  And many students were sent to China and then they set up the Middle School that was located in the Sandy Area [Tib. བྱེ་རགས].   

**A2:**  At that time, they gave a big exam in the school. The students of my age and the students in the Seshing Lobdra were given the exam and sent to the Middle School. I was a little bit older than ...[A2] so I was told to go to the teacher training school. [Tib. དགེ་རྒན་འོས་སྦྱོང]. Later, I was told to teach math in the school. They didn't hold that class and they told me to teach math and they will pay me in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> for my salary.   

**Q:**  How many <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> did they pay you?   

**A:**  Probably, that was about 90 silver dayang.   

**Q:**  Was that per month?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Before that when you were students, you didn't get anything, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard some of the students got some money.   

**A:**  I didn't get money when I was a student. But I was told to teach the lower math class of the "Spare Time School" [Tib. ལས་ཞོར་སློབ་གྲྭ] which was set up for the people who couldn't come to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་སློབ་གྲྭ] A new school jointly started by the Chinese and the Tibetan Government in 1952 that was open to students from all classes in society. Thus the name.">Society School</a> and for the illiterates from the traders, peddlers and probably some farmers.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you teach them in Tibetan?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Were you able to write Tibetan?   

**A:**  The math I was teaching didn't reach the standard where I needed to write the problems in Tibetan. I was just teaching the units of ten, hundred and thousand.   

**Q:**  At that time, what kind of clothing were you wearing?   

**A:**  I was always wearing Tibetan dress.   

**Q:**  That was what year?   

**A:**  That was in 1955. We didn't have much chance to go to the Society School.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you [A1] in Lhasa?   

**A1:**  At that time, I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When did you return from Kalimpong?   

**A1:**  I went back in 1951. Then I came to India for a short time in 1953. I stayed in India for a couple of months and then I went back and stayed in Tibet till 1959.   

**Q:**  What changes did you see in Tibet before the Dalai Lama went to India in 1956?   

**A1:**  I didn't go out very much, but I saw that there were great changes in Tibet.   

**Q:**  Like what? For example [question not finished]   

**A1:**  The Chinese offices were set up, so there were many changes.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> and big traders giving parties like before?   

**A1:**  Those things that were done in the families became more elaborate than before. At that point, it became like people were not thinking for the long run. After the Chinese came, people had more money because they got high prices for the things they sold.   

**Q:**  At that time, when you older people were talking to each other, were you saying that this kind of situation will not last long or were you saying that the Chinese will not abolish our customs and the situation will not be so bad [Tib. ཨའུ་ཙམ]?   

**A:**  In the beginning, they were not doing those apparently but later they did all the bad things.   

**A1:**  We were always thinking that the Chinese would not do good. So we were just trying to maintain the livelihood as much as we could for the time being and in the future we were planning to go to India.   

**Q:**  At that time, were most of the people thinking that way?   

**A1:**  I don't think the most of the people were thinking in that way because we had been to India about 6-7 times starting from 1940. So we knew that it was easy to go to India and come back. Most people might be thinking that how could they get through the hot weather and how would the hygiene condition be.   

**Q:**  At that time, were they thinking that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> system and the patrilineal estate, [Tib. ཕ་གཞིས] system might not last long?   

**A1:**  Yes, generally speaking, people might be thinking in that way because before that we heard about the liberation in Ba [Tib. འབའ]. When they liberated Ba area, we had a relative called Changchub Drölma [Tib. བྱང་འཆུབ་སྒྲོལ་མ] in Ba. She was the daughter of our cousin. The family was called Nyengo [Tib. ?] Tshang. At that time, she came to Lhasa [answer not finished]   

**A:**  Wasn't that in 1956?   

**A1:**  Yes, she came to Lhasa in 1955. No, she had come before that. At that time, she was telling us, "Now you are happy, but that is not stable. [Tib. གཏན་གཏན]. We had a large area of land in Ba, but we lost all of it and we became beggars." I remember what she said at that time.   

**A:**  At that time, we were not paying much attention to what she said. She had run away from the place where she was in retreat.   

**A1:**  At that time, one of her <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> helped her.   

**A:**  Probably, she told the truck driver that she will pay him the transportation fee in Lhasa and that she is related to Surkhang. Otherwise, she didn't have money to pay them. So they brought her to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A1:**  Probably, that was in 1952.   

**A:**  No, once she had come earlier and when she ran away to Lhasa, it was about 1957.   

**A1:**  Did she come earlier and went back?   

**A:**  At that time, she didn't run away and come to Lhasa. Later, she ran away and came to Lhasa.   

**A1:**  Probably, that was in 1954.   

**A:**  It was after our new house was built.   

**A1:**  She came before the new house was built and she stayed in my brother Khenjung's room. I remember that at that time we made a tent for her. At that time, I heard that Pomda Tshang, [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཚང] also gave her a lot of gifts.   

**A:**  That was the first time when she came and then went back. At that time, she came in a rich condition.   

**Q:**  I heard that the monks of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྒོ་མང] One of the large colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Gomang</a>, [Tib. སྒོ་མང] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] One of the main colleges in Drepung Monastery.">Loseling</a>, [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང] didn't know about the situation that every would be lost and they bought an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> from Kashöpa and he knew the situation and he was selling the shiga and planning to take the money to India.   

**A:**  At that time, they asked our family whether we would sell Kalung Estate in Lhodrag, [Tib. ལྷོ་བྲག] which as a very good shiga. That was in 1958. I remember my uncle Rimshi told me about that.   

**Q:**  Who told that?   

**A:**  That was from Drepung I think. I never heard about selling <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> in the old society.   

**Q:**  Did you know which <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་ཚང] A &quot;college&quot; within a monastery, for example, in Drepung Monastery there were four main tratsang: Gomang, Loseling, Deyang and Ngagpa. These tratsang were property owning corporate entities and included monks who were organized into residential dormitories called Khamtsen.">tratsang</a> was that?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. At that time, they were still thinking that the situation would remain like that continuously. How many times did the Chinese say that the reform would be postponed? At first, they said that they are going to implement the reform, was that in 1952? After that, they said that the reform was postponed for 6 years.   

**Q:**  That was in 1955-56.   

**A:**  When they said that reform was postponed, all people were kind of relaxed. But, deep inside their mind, probably, people didn't believe in the Chinese. At that time, Changchub Drölma la was telling us about her family. Actually, her family was one of the three biggest households in Ba. She was kind of wild and taking guns. She told us to put sand bags on the windows. She said that the Chinese were making war like that. But, it seemed too far-fetched at that time to me. That was after the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> was preparing.   

**Q1:**  In those days, the monasteries had similar kind of thoughts. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འབྲི་གུང] The Drigung Monastery.">Drigung</a> Rinpoche, [Tib. འབྲི་གུང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] said that they didn't let him go even in 1959 when one of the lords [Tib. དཔོན] went to Drigung and he held guns and said that he is going to take the Lama, they still made trouble.   

**Q:**  Some of the monks were saying that they thought the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་ཀ] A manorial estate.">shiga</a> might be taken away, but they never thought that the religion would be destroyed and they didn't run away in 1959. Those were the smart ones. Most of the monks didn't even have that kind of thoughts.   

**A:**  As ... [A2] said, at first, when we went to the dance party, they served cigarettes, sweets, sunflower seeds, and cookies and teas. After about two years, there was only the sunflower seed and they didn't serve sweets and other things. Later, it became difficult to get the tickets. At that time, only the organization could attend the dance and ordinary people didn't have the chance to dance. They were saying that tonight the dance was held by the Youth League or the Women's Association and so on. It became like exclusive. They were very smart in changing those things gradually.   

**Q:**  When was the change? Do you remember? So hard to get when these happened.   

**A:**  When was the Preparatory Committee of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> was set up?   

**Q:**  That was in 1956.   

**A:**  At that time, it had already changed.   

**A2:**  At the end of 1955, we were in the Middle School. And we voluntarily went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> to work on the preparation for the meeting in the hall. When the meeting was held for about a week, we have to do the works like sticking posters in the hall at night. At that time, ...[A] la was among the Reception Committee [Tib. སྣེ་ལེན].   

**Q:**  For what?   

**A:**  For the youth representatives coming to the meeting in Lhasa. There were also youth representatives [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  If you compare Tibet with your school in India and your school in England, what was it like then in Tibet? Do you have friends?   

**A2:**  Do you mean in Tibet?   

**Q:**  Yes, in the Middle School, did you visit your friends out of your social class? Did you go to like teashops or something with your friends?   

**A:**  I never went to the teashops.   

**A2:**  I think I was a little out of ordinary. For example, when I came from India and first arrived in Lhasa, we had a servant called Phüngyal, [Tib. ཕུན་རྒྱལ]. He had a white complexion and he was also wearing good clothes. At that time, the servants thought that Phüngyal was the son of Surkhang and they invited him inside and I was left in the servant's section. [laughter] That was because I stayed in India for a long time when I was young. So probably, I was not much dignified [Tib. ཉམས] like the kudrak. Therefore, in Lhasa the boys I was acquainted with were the children of the Thalphung Gang, [Tib. ཐལ་པུང་སྒང]. I was not much acquainted with the children of the kudrak. The boys with whom I was going around with were guys like Seril, [Tib. སེར་རིལ] Trinley Tsewang, [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས་ཚེ་དབང] Chung Chung, [Tib. ཆུང་ཆུང]. Probably, that was because I was from a well-to-do family and when they would come to my house everything was like perfect.   

**A:**  Probably, you didn't go to their houses?   

**A2:**  I had been to the home of Seril. Otherwise, I didn't go to their homes. We also used to go to the teashops.   

**Q:**  Was that the sweet teashop?   

**A:**  Yes, at that time, there was a teashop called Arsan, which was serving very good tea.   

**Q:**  Did Arsan mean two and three or something?   

**A:**  No, that was a just a Muslim name. At that time, we didn't dare to go to the teashop, so we would send people to buy tea in the thermos flask.   

**A2:**  The Tibetan schools were very happy compared with the schools in India.   

**Q:**  Why?   

**A2:**  The schools in India were stricter in discipline. I went to the Convent and to the St Augustine school. At that time, we had to go to church and the teachers were beating us up and at that time we were in the boarding school. In the Tibetan School, they would not say anything whether we go to the school or not. The teachers were very well educated and most of them were very young. They never scolded us. When something went wrong the teachers were apologizing to the students.   

**Q:**  Were there many parties, meetings, socializing and clubs?   

**A:**  In the school, there were two kind of associations [Tib. ཚོགས་པ]: a Youth League and the Women's Association. At that time, I was too young to attend those associations. I joined both of the associations but I didn't go much to their meetings. But I was always going to the dance parties.   

**Q:**  Somebody came and told you to join, or how did you join that?   

**A2:**  That was kind of forced voluntary. Later, they became a little bit like that. At the beginning they were giving 20-30 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> to the students of the Middle School per month. In addition to that, they were giving new uniform and at that time, we need to submit the names of our families. Later, it was said that the students had to tell the Chinese what they were doing in their families [answer not finished]   

**A:**  Did they have to inform?   

**A2:**  Not really inform [Tib. ལན་བསྐལ་པ་ཟེར་ནའི]. Anyway, some of students who were very good in their studies were told to join the Communist Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་སྡེ་ཚོགས] and they were insisting that they join it. They didn't insist on that for me, but they insisted for one of the students that I knew.   

**Q:**  Was that the Youth Pioneer?   

**A:**  That was the piaoneer, [Tib. གདོང་ལེན་རུ་ཁག]). Those were small boys. The Youth League was above that.   

**Q:**  What do you call that in English?   

**A:**  If someone joined that, it was the same as the Communist Party Member.   

**Q:**  At that time, were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> joining that?   

**A:**  When I was in the school, I heard that the first member of the Communist Youth League in Lhasa was Pomda Jigme, [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་འཇིགས་མེད]. The next was the Chösur Drölkar La, [Tib. ཆོས་ཟུར་སྒྲོལ་དཀར་ལགས] who was in the Theatre Group [Tib. ཟློས་གར]. Once they held a meeting and they gave them some kind of medals. At that time, it was regarded that they became very exclusive.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  Probably, that was in 1956.   

**Q:**  Do you know them?   

**A:**  I know them well.   

**Q:**  Did you people ever talk like that? To me it is hard to understand all of this because if you think that was terrible conflict, how would that happen? Some people were joining these groups and some people were not. It doesn't seem that there was a lot of discussion. People were saying we should back this or we want to get rid of the old society or anything.   

**A:**  I think to me the general impression, even with the older people, was sort of mindlessness throughout this. As if something inevitable is going to happen, but lets just have fun. That kind of attitude pervaded.   

**Q:**  Is it like when you were with your friends who were not <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, did they ever say "The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> system and the monastery is no good and we have to change all this." Did you have any kind of conversations like that?   

**A:**  Never.   

**A2:**  Most of my friends were 13-14-15-16 years old. All we did was play basketball   

**Q:**  Look at the Palestinians, they are 12 years old.   

**A2:**  The only problem that we had was, say in order for us to go to school, we had to bicycle all the way from our house to past Potala. So very often we were called the "<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayang</a> students" [Tib. དཡང་སློབ་གྲྭ་བ]. We would encounter a lot of monks on the road and the monks would shout from Potala, "dayang students! Are you going to eat shit? [Tib. དཡང་སློབ་གྲྭ་བ་སྐྱག་པ་ཟ་ག་འགྲོ་གས].   

**Q:**  At that time, the abbots were taking dayang.   

**A2:**  Often times, I have heard of some students getting beaten up by the donkey herders and monks.   

**Q:**  This is when? This might be later.   

**A2:**  This was in 1955. There was some tension and as matter of fact there was some members of our students in the Lhasa Middle School who were from outside of Lhasa and they would live in tents at the school. I never saw it, but I was told that every tent or every leader was allowed to carry a gun or was given a gun to protect himself because there was some tension I suppose.   

**A:**  It was pretty kind of deserted where the school was.   

**Q:**  Where was it?   

**A2:**  It was behind Potala.   

**A:**  Do you know where the Lukhang [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང] is? The school was next to Lukhang.   

**Q:**  The Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས] was there, right?   

**A:**  Not that far. That was towards Drepung or no?   

**A:**  The place where the school was located was called Jarag Linga [Tib. སྦྱར་རག་གླིང་ག]. At that time, it was an empty place.   

**Q:**  What do the people think? You were educated in India and you were thoughtful. Did you think that the monasteries are no good and the Chinese were right. At that time, did you ever talk with anybody about those things like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> system is good or bad. Or that we should send people to China to learn Chinese.   

**A2:**  I had my doubt about the deities and all of that, but I never really thought much about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> system being correct. Everything was taken for granted. As a matter of fact, it was only after I came to Lhasa. Otherwise, when we were living in India, we never thought of our servants as being inferior. As a matter of fact, I used to be dead scared of my maidservant. And later of course, I don't think we were ever politically conscious.   

**A:**  I don't think so. The only thing that was kind of brought home to me when he had to plant trees in Nortölinga [Tib. ནོར་སྟོད་གླིང་ག] at one time. That was really such a rough I could not hit that axe and break up the stones. That was like what the Chinese represented as hard labor. I thought I myself would never be able to do hard labor.   

**Q:**  Did any of the other Tibetans laugh or make fun?   

**A:**  No, we were given like a small section. At that time, nobody really held us to do it. We went there first of all on the motorbike. Then we had servants with tea [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Who rode the motorbike?   

**A:**  The servants. Then we had tea.   

**Q:**  You had your own tea?   

**A:**  Yes, the servants were standing when we were digging the ditches for planting trees.   

**Q:**  The servants said, "I will do it"?   

**A:**  They were not supposed to. We were organized by classes.   

**Q1:**  What was the tree planting for?   

**A:**  Just to plant trees in Nortölinga.   

**Q:**  Did you dig ditches?   

**A:**  We dug the ground in order to plant trees.   

**A2:**  I remember right there whether they were trying to plant enough so that it was going to get more rain or stop wind or some sort of ecological reason.   

**Q:**  Do you mean they Chinese?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you feel embarrassed then with your servants serving tea and other students not having servants?   

**A:**  I think lot of them had. It wasn't unusual, not only us.   

**Q:**  But, you didn't feel that anyway?   

**A:**  No, I think the servants had a big chuckle afterwards because we were not able to do much work. I think that they had never seen the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> working. At that time, when they filled the basket , you couldn't get up and you couldn't throw it out and the whole thing came by your neck.   

**Q:**  Did you [A2] do that also?   

**A2:**  No, we dug ditches.   

**Q:**  That was for the same project?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q1:**  On other occasions did you also go to contribute school labor?   

**A:**  That was the only time and day. It was like a big deal.   

**A1:**  At that time, probably the older wives of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>'s also did that. On that day, probably all people had done the work.   

**A2:**  We had to continue to do it for a while and I remember that my friend and I dug three feet deep and about maybe a foot wide and 20 feet long. We dug about 28 of those over a period of time.   

**Q:**  There was a song though I don't remember that was about when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were doing the labor; the basket hit their head.   

**A:**  Probably, it was like that. I remember, I couldn't get up because they put in too many stone.   

**Q1:**  Lukhang Trinchö La, [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་འཕྲིན་ཆོས་ལགས] who is in Rajpur she knows the song.   

**Q:**  You were there when the Dalai Lama went to China?   

**A:**  When he came back, I was there. At that time, we were in the reception. Everybody was lined up.   

**Q:**  Were you worried and were the people worried that he would not come back?   

**A:**  I think that it was a general feeling that they thought he wasn't going to come back or they won't let him come back. Then he came back. Probably, that kind of symbolized that the Chinese were not going to do anything any time soon.   

**Q1:**  At that time you [A1] were staying in Lhasa when the Dalai Lama went to China, right?   

**A1:**  Yes, We were standing in line near our house.   

**Q:**  At that time, what were the people thinking?   

**A1:**  They thought that he wouldn't come back. At that time, mother and I were near the wall of our house. And the Women's Association was on the other side. When the Dalai Lama and the Kyabje [Trijang] [Tib. སྐྱབས་རྗེ] Rinpoche went, I had tears in my eyes. At that time, people were thinking that he wouldn't come back. When the Dalai Lama was not there, people remained kind of in mourning [Tib. མྱ་ངན] in the whole area of Lhasa. At that time, I was not there. When I arrived at Lhasa, the Dalai Lama already came back to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  When Alo Chöndze and the Mimang Tshogpa threw a poster during the Mönlam and Alo Chöndze was arrested, was that at that time or when?   

**A:**  When was that when people said that they were throwing posters from the sky?   

**A1:**  Probably, it was after that.   

**A:**  That was long after that, probably in 1957. At that time, Alo Chöndze was our neighbor. At that time, Alo Chöndze was living near the Palai Tshonkor [Tib. དཔལ་ལྷའི་མཚོ་འཁོར] and his house was next to the Nampön's, [Tib. གནམ་དཔོན] house.   

**Q:**  Was that the second Mimang Tshogpa or the first?   

**A:**  We didn't have any idea about that.   

**Q:**  Then the first Tibetan Newspaper came out, right?   

**A:**  That came out long before that. When we went back to Tibet at the first time, there was the Newspaper, right ...[A2]?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you reading the Newspaper?   

**A:**  When we were studying, didn't we have to read some Newspaper?   

**A2:**  We were just reading the letters of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ཁང] The name of a famous and powerful Tibetan aristocratic family.">Shölkhang</a> Jedrung. We didn't read Newspapers. At that time, Jedrung La's handwriting was good, so we were reading his letters.   

**Q:**  Was he your teacher?   

**A2:**  No, our teacher was called Shabsur La [Tib. ཞབས་ཟུར་ལགས]. He was using the letter as a sample and he was doing the dictation. Shabsur La was making a lot of sarcastic remarks about the Chinese.   

**Q:**  What kind of things did he say?   

**A:**  He said, "We are not grateful to the uncle . The most grateful thing that they have done was that they brought opium to Tibet and uncle taught us Mahjong." He was saying that every time.   

**Q:**  Was he a monk?   

**A1:**  He might have been an ex-tsidrung of the Tibetan Government and later he had a woman.   

**A2:**  He used to stress a lot on writing the traditional Tibetan writing because often times we would write in Tibetan but write the dates in English. At that point, he would say, "How would it look if you put the Bogtho, [Tib. འབོག་ཐོ] on a People's Liberation Army soldier". If you write Tibetan and write these numbers, it will look the same. Probably, he was attentive to political matters.   

**A:**  Later, he set up a private school. At that time, Tsering Yangkyi la, [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་གཡང་སྐྱིད] and Champa Gyentsen la, [Tib. བྱམས་པ་རྒྱལ་མཚན] withdrew from the Chinese school and joined his school. He was teaching Tibetan exclusively. Probably, he was a thoughtful person.   

**Q:**  What happened to him later?   

**A:**  Probably, he died.   

**Q:**  What did you think when they made the Preparatory Committee of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a>?   

**A2:**  I had an experience with the Gyari Trichen [Tib. རྒྱ་རི་ཁྲི་ཆེན]. At that time when the Preparatory Committee of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང] Tibet Autonomous Region">TAR</a> was set up, there were a fixed number of representatives who had to come to Lhasa. At that moment, probably, the representatives from Ei [Tib. ཨེ] area didn't come and they needed one more representative from Ei and he wanted me be the representative. When I went inside, I found myself just behind the Panchen Lama.   

**A:**  At that time, Lhagyari had a very high position.   

**A2:**  I just went with the Trichen because he was insisting and he told me that I should come to the meeting.   

**Q:**  At that time, what were you wearing?   

**A2:**  I was wearing a men's chupa. At that time, when we were going to the school, we were wearing Tibetan chupa.   

**Q:**  What happened at the meeting?   

**A2:**  At the meeting, many people were talking a lot, but, I didn't understand what they were talking about.   

**A:**  At that time, I also didn't understand what they were saying at the meetings.   

**Q:**  What people were talking about what is going to happen? Nobody seemed to worry about it as far as I can see.   

**A2:**  That's right. Probably, at that time, we were thinking that it was a separate kind of organization and the government was a separate one and people never thought that it would seize the power of Tibet. People might be thinking it was just a Chinese office.   

**Q:**  At that time, what did you [A1] think about the Preparatory Committee, did you think that was good or bad?   

**A1:**  I didn't think it was good. When they were holding the meetings, I didn't like that, I was not glad.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Dalai Lama was the leader.   

**A2:**  Yes, at that time, he was there, but I thought after a period of time this side [People's Liberation Army] would become higher and higher and that side [Tibetan government] would become lower and lower and it would all be lost.   

**Q:**  At that time, wasn't there any kind of event of opposing it. There was the Mimang Tshogpa before that [answer not finished]   

**A1:**  At that time, there wasn't any large-scale opposition [Tib. ངོ་རྒོལ]. But, in the end, there was the event of opposing.   

**A:**  That was long after that when many Khampas came and it was said that they are going to offer a golden throne to the Dalai Lama. It was said that many people were going to Lhoka and the people in Lhasa weren't involved in that. Probably, people were considering the Khampas and the people in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, [Tib.དབུས་གཙང] as kind of separate and not joined together.   

**A1:**  At that time, the people were kind of fond of the Khampas. When they heard that the Khampas were doing something, they kind of liked them and they were holding a kind of hope.   

**A:**  Later, when we heard that the Khampas were doing something, we were not holding any kind of hope.   

**A1:**  Later, the Khampas were looting [Tib. འཕྲོག] a little bit.   

**A:**  They also raped.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, people were saying those people were the false Chushigangdru.   

**A:**  Who knows.   

**Q1:**  I don't remember the names, but some people told me that the Chushigangdru executed one of the so called false ones.   

**Q:**  Yes, I heard from Gen Yeshe, [Tib. rgan ye sjes] that they executed one person.   

**Q1:**  I think that both might be possible.   

**A:**  When I met those people in 1958, they didn't say that they were false. They said that they were the real Khampas. The Khampas made Tashi Lhamo, [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལྷ་མོ] suffer seriously in Trango [Tib. འཕྲང་སྒོ].   

**Q:**  Probably, that was true, they did those reckless things.   

**A:**  At that time, some people in Lhasa were saying that the Khampas were doing that because their own homeland was lost. They should have fought at the beginning, but they didn't. If they had fought at the beginning in Kham, the situation would not have become like that. People were thinking that the Khampas had let in [Tib. གློད] the Chinese at the beginning.   

**Q:**  Do you think at that time people were thinking in that way? Later, everybody got smarter.   

**A:**  I think even then some people thought like that. I didn't feel positive about that. At that time, the ordinary people were not supporting the Khampas. I heard that all the wives of the Khampas were going to burn the incense and they said that they are going to beat us up if we go to the school. That was told in the school. At that time, I was in the teacher training school. There were several of us in the school. We told them that we are not coming to the school from tomorrow. Please allow us to ask for leave because the Khampas were saying that they are going to beat us up. At that time, they said, "We will send bodyguards for you." and they sent a Chinese bodyguard.   

**Q:**  That would be worse, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was riding a bicycle and coming a little bit away from us and watching us. They said, "There would no problem because he had a gun" At that time, there were many people going to burn incense at Bumpari, [Tib. བུམ་པ་རི] and our school was on the way. We heard that the Khampas were saying that they are going to beat up all the students who were going to the Chinese school.   

**Q:**  What year was that?   

**A:**  That was in 1958. We told them, "When you send the bodyguard for us, that was like telling them that we are here and we are the students of the Chinese school." After that, we didn't go to the school. Taring, [Tib. ཕྲེང་རིང] Beti la and Changö Tashi La [Tib. བྱང་དངོས་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལགས] were also in that school.   

**Q1:**  Probably, they just made many things in the front of the Chinese like the disturbances of the Khampas because the Khampas and the Tibetan Government were working together.   

**Q:**  Some of them were working like that.   

**Q1:**  All people knew that the Drönyerchemmo Phala was working with them. Later, it was said that the Khampas looted many weapons from the monastery. If the government hadn't worked with them, they would not be able to take the weapons. So they made many things at the front of the Chinese to imply that the government didn't meddle in those matters. Many people were saying that the Kashag was involved in that. The Chinese were saying that <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> made the Chushigandru.   

**A:**  Trichang Rinpoche, [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] and Phala were also like that.   

**Q:**  Was that true?   

**A1:**  That was true.   

**Q:**  Did you people know what like your father's politics were?   

**A2:**  I was in India at that time.   

**Q:**  You were back in 1956, right?   

**A2:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Probably, my uncle knew something because my grandmother was always telling uncle Khenjung and JT to go back to Tibet. At that time, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> wrote a letter and told them to stay in India.   

**A2:**  At that time, my grandmother wanted me to become a Tibetan Government Official. Once Yangchen, [Tib. དབྱངས་ཅན] wanted to go to China because at that time many students and children of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> were going to China and they were joining the Theatre groups and it looked happy. At that time, my uncle used to tell me, "Tell Yangchen la that it would be better to go to India than going to China." She was kind of brainwashed and later she said that she is going to India and we came together.   

**Q:**  When did you go to India?   

**A:**  In October 1958.   

**Q:**  How did you go, that was an interesting story I remember.   

**A:**  At that time, the situation had become kind of strict. There was nothing for us because of the name of my uncle. At that moment, the Lhayum, [Tib. ལྷ་ཡུམ] the mother of King of Sikkim and the wife of Rakhashag, [Tib. རགས་ཁ་ཤག] were going to India. We had about three trucks and they rented our trucks and we came along with them. When I arrived at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, I was supposed to be the servant of Rakhashag.   

**Q:**  Was that at the check post?   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't look at us individually. They just counted us like so many servants. So there was no problem. At that time, Yarphel la, [Tib. ཡར་འཕེལ་ལགས] was also with us.   

**Q:**  Were you dressed like a servant or what?   

**A:**  Yes, when we traveled we didn't wear something flashy. We just wore something warm.   

**Q:**  Were you in the car or the truck?   

**A:**  We were all in the truck.   

**Q:**  Were you at the back or the front?   

**A:**  I think we were at the front.   

**Q:**  You were frightened then or not?   

**A:**  I think people were very apprehensive at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> Border post because by that time I think things were like different. We were relieved when we finally got past that check post and crossed the Nathö La [Tib. རྣ་ཐོས་ལ] Pass.   

**Q:**  You were the only two who were escaping?   

**A:**  That's right. And there was Yarphel la, an old friend of ours. He was a Mongolian he just walked out and he was supposed to be going to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲོ་མོ] The Tibetan name for the town that is located on the Sikkim/India border that the Chinese call Yadong.">Tromo</a> Rinchengang, [Tib. གྲོ་མོ་རིན་ཆེན་སྒང].   

**Q1:**  My father did the same. My grandfather had the permission, but my father didn't get permission. But he said nobody was there and he just walked out. I think they were becoming very tight regarding issuing permission at that time.   

**A:**  Even then, I didn't think when we came to India that things will change like that. Later, what did scared us was that when the bride of the Rakhashag came later and told us how [Surkhang] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང་ཆེན་མོ] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang Chenmo was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang Chenmo</a> was being talked about at public meetings. The Chinese were openly critical of him putting him down. This never happened before. After he left the meeting, they were calling him impolitely like "kai" [Tib. ཀས] and "Kho" [Tib. ཁོ] it seemed like that they might arrest him any day.   

**Q:**  At that time, was Rimshi in India?   

**A:**  Only Khenjung was in India. Rimshi was in Tibet. At that point, we were very frightened.   

**Q:**  It was the end, four or five months later, right?   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  When you left, did you hear about the big trouble in Drepung?   

**A:**  No. What happened?   

**Q:**  Well the monks had an internal fighting and they tied some people to the pillar and beat them up. That was the trouble in Gomang.   

**A:**  Did you hear about that?   

**A1:**  Yes, there was such an event. That was probably in 1957.   

**Q:**  That was about paying the salary to the monks who were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དཔེ་ཆ་བ] A monk studying the monastic philosophical curriculum. A scholar monk.">pechawa</a> in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. chöra (ཆོས་ར)] The walled-in grove in monasteries (monastic colleges) where monks go to study/practice debating.">dharma grove</a>, [Tib. ཆོས་ར] and the abbot said that the pechawa were becoming less and less. So if we pay the salary in the dharma grove it would be better, but the ordinary monks refused that.   

**A:**  Did you hear bout that?   

**A1:**  At that time, the Kündeling, [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] Kungö also had a little trouble.   

**Q:**  Yes, he was supporting the pechawa. At that time, two people were expelled from the monastery. Both of them didn't join the Drepung again even after 1959. When they were asked why didn't they join the monastery, they said we were expelled by the Dalai Lama. So we will not join the monastery until we get the permission from the Dalai Lama. One monk was called Wöser Chökyong, [Tib. འོད་ཟེར་ཆོས་སྐྱོང] and the other was called Gyentsen Nyima, [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཉི་མ].   

**A:**  How old are they now?   

**Q:**  They are about 75.   

**A1:**  Are they still alive?   

**Q:**  Yes, Wöser Chokyong was the main leader of the ordinary monks and Gyentsen Nyima was the umdze. The country was falling apart and the monks were worried about how they could get their salary. That was a serious thing.   

**Q1:**  My grandfather was in Kalimpong and after three four months he went back. Nobody knew about that and at that time. Two of the old couples of Taring were not even together. Taring was at work.   

**A:**  When we were in Kalimpong we weren't sure whether Tsharong was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and if he is going to go back or not.   

**Q:**  What did the people in Lhasa think about the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>? It is hard for me to understand what people thought and what was the use of Chushigandru. The People's Liberation Army had three or four million troops. They fought with Jiang Kaisheg who had American arms. Were the people thinking they were hopeless or what? By that time in 1958, they were out in Lhokha.   

**A2:**  At that time, we were in Kalimpong in 1957-58-59. Usually, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Nyendrag la [Tib. ས་འདུ་སྙན་གྲགས] would play mahjong with the Kumar Sab of Tragsho, [Tib. དྲག་ཤོས]. At one time, Nyandrag La and those people also went to Tibet to join the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>. At that time, I was young and I thought that Chushigandru was quite powerful and they could do something.   

**Q:**  Did you think that they were going to get the help from the US?   

**A:**  I didn't have that kind of thought. When Nyendrag la went to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, I thought that the Chushigandru would be able to do quite well. When we were in Kalimpong we heard that the Chushigandru was making war. So we thought that the war would be made for a long time. At that time, Söpal, [Tib. བསོད་དཔལ] and me the girls agreed to go to Tibet with the Red Cross and help the injured people. But, actually we heard that the war was finished in two days.   

**Q:**  Did you hear anything about there was going to be outside aid and it wasn't just the Tibetans fighting by themselves?   

**A2:**  Regarding the outside aid, I heard that a foreigner came to see uncle Khenjung. But, I am not sure who that person was. That was kind of business and that person told Khenjung that if the Tibetans need weapons we will help you to get a lot weapons. My uncle told me that he told that person that my father and all of them are in Tibet. In case they did something about that and if the Chinese happened to know that, they will get into trouble. At that time, if he had got an opportunity to do some kind of business in guns.   

**Q:**  This was when?   

**A2:**  This was in 1957-58.   

**A1:**  Was that the Americans?   

**A2:**  I didn't know whether that was from a government or a private.   

**Q:**  He wanted to sell them, not give them?   

**A:**  He wanted to sell them   

