# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0432.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Surkhang, Chunden Drokar [Tib. ཟུར་ཁང་ཆོས་ལྡན་སྒྲོལ་དཀར], D.Y. Yuthok [Tib. གཡུ་ཐོག་རྡོ་རྗེ་གཡུ་སྒྲོན], and Jamba Tseden (J.T.) Surkhang [zur khang, byams pa tshe brtan]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** USA  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Goldstein [Q]  
**Name:** Surkhang, Chunden Drokar [A]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 55  
**Date of Birth:** 1937  
**Name:** Dorje Yudron Yuthog Lhajam [A1]  
**Gender:** Female  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1912  
**Name:** J.T. Surkhang [A2]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 49  
**Date of Birth:** 1943  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 The interviewee [A] was born in an aristocratic household in the old society. She spent most of her childhood in a Christian boarding school in India and later attended school in Tibet. She finished her education abroad in 1954 and returned home with interviewee [A2]. In Tibet, she enrolled in the Society School. After the Society School was dismissed and replaced by the Lhasa Middle School, she enrolled in the teacher training school in 1955. Throughout the interview, all of the participants discuss spirituality and the clash between the old society and the new customs. All interviewee talk about their experiences during the 1950's, such as the changes in Tibet over the decade, the apprehension to Chinese rule, the tension building between the Chinese and Tibetans, and the revolt in 1959. More personally, interviewee [A1] discusses the public opinion about the Dalai Lama, interviewee [A] describes the problems with giving up traditional Tibetan writing, and interviewee [A2] explains the threat from Khambas on students attending Chinese schools in 1958. The interviewee [A] left Tibet for India in 1958 where she heard of and discussed possible foreign interventions, particularly in the CIA, and the politics of this foreign aid.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0432_02/H_0432_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Did you [A1] hear anything about the hope that the foreign countries were helping the Chushigandru?   

**A1:**  Yes, I heard about that.   

**Q:**  Was there a great hope for that?   

**A1:**  At that time, I heard that the foreign countries were helping us.   

**A:**  Probably, people were thinking like that because at that time Tagtser Rimpoche had already come to this place.   

**Q:**  That was very early when Gyalo Thondub, Shakabpa and Losang Gyentsen had kind of small group [tshogs chung] that was called the Jenkhen Tsisum [gcen mkhan rtsis gsum].   

**A1:**  Yes, at that time, they were in Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  I heard this from Pelsur Jolag. He said Lukhangwa and Losang Tashi had the trouble with the Chinese and they had to resign. He said that he received a letter from Gyalo Thondub in which it was written that we have foreign support so we should not keep quiet and we should keep on opposing the Chinese. That was in 1951-52.   

**A:**  Probably, it was like that because Gyalo La had said on the tape that he didn't go to Taiwan at first and he came to India. When he came to India, all the representatives [sku tshab] came to contact him.   

**Q:**  The foreign representatives?   

**A:**  Yes, that was when he was in India. The representatives of the Indian Government, America, Britain and there was also the representative of Jiang Kaishek. That was before the Chinese came to Tibet. He said they will mobilize and the Tibetan Government should get prepared. He said that he delivered all the messages to the Kashag through a monk official. But, he didn't get any answers from the Kashag. That was the Tibetan representative [don gcod] staying in Kalimpong. He was called the Khenjung Thubten Sangpo.   

**A1:**  Before that he was the Tibetan Representative in China, and after China was lost, he stayed in Kalimpong.   

**A:**  So it seemed that they were helping Tibetans at the beginning. Probably, Gyalo-la told that.   

**Q:**  We don't know what the CIA said. We only know what the government said. Mr Yuthok and Henry Harrer went to a secret meeting held in Calcutta. Rakashag had said to the Americans that you say you are going to help us but we didn't see anything in writing. So the Kashag wanted some thing more concrete. Then the American Ambassador in New Delhi wrote out a letter stating what kind of help the Americans would give. But, they wouldn't give it to the Tibetans. The Tibetan was Yuthok and Henry Harrer translated to Yuthok what the offer was. But then, Yuthok Sawang Chenmo didn't go back . He gave the letter to Gyalo Thondrub. When Gyalo Thondrub went in 1951, he took the notes on that letter. They must have passed them on earlier.   

**A:**  Do you think the CIA was...   

**Q:**  CIA had their own operation.   

**A:**  Before the Chinese actually came into Lhasa, maybe some one helped.   

**Q:**  I think all of those things happened after the Chinese invaded and Chamdo was lost.   

**Q1:**  What he said was the Indian Government said something and the intelligence people with the CIA had another plan.   

**Q:**  The Indians had said that we will let you send arms through. The Americans were eager to send that. But, nobody knew where to send these stuff to which country. You have to have some country like Pakistan to let the U.S. send things as in Afghanistan. But, Pakistan said no, we couldn't help Afghanistan. So for sure Nehru was hundred percent against this. I think he just knew every thing was up to India.   

**Q1:**  But, in the fifties where did they drop the arms from?   

**Q:**  There were not many drops. I think they dropped them from airplanes.   

**Q1:**  they should come by land...   

**A:**  It was from Thailand and Philippines.   

**Q:**  At that time, Thailand and Northern Burma were held by Jiang Kaisheg.   

**A:**  They even dropped people. I met one of those who were dropped first.   

**Q:**  You met him?   

**A:**  I met one of the members who spend twenty some years in prison after he was dropped. He said the first thing they did is that the guy who was their leader went to look up his family. That was his undoing. Then they were just surrounded.   

**Q:**  He was from Kham?   

**A:**  Yes. He said he did fight and several were killed there and those survived were put in the prison. I met him in 1980.   

**Q:**  Do you remember when he was dropped?   

**A:**  That was real early.   

**A2:**  Probably, they were dropped when Gendun [dhge 'dun] was dropped.   

**A:**  Gendun was not dropped. Was he able to come out?   

**A1:**  Probably, he was not dropped.   

**A2:**  So he just got the training.   

**Q:**  It was not clear from any of these how much is the Khambas saying that they had helped and the CIA was saying whatever that they had helped.   

**A:**  The CIA was saying probably the Khambas are always ready to believe...   

**Q:**  I think Gyalo Thondub might have exaggerated. I am not sure.   

**Q1:**  Chushigandru was saying that they dropped them on this side and there...   

**Q:**  I think that was a small amount. The monks I talked to when I asked them what did you think is going to happen, they said, "We thought that the Chushigandru will fight for a month or a month and a half. Then the U.S. was going to help in a big way; not in the small way like with a few guns. That was what was going to happen." They were not unhopeful. Thousands of them stayed there and the monastery didn't move out. Where did they get that? Somebody told them that. What I was told from somebody who was a high official in the Administration said at that time, the CIA was so anti-communist that they were perfectly capable and cynical to use the Tibetans to tie up Chinese troops. They were doing this in Taiwan and Burma and just trying all the areas around China to have trouble everywhere.   

**A:**  So the Chinese troops would be kept busy?   

**Q:**  To keep them occupied and he said that they were perfectly capable of lying to Tibetans simply to get them to do things which would fit their anti-communist goals. He thinks that they were trying to buy these guys. The document they would never get, but they were trying to one person who were doing it.   

**A:**  They trained some where in Arizona, right?   

**Q:**  That was in Colorado. Those things we know, but we don't know what they were promising because you have people in Kalimpong telling the people in Tibet that we have help. We don't know are they just wishful thinking? Because what the State Department was saying was nothing like that.   

**A:**  They said we never promised any thing?   

**Q:**  Not very important, nothing like military aid. They weren't even willing initially to invite the Dalai Lama and the high official to America. Only at the very end Tibetan said weren't accepted any thing. They said bring 200 people to America. The government was telling " we think you should flee, but you should go to Sri Lanka or go to Thailand or something like that. That was the offer at the very end. That was literally after the Dalai Lama had come back to Tibet. What the CIA was doing nobody knows, but they were independent at that time.   

**A:**  Gyalo la said that they promised to bring the Dalai Lama over to the US. And Gyalo la himself met Eisenhower. Did you think he met Eisenhower?   

**A2:**  I don't know.   

**Q:**  That was Truman.   

**A:**  I mean Truman, sorry. Gyalo la said that he met him and he wanted to send him to school in Stratford and he received a lot of preferential treatment. He told them that he is going to Tibet. He can't just think of his own personal well being and he went back to Lhasa. He said that he considered every government official except Lukhangwa and Losang Tashi Chinese puppets.   

**A2:**  He said that they were duped [mgo 'khor] by Chinese money.   

**Q:**  That's why it is so important to see what the country was really offering because people like him tried to just create whatever every image they want to create about who is to be blamed sowing the blame somewhere else. I have seen all the documents. But it's hard for me to believe that there was any serious offers...finally Dalai Lama left... I could see that there was a reasonable idea to stay and that wasn't completely idiotic. Certainly a lot of aristocrats like Phala and ...[A2] were saying "Don't go back." I mean at that time, ...[A2] didn't even go back and stopped in Gyantse, wasn't that correct?   

**Q1:**  I am asking ... [A1]. In 1956, the King of Sikkim invited the Dalai Lama to India. At the time of the Buddha Jayanti, Ngabö and all of them came to India. At that time, probably there were a lot of internal talks among them. What did you hear about that?   

**A1:**  At that time, Yuthok Kungo and one representative from each of the big monasteries came and at that time, probably, Yuthok had told the Dalai Lama something kind of good about not to go back and it would be better to stay in India.   

**Q1:**  Other than Yuthok who were there among the people who told him not to go back to Tibet?   

**A1:**  Lukhangwa and those people might have told him not to go back to Tibet.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Chinese leader Zhou Enlai also came there. He was a leader of the Chinese Communist Party and he came to India on his way going somewhere else. Probably, he told that there would be no problem to postpone the reform for 5-6 years. Did you hear about that?   

**A1:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  Did you hear about this. I heard clearly that at that time Shakabpa and those people were saying that we had support from the foreign countries and they were working continuously. At that point, Ngapo came over and said "if you really have the support from the foreign countries, I am staying here I am not going back. What kind of proof do you have? What would they do for you and who will do it for you? At that moment, they didn't say anything.   

**A:**  They didn't have any thing to prove.   

**Q:**  Probably, Ngabö said that if they really had the support, he will stay there. That was quite widely spread [skad grags chen po].   

**A1:**  He talked strongly about that...   

**Q:**  I am a foreigner, so I didn't know about that. That's why I am asking you?   

**A1:**  I didn't hear about that.   

**A:**  What year was that?   

**Q:**  That was the time of the Buddha Janyanti.   

**A2:**  hat was the time, when it was said that the Nehru gave an advice to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  At that time, Zhou Enlai said that we will not cause any trouble and we will not implement the reform. When Ngabö said that Lukhangwa and Shagapa those were not quite clear [gsal po] about that.   

**A:**  They didn't have documents to show. Can you interview Ngabö?   

**Q:**  I am trying to do that.   

**A:**  Now, there is only Ngabö left. That was the time when Gyalo Thondub was not there.   

**A1:**  Probably, he was not there.   

**Q:**  Gyalo Thondub was interested in...   

**A:**  Today, Gyalo Thondub is irrelevant. I don't want say about that...   

