# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0040.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Ngabö, Ngawang Jigme [Tib. ང་ཕོད, ངག་དབང་འཇིགས་མེད]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , Beijing/China  
**Date of Interview:** October 19, 1995  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein  
**Name:** Ngabö, Ngawang Jigme [Tib. ང་ཕོད, ངག་དབང་འཇིགས་མེད]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 85  
**Date of Birth:** 1910  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Ngabö was a Shape who was the Governor-General in Chamdo at the time of the Chinese invasion in 1950 and then the head of the negotiating delegation in Beijing who concluded the 17-Point Agreement. He was one of the most important senior officials in the Tibetan government. In this interview, Ngabö discusses the the events surrounding the 17-Point Agreement, the Tibetan reaction to the Agreement and some thoughts about Chushigandru and the 1950s.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0040_01/H_0040_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Can I ask you a question directly?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, in 1951, when you came back from Beijing to Tibet after signing the 17-Point Agreement did you think that the Tibetan government could remain continuously?   

**A:**  [Laughter] Regarding this, there wasn't any other way for Tibet to go. For example, in the beginning, they cut off the relationship with the People's Republic of China. In 1949, the Tibetan government sent three groups of representatives to the foreign countries of Great Britain, America, India and Nepal. To India and Nepal, they were sent together. The representatives told those countries that the Chinese Communist Party was about to do that [invade] Tibet. "So it would not be okay if all of you do not help us." At that time, there were three representatives [three groups]. Each consisted of a monk and lay official. There was Yuthok, Tashi Thondrup, Dingja and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཐའི་ཇི] A third rank official in the Tibetan government.">Teiji</a> Tsesum Phunkhang. Each had a monk official with them. I don't remember the monk officials. One group had not left but two groups had left. However,when one of the groups reached Gyantse and one had reached Phari, America, Britain and India, those countries sent a message through the Indian Embassy saying, "Do not send them. We cannot help you because this is an internal affair between Tibet and China and you have to hold talks." The thing was that Tibet itself didn't have the strength, and the foreign countries were not helping it (Tibet), so it was finished. That's what happened. But, still we were hoping, and at that time, the Governor General was Lhalu and I was the new one (Governor General). I was sent down there (to Chamdo) in 1950. I departed from Lhasa on the 21st of the 5th Tibetan month and I came down to Chamdo. At that time the situation was unstable [Tib. ལྡང་ངི་ལྡིང་ངེ] and people were saying that maybe there will be a disturbance and maybe not. Then in the beginning of October, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> came up (from China) and all the people were scattered and there was nothing; there was no way to go. The PLA were going through Kham and also going through Xinjiang and also going through this side. They were going in three groups. When I was there in Chamdo, we thought there will be a big disturbance and we discussed this and I said it is not okay for the (Tibetan) soldiers to go beyond Lho dzong. We are going to tell the local government to have peace talks. If you don't listen to this, it is your choice. But it will be better to hold peace talks because when the thing called war happens, it will cause a lot of hardship. When we said that, they said okay, you can hold talks. At that time there were about 37-38 people, but it was said that there were 41-42 local (Tibet) government <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> officials there. Then we all signed it (a letter) and sent it up (to Lhasa), and later they said they will hold peace talks. That's how the Agreement was signed. We were thinking that something good will happen (as a result of it). Anyway, there were two things in it: one thing was getting united with China. This was the principle thing. Second (it said) that according to the Tibetan people's opinions, when the Tibetan people say that they want to reform the system, the higher classes (elites) should think about it and do it through consultation. One should not use force and tell the people to do it. It was said like that, so we were hoping that things will go in a stable manner. This was our hope. Otherwise, we did not have any path to go on.  

**Q:**  After you arrived in Lhasa, what kind of suggestions or methods did you put forward to the Dalai Lama, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, and the kalön?   

**A:**  I was saying that, "If you work according to the Agreement, there will not be a problem." This was what I told them. At that time, there were much talk and there was the problem [of] whether they would accept the 17-Point Agreement or not. We had just signed the Agreement over there but it was not signed after the Dalai Lama and the Local Tibetan government totally accepted it, right? Therefore, the matter of whether it would be accepted or not depended on up there (leaders in Lhasa). Even when we were here [in Beijing], we were saying that, "We the representatives have signed the Agreement, but as for the matter of whether it will be accepted or not, [this] depends on the Dalai Lama and it is not certain whether he will accept it or not. Therefore, if the Dalai Lama does not accept it, since the Agreement is signed, it is there, so the Dalai Lama would not be able to stay in Tibet and he would probably go to India or another foreign country. (Then) He would watch the situation in Tibet, and if he thought it was good, he could come back. So we need this time. The government of the People's Republic of China should accept this." (That he might leave and then later decide to come back). This was what we told them (the Chinese) and they accepted it. We said that it is not okay to put in the Agreement, because the Agreeement should be publicized, so we can made a side agreement. So we made a side-agreement with seven points. This was mentioned in that. When we arrived in Lhasa, we were suspicious of whether the Dalai Lama would accept it or not. If he didn't accept it, he would go (abroad). The point was that he would be allowed to go outside. After going there, if he thinks the situation in Tibet is good and okay, he can come back. And the Central Committee must accept that his position and power will remain as before. That was the main point.   

**Q:**  Your opinion was that we should implement the Agreement, but what were the thoughts of the other kalön and the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>? I don't know about their goals.   

**A:**  After we got back, nobody was openly telling us that this was not okay. But the appearance was not good because they had spread many talks (rumors) and the masses saying that we the representatives had eaten (taken) a lot of money (bribes) from China and signed the Agreement.   

**Q:**  You came to Lhasa on September 10-11th 1951, [right]?   

**A:**  No, it was in July. I don't remember the date. At that time, it was not certain whether the Agreement would be accepted or not, but we were telling the Central Committee that it would be accepted. At that time, we had to show the Central Committee our attitude about whether the Dalai Lama will accept it or not, so we said he will accept it. By this time, Wang Qimei had already arrived in Lhasa, but it was confirmed that Zhang Guohua, who was the Army Commander [Ch. jun zhang] and Tan Guansan, who was the Political Commissar [Ch. zheng wei] will arrive in October. Zhang Jingwu, the representative (of the Central Committee), had arrived and he said, "Before they [Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan] arrive in Lhasa, the matter of whether [or not] the Agreement will be accepted should be confirmed." At that time, there were the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and they said that they cannot make the decision and that the decision should be made by the Large Abbreviated Assembly. This assembly was presided over by the four trunyichemmo and the four tsipön; and the kalön would not attend it. And we, the five representatives, said that please allow us to attend this meeting and they said it is okay. So we attended the meeting. Our purpose of going there was because they were making a (false) accusation [Tib. ཞ་མོ་གཡོགས] against us saying that the Chinese government gave us a lot of money and bought us. This talk was widespread, so the five of us went there and told them how the negotiation was started and how in between we had disagreements, and how it ended. We signed the Agreement for Tibet and not for our private matters. Some people were saying that we were bought by them paying money and that we have brought the things that we were given. As for me being the main representative, they gave me a photo of Chairman Mao and as the gift, a box of red tea, a roll of yellow satin and the other ones were given the photo but the tea box was smaller and there was lesser satin And we brought of these things and said that these are the things that they bought us. All you people know that these could not buy us. Whether you accept it or not, you, the Assembly, must think about it. You should not listen to such talk. We said that at the meeting and told them to make a decision and then we left. And then the Assembly said they will accept the 17-Point Agreement and the Dalai Lama sent that telegram to Chairman Mao.   

**Q:**  Did the Dalai Lama send the telegram to Chairman Mao right after the meeting? I thought that you had been sending messages for a couple of weeks.   

**A:**  No. After the meeting was over, they submitted the statement to the Dalai Lama and after seeing it, he sent the telegram. It was not delayed for so long.   

**Q:**  Can you tell us about the signing of the 17-Point Agreement? For example, when we Americans would deal with big matters like losing a war, at this time they would gather all the high leaders and talk with each other and discuss what methos would be better. Then one path would be confirmed and the government would implement it. I think Tibet didn't have anything like that.   

**A:**  In the past in Tibet, the Assembly would make the decision.   

**Q:**  No, I (didnt) mean the meeting that decided to accept the Agreement, but I was thinking of day-to-day policy; the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were always showing an angry attitude, and they never showed a friendly expression towards Zhang Guohua and those people. You had a different [way of] thinking, and the other kalön also had different thoughts and the Dalai Lama also had different thoughts. It seems that they (the sitsab) didn't have the thought of solidarity and didn't have one unified policy. At that time, Chairman Mao said that after they reached Tibet, not to make them go on the socialist path right away and to not harm the religion. When the Central Committee said that all people, whether they liked it or not, had to implement it-it seems to me that in 1951-52, in Tibet, they didn't have a clear policy and method. Was it like that?   

**A:**  Actually, it was clear, but in between, they were doing that kind of work. For example, the Dalai Lama sent the telegram (to Mao) almost at the beginning of October 1951, right? After that, there was no trouble, but in between that, there were some people saying that they were representatives of the People's Association and that caused trouble. This was just made up. The aristocrats internally were not talking to each other. The so-called False People's Association came out and the Chinese were saying that it was false. They also set up the People's Association in the beginning of 1952. This was the cause for the two Sitsab to be demoted.   

**Q:**  I think it was not only the masses, [but] from the beginning, the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> also showed an angry attitude toward the Chinese military officers. (For example) they didn't sell them barley even though Tibet had a lot of barley if they would collect it temporarily. So you were saying that we should implement the Agreement, and on the other side, the government was doing something different? Was this a [government] policy or [did] each individual have a policy?   

**A:**  This was an individual's policy and not a basic [Tib. རྩ་བའི] core policy.  

**Q:**  What were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> and Lobsang Tashi thinking? I think if they didn't like the Central Committee, they could have made war and fought to the end. This would have been understandable. But how could they benefit from showing an angry/ unfriendly expression even [though] the war was lost? What was their hope [doing this]? They were not fools, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  According to me, I think it would have been good to find a method according to the situation. But what would have been their hope? What do you think the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were doing?   

**A:**  This was what the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were doing secretly regarding the people (the masses). At that time, there was talk in Tibet saying that the Communist Party would listen to whatever the people said. So they thought that if the government, the aristocrats, said something, they wouldn't listen, but if the people said it, they would listen. Therefore, they said that they were the representatives of the people, although it was not the majority of the people/ masses [Tib. དམངས]. It was (really) the group of people in between (the masses and the elite). We don't know who was asked to do this. Anyway, a group of people had been collected and there were a few leaders. They were like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> (managers) and the stewards of the aristocrats, and they said that the coming of the People's Liberation Army was not right and they should return. There was no talk about whether the Agreement would be accepted or not.   

**Q:**  In their petition, did they (the Pople's Association) write that they wanted genuine autonomy or complete independence for Tibet?   

**A:**  No, they didn't write that.   

**Q:**  Did they write that they wanted [things to be] like [during] the Qing Dynasty?   

**A:**  No, they didn't. The main point was to withdraw the People's Liberation Army.   

**Q:**  Did they write that they could leave a few soldiers?   

**A:**  They didn't talk about a few soldiers. They just said the People's Liberation Army troops should be withdrawn.   

**Q:**  When they submitted the petition to the Kashag, what did you think in the beginning?   

**A:**  They submitted the petition to the Kashag and they also submitted [one copy] to the Tibetan Work Committee [Ch. gong wei]. At that time, there were different thoughts internally. Some said that this was not good abd that this was just instigating trouble. Some thought that it would be beneficial.   

**Q:**  Do you mean in the Kashag?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Who were there in the Kashag then?   

**A:**  There was Surkhang.   

**Q:**  At that time, Surkhang was not in India, right?   

**A:**  He had probably come to Lhasa then, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་པ] The family name of a well known aristocratic monk official who was a Kalön.">Ramba</a> Kalön Lama, Lhalu, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> and I were there. There were also the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་ཚབ] An acting Kalön.">katsab</a>, Shasur and Thubden Ramyang who were appointed when the Dalai Lama went to Yadong. At that time there were about seven kalön.  

**Q:**  Who was saying that the petition was not good?   

**A:**  There were just a few of us thinking in that way. The majority had something internally (that they were thinking that the petition was good).   

**Q:**  Later, you people got the petition, right? Then did you submit it to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, we reported it to the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>. And the sitsab, the kalön and the representatives of the Central Committee held meetings many times in the Labrangteng [Tib. བླ་བྲང་སྟེང] [on top of the Jokhang]. We talked during many meetings regarding this matter. At that time, Sitsab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> acted very tough [Tib. མཁྲེགས་པོ]. The main person was Lukhangwa who spoke out frankly. Therefore, later it was said that this was made by the two sitsab, "So it would not be okay if you don't demote them."   

**Q:**  This year I went to Dharamsala and the Dalai Lama said that all of you kalön went to the Dalai Lama and submitted a petition for demoting the sitsab. How did this start?   

**A:**  This was after we talked to each other many times, and there were also the representatives of the three great monasteries. There were not many other aristocrats. All the incumbent and ex-abbots of the three great monasteries were at the meeting. There were the Kashag, the four trunyichemmo and the four tsipön. We talked about this many times. We didn't report it to the Dalai Lama and we talked to each other many times with the representative of the Central Committee. Finally, Zhang Jingwu insisted, saying, "This will not be okay at all. The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were the people who did all of the instigation in this. So if you demote them, it is okay with us. If you do not do that, it will not be okay." When we were holding the meeting in the Kashag, the abbots of the three great monasteries told me, "Please go to the Chinese and do something so that the two sitsab do not get demoted." So I said, "Okay, I will talk with them," and I went to Yuthok (House) purposely and told them, "As for the People's Association, we can punish them in whatever way we would like to. But as for the two sitsab, all the people like them and in the past, they were the better ones, so please leave them as before." But they [Chinese] said that "This is not at all acceptable because from the beginning, since the People's Liberation Army arrived in Tibet, the two sitsab have only done bad things to us and they haven't implemented even one point [of the Agreement], like not selling (us) grain. The two of them were the ones who made all of the obstacles. If you don't demote them, the relationship between Tibet and China will not be good. So don't say that. Whether you say [ask] this or not, we can't do anything." (No matter what you say to us we can't do anything). Then I went to the Kashag and told this to all the kalöns. I said, "You can do whatever you want to. I don't have anything to do (anything else to tell you)." Then we reported to the Dalai Lama that it would not be okay if he didn't demote the sitsab. Then the Dalai Lama agreed and demoted them.   

**Q:**  Sometimes, I used to think that the history of Tibet was kind of strange, and the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were the people who caused the trouble most, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Actually, when they appointed the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, the kalön should have become the sitsab. So in 1950, when the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, the kalön didn't want to stay in Lhasa. Therefore, the sitsab were appointed from among other officials and they were left in Lhasa and all of the kalön went to Yadong. But when the kalön got back to Lhasa, the sitsab came on top of them [higher in rank]. So it was difficult to get rid of them. According to my point of view, if two of the kalön had become the sitsab in 1950, later there would not have been trouble like that. [Would] this [have been] possible?   

**A:**  If the Dalai Lama was there, it was okay to not have the sitsab. But when the Dalai Lama was not there, there should have been a lama appointed as the regent, or there would have been a person appointed as the prime minister [Tib. སྲིད་བློན]. This was a custom from the early times. When the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and all the Kashag went together, new ones were appointed to all of them [to fill all of their positions]. This was the basic custom.   

**Q:**  No, I think that the kalön made some of their subordinates get on top of them.   

**A:**  Yes, it seems like this, but there was no choice, but to appoint them because we needed a prime minister.   

**Q:**  I have a different question. The Panchen Lama came to Tibet in 1952, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, I heard that there was a big problem when the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama met for the first time, and the Labrang people were very agitated. They said that the Panchen Lama did not need to prostrate to the Dalai Lama and did not need to sit on the platform and the throne. I heard that you talked with the Labrang as the representative of the Kashag about the ceremonial custom. Would you tell me a little bit about this?   

**A:**  There was the trouble in the past. There is only a 3-4 year difference between the ages of the present Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama. This is a different matter. According to the ancient custom, if the Dalai Lama is older and the Panchen Lama is younger, and if the Dalai Lama had recognized and named the Panchen Lama, the Panchen Lama has to prostrate to the Dalai Lama when they meet. If it is the present Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama, even then, the Panchen Lama has to prostrate to the Dalai Lama. According to the custom in the past, normally, the Dalai Lama would get down from the throne and the Panchen Lama would have to prostrate to him when he would come up. This was kind of a religious custom called thangshe [Tib. ཐང་བཤད]. The Dalai Lama would pull his shawl down on his arms, and he would bend down and show his respect when the Panchen Lama prostrated. Actually, since the Dalai Lama is older, the Panchen Lama should have prostrated and the Dalai Lama should have shown respect by going like this with his hands (holding hands together in respect). But, at that time, there was a lot of trouble regarding the height of the throne. In the past, there was a history at the time of the 7th or 8th Panchen Lama when they made the thrones with the same height for two of them. We had been talking about the height of the throne for many years. So we were saying, "We shouldn't do this. They can meet in the room and the Panchen Lama doesn't need to prostrate in the assembly hall, and the Dalai Lama doesn't need to go like this with his hands. They can just touch their foreheads to each other and sit in the room. It would be good to meet in this way." And it was decided to do this.   

**Q:**  But in the beginning, didn't they get agitated? I heard they came to an agreement, but the Tibetan government didn't implement it. So they became agitated.   

**A:**  No, there wasn't such a case. At first, when the Panchen Lama came, the kalön and those people went to receive him, and the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> should have come to the top of the stone steps in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, but they were probably kind of late, though it was not the case that they didn't come. For this, they felt something, [they were] a little bit [agitated]. Otherwise, there wasn't anything else.   

**Q:**  I saw in the movie that the Dalai Lama was standing on the stage and the Panchen Lama was standing below that, and there was quite a big gap.   

**A:**  Where was this?   

**Q:**  This was in the assembly hall [Tib. ཚོམ་ཆེན] when the Panchen Lama came for the first time. This was when the Panchen Lama was offering the Tensum [Tib. རྟེན་གསུམ]. The Dalai Lama was standing on the stage and when you look from a distance, the Dalai Lama looks big and the Panchen Lama looks small. I just heard about this a lot. I am not sure if that is true or not.   

**A:**  [Laughter] This is probably not true. From the beginning, we got rid of this and they met in the Dalai Lama's room sitting, facing each other, and a table was placed in between [them]. When he left, the Panchen Lama sought the Dalai Lama's hand blessing [Tib. ཕྱག་དབང] and the Dalai Lama, in return, touched his forehead to the Panchen Lama's forehead. They didn't do that at all. There wasn't any trouble. This is totally a lie.   

**Q:**  That's why I am asking you. I hear many reckless things and most of them are lies. After the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were demoted, the Kashag got total power, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  At that time, what was the ideology of the Kashag? During the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, it was kind of opposing the PRC. After the sitsab were demoted, you Kashag probably had a talk about what you ought to do.   

**A:**  After they were demoted, there weren't any problems at all, and there wasn't a single event [conflict] that happened.   

**Q:**  Even if there wasn't any trouble, there should have been a policy because there were still many paths to go [on]. One was to help the masses and make some changes as soon as possible, and the other one was that it would be better to not make the changes right away. There should have been an ideology.   

**A:**  The ideology was that the Tibetan people, the farmers, and the nomads-all the people knew that they had hardships. On the one hand, they levied many taxes on the fields and there were a lot of barley loans given by the government, and also [ones from] private [sources like] the three great monasteries and the other monasteries, and they were receiving interest for that. Interest was like 20 percent (ngakye [Tib. ལྔ་སྐྱེད]), and there was also a 25 percent (shikye [Tib. བཞི་སྐྱེད]). When people couldn't pay the interest, the interest was added to the principal. For example, if a household had taken 10 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</a> of barley [in] loans, after many years, it would have become about one hundred khe because they couldn't pay [off] the loan. There were also many taxes. The reason for the taxes was because the districts and the estates would deliver a certain amount of income to the government and they would keep the remainder for themselves, so they were collecting things as much as they could. If we couldn't solve these problems, then it would be difficult to implement the democratic reforms. This was the opinion of the Kashag, and [so] we set up the Reform Conference (legjö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> [Tib. ལེགས་བཅོས་ཚོགས་འདུ]). This conference did this kind of works, like having all the districts and the estates managed by the government.   

**Q:**  When did you start doing this?   

**A:**  This was started at the end of 1952 and put it into action in 1953. The lay and monk officials going to the districts and estates were paid a salary, and they had to deliver all the income they collected to the government.   

**Q:**  When did you start this new law?   

**A:**  It was started at the end of 1953. Also all of the old loans that had been taken 4-5 years before were exempted, no matter if they were [from] the government or were private [loans], but it was said that the loans taken that were out only three years before should be paid. When the loans were exempted, all of the people became happier. And it was decided that the horse corvée and the pack animal corvée transportation [system] should be paid as a transportation fee.   

**Q:**  Did you have talks about dividing the fields?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have that talk.   

**Q:**  During the years 1952-1959, from whom would the Dalai Lama seek advice?   

**A:**  Mainly, there were the personal attendants [Tib. སྐུ་བཅར] of the Dalai Lama, like the three officials in charge of clothes, food, and religious offerings [Tib. གསོལ་གཟིམ་མཆོད་གསུམ]. Actually, the Jigyab Khembo should have been the advisor, but at that time, the Jigyab Khembo was the Dalai Lama's brother, Lobsang Samden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན] and he himself was young. The Dalai Lama mainly trusted Shasur and me, and we were doing our best with giving him [advice].   

**Q:**  What was Phala doing?   

**A:**  He was also doing that.   

**Q:**  Phala had relations with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> and he kind of had a secret group, and I think he was the main person who opposed the PRC.   

**A:**  Yes, he was one of the main persons opposing the PRC. Probably, he might have been telling some different things to the Dalai Lama also. I don't know for sure.   

**Q:**  Normally, would the Kashag meet the Dalai Lama once a month or once a week or what?   

**A:**  This was not certain. When the Dalai Lama was staying in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, every Thursday, the Kashag would meet in Norbulinga, and if we had something to report, we would do that. When there were some special things, the Dalai Lama would call the Kashag. When the Kashag had some special things to report, we would report that we were going to visit the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Did you have a rule of making a summary of the work for each week and reporting it?   

**A:**  No, we didn't have that. We just submitted the report right away at that time.   

**Q:**  Although the Dalai Lama was the main leader of the government, he probably didn't know about all things clearly, right?   

**A:**  He should have known a little bit about the root of the (different) matters, but he would not (have) known all the things completely.   

**Q:**  For example, the Dalai Lama and you people went to China in 1954, right? At that time, you people talked with the PRC and it was confirmed to set up the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region. It seems to me that at that time, the Dalai Lama and the Kashag had a little bit of enthusiasm and hope for going on the path of the democratic reforms and making some changes.   

**A:**  This was not the case. The point is that it was written in the 17-Point Agreement about setting up the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. At that time, all people were opposing it a little bit and it was unable to be set up. So in 1954, when the Dalai Lama came here, Chairman Mao met the Dalai Lama and he told the Dalai Lama first, and then he told the Panchen Lama, "First of all, you are probably a little bit suspicious of setting up the Military Administrative Committee. Secondly, in the PRC, the Military Administrative Committees are being withdrawn, so there is no need to set it up (in Tibet). You should set up the Preparatory Committee of the Tibet Autonomous Region and you should get prepared for setting up the Tibet Autonomous Region. This was told to Dalai Lama in person. So the Dalai Lama said that this was good and when this was told to the Panchen Lama, he also said the same thing. Then we gathered together and discussed how to set it up and about the personnel. At that time, as for the representatives from the local government, [there] was me and Liushar [Tib. སྣེཨུ་ཤར], and there were several of us. From the Panchen Lama's side, there was Che Jigme [Tib. ཅེས་འཇིགས་མེད] and Denlhun. From the Chamdo side, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] and the Chinese Wang Qimei. We met for many days and discussed whether it would be appropriate to set up the Tibet Autonomous Region. Then we reported about setting up the Preparatory Committee and it was approved during the 7th session of the State Council [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང] of the Central Committee. That's how it was confirmed.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama himself decided to accept it, right?   

**A:**  Chairman Mao told the Dalai Lama and he said, "It will be okay and I will tell them."   

**Q:**  When you got back, the trouble of the Khambas had started, right?   

**A:**  This trouble was after the Preparatory Committee was set up (i.e., mid 1956).   

**Q:**  Yes, they did that continuously, right? Regarding this matter, what kind of talks did the Kashag have with the Dalai Lama? I think there was one group saying that it would not be good to leave the Khambas in Lhasa, and that we had to do something. But some people might have had different thoughts. In reality, did you discuss this in the Kashag?   

**A:**  There was no discussion in the Kashag.   

**Q:**  That is strange.   

**A:**  Later, after the disturbance in Chamdo occurred, Tsurphu Karmapa [Tib. མཚུར་བུ་ཀར་མ་པ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Tobgye, and I, went there to stop the disturbance. We we did a lot of work in Chamdo. But it was not done completely and it was left uncertain [Tib. ལྡང་ངི་ལྡིང་ངི]. After that, many Khambas from Chinese territory came to Lhasa.   

**A:**  This matter of the Chinese territory is a different matter.   

**Q:**  It is different, but when they came to Tibet, it became a Tibetan issue.   

**A:**  No. The main cause was that the democratic reforms were done too early and they were not done well. Therefore, in 1957, when the Dalai Lama went to India, the Premier (Zhou Enlai) went there and it was reported to him that "The cause of the revolt in Tibet was Chushigandru. If they were left there [in Sichuan] untouched and good, there would not have been this [disturbance]. All of the garbage [Tib. གད་སྙིགས] from down there was put in Tibet and then they launched the disturbance in Tibet. All of this was caused from down there. Otherwise, there wasn't any basis for things to happen like that in Tibet because the democratic reforms were not being implemented in Tibet. When the Preparatory Committee was set up, Chen Yi said that it would be good to get prepared to do the reforms, and there was a little bit of talk about that. But it was said that we couldn't do that for the time being. The democratic reforms down there were not done well, so this thing happened.   

**Q:**  But when the Khambas came to Tibet carrying guns, I think that in 1957-58, if the Tibetan government had taken action, it would have been good, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When the Khambas were carrying guns and making war, the Tibetan government did not take action for one's own nationality, like banishing them, or making them gather together and leaving them in the north; and they didn't move them (out oif Lhasa).   

**A:**  This was what happened.   

**Q:**  I think the Tibetan government was kind of wrong about this.   

**A:**  Yes, this was wrong. But at that time, internally, we didn't get along too well and there was trouble.   

**Q:**  Do you mean internal trouble? Do you mean people had different thoughts?   

**A:**  Yes, it [the government] became different in thinking. So there wasn't anybody doing things about the matter of the Khambas.   

**Q:**  I think if they sent soldiers and the leaders gave the order, they would have shot [the Khambas] because the Tibetans and the Khambas didn't have solidarity.   

**A:**  This is not certain.   

**Q:**  Some of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a>, like Tashi Bera, were opposing the Chinese, but he was there, and they couldn't demote him or give him a promotion with no power, and, actually, they should have appointed a depön who was trustworthy to themselves. This was a custom spread all over (the world).   

**A:**  As you have saidd, the Kham trouble was not that small. When I went to Chamdo to do the work, you know <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྤོམ་མདའ] The abbreviated name of a Khamba trading family (Pandatsang), one branch of whom became lay officials in the Tibetan government.">Panda</a> Yambe [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་ཡར་འཕེལ], who was a very close friend? [He] told me, "It is useless to go there. It isn't something that can be achieved." When I asked why, he said, "In 1956, when the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up, the main person who launched the revolt was [Note: There is a long thinking pause when trying to think of the leader of the Chamdo Revolt]- the guy was from Derge, on the west side of the Yangtse River. He was a tusi [Ch. tu si]." [Note: This is a nationality minority, hereditary headman appointed by the Yuan, Ming and Qing Dynasty.] I can't think of his name. He came as a delegate to Lhasa when the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up. When he was there, he went to the Dalai Lama's relative, Lobsang Samden, who is now dead. He went to Lobsang Samden and asked, "Now, how should we proceed? What does the Dalai Lama think? We have a plan to start an uprising. What should we do?" Lobsang Samden la said, "Do what you want to satisfy your desires. Here I will take action so that the Dalai Lama supports this." [Tib. ཁྱེད་རང་ཚོས་འདོད་པ་གང་ཡོད་བྱེད་ཤོག]. That is what Lobsang Samden himself said.   

**Q:**  Is that really true?   

**A:**  Oh yes, absolutely. There is no mistake. When I returned from Chamdo, I went to the Dalai Lama and told him all about what Lobsing Samden said. I said to him, "This is what they are saying and this is the cause of the disturbance. The Dalai Lama is still around, you can go to ask him about this. I went directly to Dalai Lama and told him this straight [forwardly]." He replied, "Are they saying things like this? I said, "Yes, this is what they are saying. When I went to Kham, I learned this clearly. So the situation has come to have trouble like this."   

**Q:**  That is very strange.   

**A:**  Yes. I told this to the Dalai Lama; (I told him) that a person said such a thing, and he said, "He shouldn't have said that. [Tib. དེ་འདྲ་ལབ་ནི]."   

**Q:**  Did the Dalai Lama know about this?   

**A:**  I don't know if the Dalai Lama knew. How could I know?   

**Q:**  If he wasn't aware of this, would Lobsang Samden have dared to say that?   

**A:**  How should I know, but he definitely said that. I haven't said this to others. You came specially to question me this time, so I've told you. Otherwise, I haven't said this. It is really true. You go back and ask the Dalai Lama and he will remember it.   

**Q:**  After that, things got worse and worse?   

**A:**  After that, things became more and more serious. And internally, there was nobody suppressing them, though it wasn't that they could not suppress them. And then the guns that were at Shang Ganden Chöngor (monastery) were taken (in 1958) and the guns in Lhasa were taken secretly. Internally, everything was rotten. That's the way it was. It was made [rotten] by all.   

**Q:**  In 1951, you people signed the 17-Point Agreement, and since you lost the war, it was okay. And then after you got to Lhasa, you thought that it would be good if we put the Agreement into action, right? The Dalai Lama told me that he was in favor of making new [changes] and helping the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> (peasants) and doing reforms, et. cetera.   

**A:**  Yes, the Dalai Lama did not at all like the old society of Tibet.   

**Q:**  But in 1959, many bad things happened with the revolt, and many people killed each other and the Tibetan monasteries were closed. So during these eight years, from the time of the 17-Point Agreement, what was the greatest mistake of the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  The Tibetan government's greatest mistake was that when <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> came (from Sichuan to Lhasa), they didn't stop them. That was their greatest mistake. They should have stopped that. We were clearly telling the Central Committee this, but they were not attentive [Tib. བདག་པོ་རྒྱག་གི་ཡོད་མ་རེད] [literally, they were not taking ownership of this problem]. The reason for this was that if we had to do democratic reforms, then the democratic reforms had to be done. There was no way to avoid this because we had to equalize the livelihood of all the people a little bit. The Tibetan people were extremely poor and suffering from great hardships, so the democratic reforms should have been done gradually and slowly by not hurting the high ranking (elite) and the monasteries very much. We had to do this well. So when the Kham situation and events occurred, I reported to the Central Committee, "This work was a complete mistake. The democratic reforms should be done from Tibet downwards and should not be done from down there (Amdo/Kham) upwards (to Tibet). The basic situation and main things lie with Tibet proper. Tibet has a large area, and Chushigandru doesn't have that much power and wealth. We should make the situation in Tibet calm and in accordance with the people's thinking, and do the democratic reforms in a nice way. If we had done it from up there downwards, there would not have been any problems." That's what we suggested. But, they did it here [in Kham] and the disturbance took place here, and all of the garbage from here was dumped into Tibet. That's what happened. Later, when I personally met Chairman Mao, he told me purposely, "What you said was correct. At that time, I was also a rightist. I was regarded as slightly on the right side. The people who were on the left side said that we should send the letter."   

**Q:**  At first, when the Chinese came to Tibet, it (the Chinese) said that we should be friendly and a lot was said, like, "We are the bew Chinese." I think that because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> showed an angry/hostile attitude, some of their cadres, like Fan Ming, became discouraged and thought that there was no hope that Tibetan aristocrats (would change) so it would not be good to use the lenient (gradualist) policy. So one of the mistakes was that the two sitsab didn't make friendly relations and got agitated. The second was about having relations with the U.S. They did a lot of reckless things, and I have all the documents from America. They did strange things.   

**A:**  The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were to be blamed.   

**Q:**  Otherwise, according to Mao Zedong's order, it was to make relations with the higher leaders and change their minds, and then gradually, there would be a change for all, right? If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> had put forward a better policy, would the revolt have taken place?   

**A:**  There would not have been the revolt. If the revolt happened, what was the use of signing the Agreement. If we worked honestly and worked slowly, it was impossible to have had the revolt. Chairman Mao and Zhou Enlai both were saying that we should not hurry with doing the work in Tibet. And they wrote many letters to the Dalai Lama saying, "You should not hurry. You can do the work slowly." Especially, they were saying that we should take good care of the religion and the people. The old society of Tibet was bad, and the world knows it, and the Dalai Lama himself didn't like it. But now people are saying that the old society will be revived. It is not like this. The Dalai Lama himself knows clearly that he doesn't like the old society. In doing so, we should have good discipline in the monasteries. Religion and politics should be separated. In the old society, the religion and politics were mixed together. Improve the livelihood of the masses and divide the lands, and let the aristocrats reform their own ideas and minds by themselves gradually and without inflicting great suffering upon them. This was the opinion and it could have been done in that way because the Central Committee was not in a hurry.   

**Q:**  So both sides made mistakes, right?   

**A:**  It was, of course, a mistake.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama told me, "At first when I went to India (in 1959), I thought that I had made a mistake by coming out, and if I had stayed in Tibet, it would have been beneficial for the religion and the people in Tibet. But after several years, when the Cultural Revolution started, I changed my mind and thought that no matter if I was in Tibet or not, Tibet was finished, and it didn't make any difference whether I was in Tibet or not." Do you think this is true?   

**A:**  Of course it was his mistake. All the border areas [in China] didn't experience the Cultural Revolution, and even in the Tibetan districts (dzong) and the estates located at the border, the Cultural Revolution was not done. Hypothetically, if Tibet had stayed firm, how could they have done the Cultural Revolution? The root of doing the Cultural Revolution was an internal matter, like to [prevent them from] harming Chairman Mao and those people's power. This was the political principle. It was not for beating all people. If the Dalai Lama had stayed still and if the revolt in 1959 hadn't taken place, in Tibet the Cultural Revolution would not have happened. When I said this to Kündeling Dzasa and Phüntso Tashi (in 1980 when the 2nd delegation went to China/Tibet), they didn't listen or accept [this], and said that it is not true. They said that this monastery and that monastery were destroyed on the border, but while this may have been true for one of two monasteries, that did not represent the whole of Tibet. I can guarantee that the Cultural Revolution would not have happened in Tibet if the Dalai Lama had stayed in Tibet. There was no reason to have the Cultural Revolution in Tibet. It was in China proper where there was a reason.   

**Q:**  How many aristocrats in the 1950s had the same ideas as you?   

**A:**  Very few.   

**Q:**  100-200 or 10-15?   

**A:**  There were probably 15-20 of them.   

**Q:**  There was Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] and Shölkang [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང].   

**A:**  Yes, they were among them, but of the older [generation], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> was good.   

**Q:**  Thanks. That's all.   

