# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0031.02 : Tape 2  
##  : with Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 63  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] was a monk official who served as a tsendrön. He was from the Dombor monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང], and a relative of his had been a katsab. In this interview, Ngawang Rigdrol describes how the Chinese divided Tibet into three parts: the local government, the Panchen's Nangmagang, and Chamdo. He discusses the Panda Tobgye incident, the problems between Targye Gomba and Beri Monastery, and how Targye Gomba expelled the Chinese and the monastery was burned down in response. He also tells how the Chinese forced the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama to attend the National People's Congress, and forced the signing of the 17-Point Agreement. Finally, he talks about the formation of the Youth and Women's Associations.   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0031_02/H_0031_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Previously, there was no division of {Tibet into] Lhasa, Shigatse and Chamdo, but later [question not finished]   

**A:**  Because it was all under the Tibetan government. For example, Shigatse had a dzong, the Labrang had a Dzasa Lama who looked after it. So it was under a dzong. At Chamdo there was the Doji, the Dome Jindom [Tib. མདོ་སྨད་སྤྱི་འདོམས], where there was one sawang. So it was all under the Tibetan government and there were no separate areas. Later, after the Chinese came, they called Labrang the Panchen Nangma Uyön Lhengang. Chamdo was made another Uyön Lhengang, and the Tibetan government was called the Local government. Today they call us separatists, but actually the Chinese did the separation.   

**Q:**  Why did they do this?   

**A:**  So that there would be an internal decision. For example, if the Chinese wanted to make a point [speaking English] with the Tibetan government, then they would bring in the Panchen factor, saying how great the Panchen Labrang was, etc. If they needed to talk with Labrang, then they would bring in the government factor. It was all separatist tactics. That's the Chinese policy. It is to their benefit if there is internal disagreement. Even today they are doing it. For example, it's like a family where if one member is good, then one begins inciting saying, "Oh! the father is not being good, the mother too, and the children as well." So obviously they would not get along. That's the Chinese policy.   

**Q:**  The Panchen Lama, as we know, is an old problem. But at Chamdo, what tactics did the Chinese use?   

**A:**  They desired to make the Khambas separate, and make the Khambas and the Amdowas to oppose the Tibetan Government, implying that you don't need to regard [Tib. བརྩི] the local government.   

**Q:**  Some say that previously the Doji was mistreating the people and imposing heavy taxes. Is that true?   

**A:**  For the Dome [Kham] position, one Sawang had to attend. So as far as the Dome Office itself, there wasn't any arbitrary imposition of taxes. For example, from Dome, a number of border guards [Tib. ས་སྲུང] had to be sent. So no matter how many soldiers had to be sent, there was no system whereby the salary was paid from the taxes collected at the Chamdo area. All salary was brought from Ütsang area. Any taxes collected locally did little to help the soldiers' salary. So the most difficult for the miser was the "military salary," but it was sent from Ütsang. Tea came from "down there" (China side). However, there were many dzongs under Chamdo, like Dzogang [Tib. མཛོ་སྒང]. The taxes were the same. They were based on land as well as animals. This was collected by the Doji, and there was the Payroll Office Phogang. The taxes were distributed for various religious needs and for soldier's salaries, etc. So there was a basis [Tib. བརྟེན] for collecting taxes, and therefore, arbitrary demands could not be made. But the person who headed the various dzongs and estates privately did cause hardships for the miser. Some officials were good others were not. For example, when Sawang Lama Champa Tendar [Tib. བྱམས་པ་བསྟན་དར] and Trimön were there it was good. Later there were more (leaders), and things got worse and the miser did suffer. But it was not a situation where the officials and soldiers were poor like beggars and they had to rely on those areas for their living. Now, since there was a Chinese threat, a large number of troops were stationed there, and wherever there were soldiers, the miser invariably experienced hardships. So for these reasons the Chinese and some Khambas were inclined to revolt against the government, which the Chinese instigated [Tib. སྦུག་སུད], and such a policy was the Chinese's main aim.   

**Q:**  Previous to this, were there attempts to revolt against the government [by the Khambas], stating that they did not want to live under it?   

**A:**  No, there were none. A little bit. For example, Pandatsang Abo Tobgye [Tib. ཨ་ཕོ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས] and others who were from Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས], worked together with other Khambas and did some guerilla warfare, but they were suppressed. They also expelled many Chinese. For example, Targye Gomba [Tib. དར་རྒྱས་དགོན་པ] expelled the Chinese and later the Chinese burned down the monastery. The government rebuilt the monastery and the jiso of Targye Gomba's tea trade was exempted from taxes as compensation. Tea from the Kham area was their main trade.   

**Q:**  The Pandatsang problem, what was it about?   

**A:**  Tobgye was not saying that they were independent. They had some problems and the government intervened, which they disliked and revolted.   

**Q:**  Did they say that they were not going to remain under the government?   

**A:**  They behaved and implied that they were going over to the Chinese side. Later they were unable to go over.   

**Q:**  Now Targye Gomba and Beri [Tib. བེ་རི] monastery had some problems?   

**A:**  It was just an internal fight. Targye Gomba was larger and Beri was smaller and probably had less monks. It is said that one bullied the other. It was just an internal fight.   

**Q:**  What was the reason?   

**A:**  They must have not been getting on well. You know monasteries each have their own source of getting alms and offerings [Tib. དཀོར་ས་དགེ་ཁུངས]. Targye Gomba is Gelugpa [Tib. དགེ་ལུགས་པ] and Beri is Kagyü, so it must have been some sectarian reason.   

**Q:**  During this period, wasn't Targye Gomba on the other side of the Yangtze River, the border according to the Agreement of the Water-Monkey Year, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was during the Khyungram period.   

**Q:**  What was the border previously? Did it fluctuate?   

**A:**  This and that side of the border were made during Khyungram's time.   

**Q:**  So from that time, no taxes were collected from the other side right?   

**A:**  No, taxes were collected. They just made it like that, but taxes were collected.   

**Q:**  So the Doji collected taxes from the other side?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Like what?   

**A:**  I don't really remember, but there was something about from such and such dzong.   

**Q:**  I was under the impression that Targye Gomba paid taxes to the Guomindang stationed at Ganzi.   

**A:**  They may have paid taxes to this place called, I forget the name of this place where the Tögya [Tib. སྟོད་རྒྱ] stays. But miscellaneous other taxes were probably paid to our side. For example, the main monastery of Targye Gomba was doing their trade on the Ütsang side. It was on this side that they became monks.   

**Q:**  Is Targye Gomba a sub-monastery of some larger one?   

**A:**  Not really, but it's a Gelugpa monastery.   

**Q:**  But Targye Gomba does not have any monastery above it. Right?   

**A:**  That's right.   

**Q:**  Does Tseja and others collect taxes from the other side?   

**A:**  Yes they do, like the Drichu Serka and Gyeltön Shidü [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྟོན྄་གཞིས་སྡོད] go to collect taxes.   

**Q:**  Now, the Chinese divided Tibet into 3 areas. What did the people have to say about this?   

**A:**  Well, Labrang has many estates in the Tö area, and they were starting to say that they didn't want to work for the horse and pack animal corvée that went from station to station [Tib. ལམ་ཐོག་ས་ཚིགས]. Actually, they were obliged to do that. For example, there are those who are obliged to pay 1/3rd or 1/4th or 2/3rds, but they said that they did not want to pay more than that. In places like Khata [Tib. མཁར་དག྄], this took place. The arrival of the Chinese had made them brave. But it really depended on the strict discipline [Tib. ཚ་གཅུན་ཆེ་ལོས] of the dzong.   

**Q:**  Now, the Tibetan government has a dzong in Shigatse, did the Labrang come under it?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Even after the separation?   

**A:**  Yes, even after the separation there was a governor (called jigyab), and at Tö there was the Garpön who collected the taxes. In the Tsang Shigatse area they came under the governor, the Tsangji. They can't say they are under Labrang so they do not want to pay the taxes, nor be under the [government’s] law. If there were some murder cases, they would get punished and they couldn't say that they were under Labrang. It was only with certain taxes. For example, if 3 horse corvées had to be provided, 1 by Labrang and 2 by the government's miser, shungba- something like that. The Chinese just made these things. For example at Lhasa, they started the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region and a lot of offices were started. In the Construction Department [Ch. jian she chu], your grandfather represented the Local government. [There was] no representative from Labrang, 1 from the Chinese side, and Karu Pön was the Chamdo representative. In the main office, there were three zhuren, 1 Chinese, 1 from Labrang and one from the Local government-no [one was from] Chamdo.   

**Q:**  Exactly how many were there in the Construction Department?   

**A:**  The Chinese called it sections [Ch. ke] and there were about three-from Labrang and the local government.   

**Q:**  Was there [anyone] from Chamdo?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  Why did the offices function in [operate out of] aristocrat's houses?   

**A:**  They loaned the space. They used bullying tactics. They said, "Oh! We don't have enough houses, so Tsarong please lend us your house." So you had to say yes. You couldn't refuse.   

**Q:**  Yes, but couldn't one say, "This is not possible"?   

**A:**  Who has got the guts to say that! In your house, the Construction Department started.   

**Q:**  Regarding the Preparatory Committee, from the outside one gets this impression. In 1954, the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama went to China, stayed for a while, attended the National People's Congress and then agreed to form the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. It then seemed that if they did that, then surely Tibet would now firmly be part of the PRC. Did they not consider this to be an important event? Did they not think that [with] participation in the Peoples Congress, then one comes under the Chinese constitution? What were they really thinking? It is at times easy to comment from hindsight, but what I am interested in is what the thinking was at that time.   

**A:**  At that time, they could not be faulted. The 17-Point Agreement was implemented. It was called the 17-Point Agreement and it was said that it was agreed upon and signed by Tibet and China. But there was no agreement [Tib. གྲོས་མཐུན]. The reason being [was that] at Chamdo, there was Ngabö and his party, and we sent our representatives via Yadong. While negotiating at Chamdo, there were 10 or 17 points. They said, "You either agree to sign these points, or we will forcibly liberate [Tibet]." Which meant that they would send in the army and take over. The Dalai Lama was at Yadong and the two sitsab were at Shöl, and consultation was not possible because they could not reach [the other] and get back on time [Tib. སས་ས་མ་འཁོར་བ]. So the Agreement had to be sealed [signed with seals]. Ngabö had the Doji seal, but he did not tell them he had it. So they made seals there. With such bullying tactics, we were already under the Chinese. So we had to do whatever they told us to do. The Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama had to attend the People's Congress. They gave all sorts of titles and they just had no choice but to attend. There is a Tibetan saying, "If he doesn't eat the grass, then force him by the horns. If he doesn't drink the water, force him by the nose [Tib. རྩྭ་མ་ཟ, རྭ་རྩེ། ཆུ་མ་འཐུང, སྣ་རྩེ]." Once in the Chinese palms, it was up to them to do whatever. So that's how the 17-Point Agreement was made. Either they accept it or face forceful liberation. They used to say that if we lit a cigarette on top of Nathula before it got extinguished we [they] would have intruded [invaded] Calcutta. That's how bold they were. There was no choice. They thought about it, but even if they thought about it, there wasn't anything they could do. At that time, he [Dalai Lama] might have had thoughts, but there wasn't anything to do.   

**Q:**  Could the Dalai Lama not refuse to go and decide to escape-or something like that? He had protection around him and it would not have been easy for the Chinese to get their hands on him. I wonder if he thought it was better to go.   

**A:**  That's sort of correct, but the Chinese were too powerful. It's hard to say what he thought. During this time the kudrak were also there. During the 17-Point Agreement, the Dalai Lama was at Yadong, and even if he left, it would be easy to do so. My feeling is that at the time to leave, without taking anything would have been rather strange, like going into exile [Tib. ཡུལ་འཁྱར], and I think it would not be easy to handle [Tib. ལག་པ་རྒྱག་བདེ་པོ་མེད་པ]. But after he had gone back to Lhasa, at least he would have met the Chinese and discussed things since the 17-Point Agreement was already implemented. However, he didn't have a detailed discussion. When the Dalai Lama went back to Lhasa and was working with Representative Zhang and other Chinese authorities, they became more and more arrogant [Tib. སྦོམ]. And when the vehicles arrived at Lhasa, then it got worse and worse. The Dalai Lama hoped it might just be workable, but they made things more and more difficult as the days went by. So by 1959, since the Tibetan people just couldn't bear it, that's why they revolted. Actually, it was like the saying, "Before you utter three words, your tongue will not be cut off. Before you move even three steps, your calf will not be cut [Tib. གོམ་གསུམ་མ་སྤོས་ན་བྱིན་པའི་ཉྭ་དང་། ཚིག་གསུམ་མ་བཤད་ན་ལྕེ་གཅོད་ཀྱི་མ་རེད]." But there was no possibility of speaking and discussing things with the Chinese. It is said that when the Chinese first came to Lhasa they kept quiet, even if you slapped their face. But they got bolder and bolder day by day, and later [they] even bullied the two sitsab into resigning. So from a political point of view, it did not seem possible to immediately escape from Yadong. because the 17-Point Agreement was already signed and we had no experience with it. And the Dalai Lama had not even gone to China. But after about ten some years of experience under it, it never got better, only worse. So we had no choice but to make "the desperate uphill jump [Tib. འུ་ཐུག་པའི་མཆོང་རྒྱག་གྱེན་ལ་རྒྱག]".   

**Q:**  After the Chinese arrived, what was the reason for the formation of the People's Association?   

**A:**  The reason was the Chinese wanted to start a Military Administrative Committee and the Tibet Autonomous Region and we were saying we didn't want these things.   

**Q:**  Yes, but the People's Association rose in 1952, this Tibet Autonomous Region thing was much later.   

**A:**  Yes, but they [the Chinese] were talking about it then; that they wanted to have democratic reforms and so forth. So they [the People's Association] said they didn't want it. The government never told them to agitate at all. The people themselves came together from districts everywhere in Ütsang and set up the representatives of the people, and even went to see the Chinese. Then the Chinese approached the local government saying that this was not acceptable. Then they [the Tibetan government] put people in prison and did things of that sort. We would never put our own people in prison, but the Chinese bullied us, and so things got worse and worse.   

**Q:**  Who was working in the People's Association?   

**A:**  In the People's Association [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Some of them were locked up and then later released.   

**A:**  Yes. Later. The three great monasteries did that [guaranteed] and told them to release [the prisoners].   

**Q:**  There was this person from a tratsang in Sera or something like that.   

**A:**  Yes, that's right, but I wonder if he was imprisoned. There could have been this guy from Sera. However, one was Bumtang Trunyi, and Alo Chöndze, and who else was there? Kamekang Chöndze was in the organization, but I don't know if he was imprisoned. Yes, another was Shigatse Lhabju [Tib. ལྷ་ཕྱུག་པ]. He later died. Mainly there were about three prominent persons who were imprisoned.   

**Q:**  Lhabju. Was he sort of from the monastery side or what?   

**A:**  No. No, from the public.   

**Q:**  Didn't the people come from everywhere?   

**A:**  Yes, but the leaders were imprisoned. Otherwise, there were many among the people and the monks.   

**Q:**  Around 1952, the Chinese were very well behaved, weren't they?   

**A:**  Oh yes. They say that even if you slapped their face, they would take it.   

**Q:**  Did they do good things?   

**A:**  What good things? When they came they came as beggars with nothing. Then our government gave grain and a lot of things. They had to, right? Before they got these things they boiled lentils and ate that. Therefore, the Lhasans nicknamed them "Boiled lentil gyaling", which meant that they ate boiled lentils and their voice was like a gyaling. So the government allotted barley grains and rice. Even on the Kham side, regarding road construction, the Chinese said that they compensated with dayan. However, all our grains were extracted. You can't eat dayan.   

**Q:**  Barley grain were send down there?   

**A:**  Yes, wherever there was road construction.   

**Q:**  Therefore, since a lot of grain had to be allocated, was this a reason for the people's agitation?   

**A:**  No, no. The source of the problem was the Chinese wish to begin democratic reforms and start a Military Administrative Committee. This the people were saying they did not want at all.   

**Q:**  Now, the 17-Point Agreement was already signed, right?   

**A:**  Yes, in 1951. The Chinese had not even come to Tibet then. Chamdo was taken. The actual justification was that Chamdo was considered part of the forcefully liberated areas. Ngabö was in detention there.   

**Q:**  So the people's agitation was not the result of economic difficulties?   

**A:**  No, because the Chinese had just come and the economic problems had not as yet begun. Later, as more and more Chinese came, in 1956, '57, '58, then the economic difficulties manifested. Whatever grain was there had to be given to them. For example, in Lhasa, the bigger houses and the wealthier people, the Chinese just made themselves at home. For example, in our quarters we have a large courtyard, but only a few horses and mules. One day about 60-70 horses and mules came saying that they had no place to keep them. Leave aside asking, they just came in and left them. At least in your house, they must have asked for a loan of office space and [said] they'd pay rent. But there was no way you could refuse them since they would remark that you have such a big house and so few people, and what are you going to do with such a big house.   

**Q:**  It is said in some books that the Chinese tried to increase the status of the Panchen Lama to that of the Dalai Lama. Did they do that? During ceremonies and when they met, how was it?   

**A:**  If we look from the religious side at the status of the Panchen and Dalai Lamas, there were times when the Panchen Lama was the teacher of the Dalai Lama and therefore, as his tutor, he naturally had a more respected position. From the political side, Tashilhunpo is considered to be an owner of a monastery and not equal to the government. For example, it is called Tashilhunpo Labrang, like Kündeling Labrang, Tsomönling [Tib. ཚེ་སྨོན་གླིང], Ditru Labrang, Reting Labrang. These labrang are all of the same status as the reincarnation of a regent [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྤྲུལ] under the Tibetan government. However, the Chinese were saying that the Panchen Lama and the Dalai Lama were of equal status, and so they started the Panchen Nangma Uyön Lhengang. When the Panchen Lama comes to visit there is a formal protocol with the Dalai Lama facing south and the Panchen Lama facing east. The seat of the Panchen Lama is a bit lower. Then he has to prostrate and make an offering of the three mandalas or Mendredensum. The Panchen Lama did all of that but the Chinese did not show him prostrating in their film. They only showed him offering the Mendredensum. Even if the Dalai Lama does something, one should keep the traditional existing protocol of the Tibetan government. Tashilhunpo people deny such differences in status and the Chinese are saying the same thing. But really there is only Tashilhunpo Labrang and no such thing as the Tashilhunpo government. It is generally said such and such dzasa of Tashilhunpo Labrang. Dzasa is the name of their chandzö. When the previous - [the] previous Panchen Lama left Tibet and there was no one to look after it, the government appointed a dzasa. From our perspective, he is akin to a chandzö. The actual work was done by the labrang officials, but to head them the government appointed 5 or 6 persons.   

**Q:**  What did the Chinese do as far as seating positions and when the two lamas met?   

**A:**  They considered them equal.   

**Q:**  So did the Panchen Lama prostrate?   

**A:**  Yes, he did -we were the tsendrön! But it was not shown on film. Only the part where the Panchen Lama who was standing offered the Mendredensum to the Dalai Lama who was seated on his throne.   

**Q:**  Were there any changes in the Kashag after the Chinese came?   

**A:**  No. The Kashag was the main contact with the Chinese. They went to the Kashag and they also asked the Kashag to come to them. The Kashag had a very difficult time. The two sitsab were very tough [Tib. གྱོང་པོ], and so the Chinese made a lot of complaints to the Kashag. The Kashag was always asked to come to Yuthok [Chinese headquarters] and there they made their complaints. The traditional work of the government continued, but it was the Kashag that got the brunt of the complaints, for example, that the People's Association was not acceptable, and that they had to get rid of it. When Chushigandru started, they wanted the Kashag to destroy it or else we would send in the army. That's why Namseling and Kungö Samjola were sent to negotiate with Chushigandru. But they stayed there.   

**Q:**  When the two were there, did they stay and work with Chushigandru?   

**A:**  The work they will do. But the two were supposed to tell them not to do this and that [Tib. མ་བྱེད་མ་ལྟ].   

**Q:**  They couldn't have just stayed there. What did they do?   

**A:**  Well, I'm sure they had to advise them.   

**Q:**  What message did they carry from the government?   

**A:**  That it is better not to oppose the Chinese, therefore stop the warfare. So when they left a bit later, the revolt had started. They had hardly been away even a year.   

**Q:**  So the Kashag meet together as usual, correct? After the Chinese came they did not have separate portfolios like kalön of the military etcetera? Were there other changes in the government's structure?   

**A:**  There were no changes in the Kashag. As far as other changes, [there were] not many. Before the Chinese came, the government nationalized [Tib. གཞུང་འཛིན] the dzongs and the estates. Both state and private loans were investigated and there was some specified period when loans were eliminated.   

**Q:**  When was this done?   

**A:**  Before the Chinese came, the Legjö office had begun.   

**Q:**  How many years before the Chinese came?   

**A:**  1 or 2 years.   

**Q:**  Had the Chinese already announced that reforms must be implemented, etcetera? Wasn't it because of this that changes were made?   

**A:**  No, implementation of the reforms coincided with the Chinese arrival.   

**Q:**  But why at that particular time? Was it around 1948, '49?   

**A:**  Yes, around that time when the Dalai Lama was about to take over the temporal and the spiritual reigns of the government. Because the miser were poor, we were trying to obtain better conditions. The nationalization of the dzong resulted in salaried officials and the surplus being given to the State. However it was not that successful, it could not be - you know because of the way people thought and did things.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came, the women's and youth organization began. How did it begin? Who said it should be started?   

**A:**  These organizations discussed and were formed by themselves. The government never had to ask them. They voluntarily started.   

**Q:**  The Chinese asked them to form, is that not right?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came?   

**A:**  After the Chinese came, at the time of the uprising, the Women's Association was there. They rebelled at that time. The actual formations of the Youth and Women's Associations after the Chinese came were begun by the Chinese themselves.   

**Q:**  How did it form? They could not just give an order?   

**A:**  There were Chinese workers, and among the Tibetans there were people like Shölkang Jedrung, etc. It was through these people that they introduced [the associations]. First, they started with dances. At Yuthok Hall there were frequent dances, maybe twice a week or so. So through these methods, they started. Even the late lady, Yabshi Lhajam Tsering Drolmala [Tib. ལྷ་ལྕམ་ཙེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལགས], was in the Women's Association. When we went to China for the 1952 tour she went to Geneva as the representative of the China Women's Association. She was part of the tour and she was sent from there.   

**Q:**  Was Taring Grandmother part of this?   

**A:**  No, I'm talking about when we went to China. The Chinese must have had their women's group, and so Tsering Drolmala went with them. Anyway, they started off with dances and other [activities], and that is how it formed. And, you know, our Tibetan people are also fickle-minded [Tib. མགོ་སླ་པོ], dancing and doing all sort of things unrestrained by laws [Tib. ཁྲིམས་མེད་ལུགས་མེད] - the youngsters, they loved that.   

**Q:**  But it was not just the younger crowd. Later Taring Grandmother, Tsarong Grandmother, and my mother also went and joined. So were they sort of compelled to go? They were not saying that from every family someone had to go, were they? So how exactly did it happen?   

**A:**  No, they were not saying that, but they would incite them via another person [Tib. བརྒྱུས་སྐུལ]. Take them for example, they would say to Taring and others, "Oh! aren't you going to go to the Women's Association? There are so many from across the nation." Tibet was already suppressed that much, and they thought that if they did not go then they might think something against them. They had no choice but to go.   

**Q:**  What did they think would happen to them?   

**A:**  Whatever, something bad.   

**Q:**  You mean to their family and such a thing, if they didn't come and all that.   

**Q:**  But according to the 17-Point Agreement the traditional system would be respected. So do you think they really had reasons to fear that the Chinese would do something bad to the family?   

**A:**  But, after they had already come to Tibet, as I have already told you, they became more and more powerful [bold]. So later, rather than approaching the Kashag, they would go straight to the Dalai Lama. Consulting the Kashag, [to them it seemed like] it was [too] far, and at that time the sitsab were there. So that's what they did! That's what they would say, "Aren't you going to go?" and such things! [And even your sister] Namla [Tib. རྣམ་ལྷ] - they said the kids should be sent to school, "Aren't you going to send them to school?" So when they sent them to school, they put baskets on their back to transport manure. They didn't want to go. There was no way of not going if others were going.   

**Q:**  Were some youths happy to join?   

**A:**  If they could do all sorts of things unrestrained by law, they would feel very glad, like a day break [Tib. ནམ་ལངས].   

**Q:**  I'm not sure but also during the Taktra reign the society was quite conservative. Football was not permitted, and then there was something about Indian saddles not allowed or some hats. So was there some dislike for the traditional society and state?   

**A:**  No, nothing about hats. The Indian saddle matter was a long time ago. Yes, football was not permitted. And also mahjong was not allowed, and so it's possible that there must have been some dislike regarding these.   

**Q:**  Did the youths have the thought of revolution?   

**A:**  Yes, that was definitely there among the lay officials and tsidrung. So when they had to carry baskets of manure on their backs, instead of feeling ashamed that kudrak children and government officials were doing this, they implied that they were doing a great thing [Tib. སྒའ་རབ་ཅིག་བཏང་ཡོད་མདོག་མདོག].   

**Q:**  When was this?   

**A:**  Probably around 1954-55.   

**Q:**  Kudrak children were carrying things?   

**A:**  Sure! They were carrying manure. Near Shöl there was a huge pile of manure and they had to go and take it to the fields.   

**Q:**  How did this happen? They didn't put a gun to their heads and say "Go!"?   

**A:**  No, this was not done. But they were compelled to go automatically [Tib. རང་ཤུགས].   

**Q:**  You were saying something about my sister, Namla?   

**A:**  Yes, Namla and others went to the medium school. And so when all the other students went to transport manure, she could not say that she wouldn't go. So younger government officials also went.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see. But they could have refused to go?   

**A:**  Yes, they could have, nothing would have happened. However, the younger ones loved the revolutionary system and they have been well coached on the glories of manual labor. So they thought it was a great thing. Many went. Not the older ones, but among the younger, many.   

**Q:**  What about the monasteries?   

**A:**  It is possible that one or two withdrew from monasteries and joined the youth.   

**A:**  Some, like Uncle Shölkang [Jedrung] for example, was taking pictures so at the drungja he was made to prostrate. How did this happen? It was when was he taking pictures.   

**A:**  This he would be punished for. The occasion was when the Dalai Lama went to Drepung. This was not permitted. These days there is such thing as permission, but we did not have such a system [before]. If there were some foreigners or if it was for the government, then they would take photos. But he was a government official, the Lhasa Nyertsang, at the time when he took the pictures. This was not permitted according to our traditional system.   

**Q:**  Yes, my father told me unless one took it secretly.   

**A:**  Even if you took it secretly, if they saw you they would reprimand you. Therefore, he was doing something openly that was not permitted. So, since he spent time with the Chinese, he must have had his own pride and he probably thought that he was doing something revolutionary and that no one could do anything. Being a revolutionist really has nothing to do with taking photographs. Therefore, he was punished because he acted without taking into account the time and the circumstance [Tib. ཚོད་རྩིས]. Actually, as a government official, he couldn't do that because he was part of the organized group. If he was a foreigner or a Newari, then that's something else.   

**Q:**  They say he liked to ride on a motorcycle and play mahjong.   

**A:**  Riding motorcycles was not a big deal and yes, he must have played mahjong. It was not because of this. However, he was close with the Chinese very early.   

**Q:**  Very early?   

**A:**  About 1951-52 Shölkang Jedrung, Surkhang Jedrung and Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ] Jedrung went as a group to China to study when we were coming back and we met them in Chamdo. They took leave from the government and the Chinese sent them down.   

**Q:**  What was the reason?   

**A:**  To study. Since China was communist, their education would be communist. They [may not specifically refer to the above persons, but in general their type] would behave like they were revolutionary.   

**Q:**  Did they feel that it was a good idea to study communism?   

**A:**  The Chinese were saying that it was so good and advanced. Therefore, Künsangtse, at the time he was going down, his maternal uncle was Künsangtse Tsipön who was telling him not to go and stay, and he was crying a lot. But he didn't listen and went. So he is said to have said, "May he not come back facing his face towards up here [Tib. ཡར་ཁ་གཏད་ནས་ཡོང་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ་ཤོག]."   

**Q:**  Besides them, were there others who went to China at that time?   

**A:**  Yes. There were common lay officials and tsidrung. Additionally, there must have been youngsters from Lhasa.   

**Q:**  From the government officials who went?   

**A:**  There was one or two tsidrung.   

**Q:**  And from the lay officials? You are not talking about the Nationality Institute [Tib. མི་རིགས་སློབ་གྲྭ], are you?   

**A:**  They went and stayed at the Nationality Institute.   

**Q:**  But many went to the Nationality Institute. So did my uncle, Phüngyela [Tib. ཕུན་རྒྱལ་ལགས].   

**A:**  It must have been later, not when we were there.   

**Q:**  So they were one of the earliest? So they went to the Nationality Institute and not as a special group?   

**A:**  No, the Chinese were saying how good it would be. And so they formed a group, discussed with the Chinese, and went. The government did not tell them to go.   

**Q:**  So they were going to the Nationality Institute, right?   

**A:**  That's right. Ngawang Thöndrub [Tib. ངག་དབང་དོན་གྲུབ] was also at the school when we were there.   

**Q:**  Now, after the Chinese arrived, what happened with trade? Did it increase?   

**A:**  No, it did not increase. It was the same old trade, like going to the north, Changthang [Tib. བྱང་ཐང], to trade, getting woolen materials [Tib. སྣམ་བུ] from the southern regions, getting odds and ends in India. But the requirements of the Chinese were corrugated sheets and building supplies. They didn't make a trade relation with India but ordered them from the Tibetans, and they were paid in dayan. So this trade was very strong.   

**Q:**  So, the traders at this time made a lot of money, right?   

**A:**  Yes, some got wealthy. Not all traders, but those who supplied the Chinese got rich. For example, remember Amji Anila, he had nothing, but later he traded with the Chinese and became real wealthy. Likewise, many Khambas.   

**Q:**  So when they ordered, did they have a special office?   

**A:**  The Chinese had a trade office. The person who headed it was staying at the old Pandatsang house. It [the office] was approached, and it was not a situation where they approached the government or the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region and then did business. They approached it independently.   

**Q:**  So if the Chinese wanted something, they got in touch with that office, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they would say they wanted such and such things and can you be responsible for it? Then they went to India.   

**Q:**  Later, the Chinese opened some banks. Is that correct?   

**A:**  A bank has been at Kyitöpa, in the Barkor, for a long time. After 1959, I don't know, but it was there. It was only for Chinese money, not ours. Before 1959, accounts were not opened in our currency.   

**Q:**  There is supposedly a branch at Kalimpong and also at Calcutta. It is said that when items had to be procured, no money was paid but some kind of voucher [was].   

**A:**  Calcutta was a large bank. At Kalimpong there was the trade representative who stayed at Pandatsang House [Hin. kutri]. We also went to get money from there because when the Dalai Lama came for pilgrimage, we paid dayan at Lhasa and collected in Indian rupees. The traders used to do that. The Chinese did not pay their military salary in real cash. They gave something called tröntrang [Ch. zhuan zhang], a kind of receipt, and with that they traded.   

**Q:**  Did trade items also go down to China? For instance, if Dome and Dotö needed items, were they sent?   

**A:**  They must have been sent. I'm not sure, but on the Dartsedo side a lot of cloth and cigarettes are consumed. In the old days, it used to be that way. If one wanted to get tea, then cloth was taken.   

**Q:**  So if Dartsedo needed cloth, then it was sent from India?   

**A:**  Yes, from India.   

**Q:**  Why? Was it closer than bringing it from China?   

**A:**  I don't know about distance, but at that time the Chinese didn't have much. They were quite poor. A lot of cloth went towards Sichuan, [and I] don't know where it ended up. In the old days, [it was] also true that after the Chinese came we traded [with them] cigarettes, cloths, woolen material, shaving blades, and the small blue bottles of perfume that the Chinese call [Ch. xiang shui]. In Dartsedo. a lot were consumed. Then cigarette paper.   

**Q:**  What happened later? It is said they raised the taxes and didn't accept the goods that were ordered.   

**A:**  Later they did that. They ordered the goods and then said the quality was no good and other complaints, and so the traders suffered some difficulties.   

**Q:**  Why did they do that? Did they change their policy or what? If they needed the goods they wouldn't do such things.   

**A:**  That may be true, but I don't know whether it was a change of policy or not. I doubt it was some policy change, but there must have been some reason.   

**Q:**  It is mentioned in certain books that the banks used to give loans.   

**A:**  Maybe around Chamdo, but in Lhasa they did not. Post-1959, they said that loans were given since they wanted to get rid of the poor by loaning capital. They said on the radio that so and so got a loan and became very prosperous. But before that, there were no loans given.   

**A:**  Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]: After the uprising they set up the cooperative, the Chinese had fully taken over. Now, there were poor, and so they said that they wanted to make them rich.   

**Q:**  In some books it is said that around '52, '53 the Chinese gave loans to the poor.   

**A:**  Absolutely not. But they gave alms to the monks during Mönlam, and that was to appease them. Giving loans to the poor public was never done. It's all lies. As far as lies are concerned, they are full of it. [Note: From here stopped recording. So edited without the recording.]   

**Q:**  Besides money, it is said that even those who had loans were suspended.   

**A:**  NR & guest: No. Yes, post 1959, but not before. The guarantees were burnt because of the reforms [he said this was in 1959, the time of the uprising- but not clearly said- swallowed his words]. The Chinese themselves did not have the wherewithal, rains, or rice and other [foodstuffs] to do such things. They had some dayan.   

**Q:**  Did they not take loans of grain from the Tibetan government?   

**A:**  Yes, grains were taken out by the government. It may have been said in some books, but there was no such thing as giving loans. After 1959, yes, they were saying this person got rich, bought a car, did such and such great things, etcetera.   

**A:**  Guest: The money that was used was Tibetan and also Chinese dayan. Most importantly, one dayan was 15 sang. Special permission was requested and the public was told to accept this conversion. Prior to this the dayan was not bought. Up to 1959 there was no Chinese paper currency- the renminbi. At least not in the Ü areas. I'm not sure about the lower areas. Only dayan were used at the 15 sang rate.   

**A:**  At this time, one India Rupee was 5 sang, and so one dayan was Rs.3. If you gave 1000 dayan, then you got Rs. 15,000. [Mixed up-should be 3000 at the said rate.]   

**Q:**  Around 1956, the Khamba problem began. They revolted. What was the main reason for this?   

**A:**  They made them suffer a lot, and then gradually they organized in the south as the Chushigandru. Although it is called Chushigandru, it was not only Khamba, but Dotö, Dome, Ütsang, Amdo, and there were monks and "deserters" from the military. So it began as a revolt against the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Did it first begin in Lhasa, the Chushigandru?   

**A:**  Yes, they first secretly met at Lhasa and then left. It was headed by Andru Dzasa.   

**Q:**  Some say that those in the government knew about everything? [Implication: were working together]   

**A:**  Well, I don't know if the government knew everything or not. However, from the government side, there were those who had connections? The government had to pretend that they didn't know, that's obvious, right? The Chinese told the government to take care of the Khambas or else they [the Chinese] would destroy them. So the government had to sort of tell the Khambas not to fight. So the government was working internally, but appeared to have no contact.   

**Q:**  Yes, the Dalai Lama also mentions this in his new book.   

**A:**  Actually, Drönyerchemmo Phala was a part of the formation of the Chushigandru. Even with the Lhasa uprising it is said that the people rose up, but actually there were a lot of government officials involved.   

**Q:**  Yes, the Chinese have been saying this too. That kalön were involved, etcetera.   

**A:**  I don't know whether kalön were involved, but there were officials with the people. People had to revolt because the Chinese were so dictatorial that the government couldn't openly complain, so the people rose up and along with them were some officials.   

**Q:**  Now, in the Kham areas, were the Chinese making a lot of reforms? What was the main reason they revolted?   

**A:**  They were giving them a hard time. Where there were fields, roads were made, taxes were also assessed.   

**A:**  Guest: The Chinese foresaw it all. When they first came, they said they would take neither a needle nor a thread from the people. Then they gave them silver dayan and stayed nicely. So our people, whoever it was, when they got money, had a way of playing up. This was probably a negative factor. Then, after some time they became more settled, and then they really squeezed them. After squeezing them, they began the democratic reforms, the elites were arrested, and then said they were reactionaries. Then they could not bear it any longer, and they gathered together and decided to come up [to central Tibet].   

**Q:**  So this was around 1955, right?   

**A:**  Guest: 1955-56. This is the reason why they came.   

**A:**  The dictatorial policy of the Chinese began with sweet talk [Tib. ཁ་མཁས་པོ]. [Saying] that in a socialist society one could eat while sleeping [paradise]. Then after some time, people found out the truth about this socialist society. Then the agitation grew and the better-off slowly began to arrive.   

**Q:**  I heard that at first they were very nice and gave a lot of money, "falling like rain," as that familiar phrase went.   

**A:**  NR & Guest: So later, in 1954 the Dalai Lama asked, "Now tell me, is it really raining?".   

**Q:**  So at that time, were the leaders given work and so on?   

**A:**  NR & Guest: Yes, [they were] given work. For example, when we started the 5 or 6 offices of the Autonomous Region, at your house the Construction Department began. The director [Ch. qu zhang] was a Chinese, I forget his name. One was your grandfather, the other was Karupön. He is from Khyungpo. When we went to China on a tour in '51-52, Karupön Quzhang was very much respected, his house was newly built. He was very much admired. He began to be very diligent in his work and also liked the reforms. So later he became the quzhang of the Construction Department. He was at Tsarong's house. Later we [the office] moved from Tsarong's house to Mentöpa's house which was bought. By then he had begun to realize, saying that, "These guys are really full of lies," and [started to] loath the Chinese. Later, in 1959 he went down and fought the Chinese from Khyungpo, and while coming via the Northern route, he was killed. At first he was liked by our students. They told the students such great things and they all pranced around together. Then when they loaded their backs [with baskets of dung], they started to scream. Likewise, in the Kham area they really played it up. The Chinese policy only got worse, never better.   

**Q:**  So they got money and were tricked?   

**A:**  Yes, then they made things stricter and stricter (gradually turned the screws), and the people couldn't bear it and came up to the central area. And the elites of the society, including [those from the] monasteries, were imprisoned. So the people were astounded. In Lhasa, since the Dalai Lama was still there, nothing much was done. So the people from Kham left their unbearable situation, and came up and started guerilla warfare in the south.   

**Q:**  According to Chinese thinking, since these areas were east of the Yangtze River, according to the old treaty, they were therefore under China, so did they feel that they could do anything they wished in these areas, since they were not covered by the 17-Point Agreement?   

**A:**  At that time the Chinese were not talking about the Yangtze and the 17-Point Agreement. The whole of Tibet was said to be peacefully liberated. The Water-Monkey Treaty was never talked about at all. Only later.   

**Q:**  The Chinese never mentioned this?   

**A:**  No, the whole area was considered taken - liberated.   

**Q:**  Did they not make a distinction between east and west of Yangtze River?   

**A:**  No, they never mentioned this at all.   

**A:**  Guest: You know 1959, before 1959 up to Chamdo was considered militarily liberated.   

**Q:**  The Yangtze River was not talked about?   

**A:**  Guest and subject: No, never at all. The Yangtze River thing was in the Water-Monkey Year.   

**Q:**  Chamdo is on this side of Yangtze, right?   

**A:**  Subject and Guest: Yes, the upward side. In 1951-52, the Chinese came from down there. They say that up to Chamdo came militarily. So they say Chamdo was forcefully taken. From there on, they said the area was peacefully liberated. This is the crux of the matter.   

**Q:**  Since Tibet was all under China, they did not talk about the Yangtze River, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't talk about the Yangtze.   

**Q:**  Were there land reforms in the eastern areas?   

**A:**  No, there were none. There was no land redistribution and taking of monastic lands, etcetera. The question of paying taxes to the government, etcetera was all after 1959.   

