# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0031.06 : Tape 6  
##  : with Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 65  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] was a monk official who served as a tsendrön. He was from the Dombor monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང], and a relative of his had been a katsab. In this interview, Ngawang Rigdrol discusses Chushigandru and the Chinese actions in Sichuan.   

---  
### Tape 6  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0031_06/H_0031_06.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Some people said that in the years 1952-53, the Chinese gave loans to the poor people, right?   

**A:**  There wasn't such a thing at all. They just gave alms during the Mönlam Festival to the monks. This was for doing something for the monks. This was just a lie. The Chinese were liars who told a lot of lies.   

**Q:**  I also heard that not only [did they give] money, [but] the Chinese also exempted the loans of some people, is that correct?   

**A:**  Not at all. There wasn't anything like this before 1959. There were such things after the reforms were implemented and they burnt all the loan pledges. At that time, the Chinese didn't have [enough] grain and rice to do that. They just brought a little bit of dayan coins.   

**Q:**  In 1952, didn't the Chinese take some barley loans because they didn't have enough grain?   

**A:**  Yes, they took out [borrowed] barley from the Tibetan government. They might have written that in a book, but actually, there wasn't anything like that before 1959. After 1959, the Chinese were saying that they did this and that, and people became rich and had cars.   

**A:**  Champa Yönden [Tib. བྱམས་པ་ཡོན་ཏན]: : At that time, the Chinese sought permission [from the Tibetan government] for using dayan, and the people were told to accept dayan and they used dayan at the exchange rate of 15 sang for 1 dayan. Before that, dayan coins were not used in Tibet. The People's paper currency, renminbi [Tib. རེན་མིན་བི], was not used until 1959 in Central Tibet and in Tsang.   

**A:**  Ngawang Rigdrol: At that time, the rate for one Indian rupee was 5 sang. So one dayan equaled three Indian rupees.   

**Q:**  Around 1956, there was the trouble of the Khambas, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was the main reason for that?   

**A:**  When the Chinese made the people down there suffer a lot, the Khambas came up [to Tibet] and they set up Chushigandru in Lhoka. This was not exclusively Khamba. There were also people from Amdo, Dome, Ütsang, and monks, and there were soldiers who also ran away from here. This was for opposing the Chinese.   

**Q:**  At the beginning, Chushigandru was started in Lhasa, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They secretly discussed this in Lhasa and then went to Lhoka. It was lead by Andrutsang [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང] [Gombo Tashi].   

**Q:**  Some people were saying that the Tibetan government knew about that.   

**A:**  I am not sure whether the government itself knew about that. Anyway, there was support from the government and they were linked together. But the government should have had to pretend that they didn't know that. So there was talk regarding calming the Khambas' disturbance, and the government went through the motions of telling the Khambas in Lhoka not to do that and "If you still do that, we will attack you." They were doing one thing internally [secretly] and another thing outwardly [publicly] [Tib. ཕྱི་ནང་བྱེད].   

**Q:**  I saw that the Dalai Lama also wrote in a book about this. With setting up the Chushigandru, Drönyerchemmo Phala [Tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ་ཕ་ལྷ] was involved in it.   

**A:**  When the revolt took place, it was launched by the people, but the government officials were involved in it.   

**Q:**  So the Chinese were also saying the same [thing]. They said all the kalön were involved in it, right?   

**A:**  All the kalön were probably not involved, but there were some government officials with the people. They should have been there because the Chinese were suppressing the people by force too much. The government couldn't openly say that the Chinese were doing this and that, so the people were rising up. So there should have been some people giving them instructions.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese came to Kham, did they launch a lot of revolts? What was the cause for the Khambas to rise up?   

**A:**  They made the Khambas suffer very seriously, like building roads where they had the fields and imposing taxes on them.   

**A:**  Champa Yönden: In the beginning, they said that they wouldn't even take away a needle and thread, and gave them dayan coins. So when people got the money, they also flattered the Chinese. Because they did that, things slightly went wrong. After awhile, when they settled down and they squeezed them and implemented the so-called democratic reforms, they arrested all the better people and said that they were reactionaries. Therefore, they didn't dare stay there. So they had solidarity and came up to Central Tibet.   

**Q:**  This was in 1955, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was the in 1955-56, and this was the reason the Khambas came. In the beginning, they talked pleasantly and talked about socialism as if people could eat food while laying down. After that, the people knew that socialism didn't have anything, and some revolts took place in Kham and the better [Tib. དྲག་པ] people came up.   

**Q:**  In the beginning, I heard that they acted very tactfully and spent a lot of money. So it was said that the money was like rain fall [Tib. ཆར་པ་བབ་བབ་རེད], right?   

**A:**  Ngawang Rigdrol: Later, in 1954 when the Dalai Lama went down, he asked them [the Khambas], "Do you still have the rain fall?".   

**Q:**  At that time, they also gave jobs to the higher chiefs [Tib. དཔོན], right?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. For example, when they set up 5-6 departments in the Tibet Autonomous Region, they set up the Construction Department [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན; Ch. qu] [Ch. jian she qu] in our house. At that time, the department chairman [Ch. qu zhang] was a Chinese. I don't know his name. Your late grandfather, Sawang, was also there, and one of the people in charge was Karupön [Tib. དཀར་རུ་དཔོན], who was from Khyungpo [Tib. ཁྱུང་པོ]. When we went to China in 1952 for an inspection tour he was regarded very highly. They called Karupön a qu zhang, and the Chinese built a new house for him. He was also kind of a progressive and went through the motions of liking the revolution. So the Chinese paid him a salary and he was the Director of the Construction Department. He was there when they held meetings in our house. After that, the Chinese bought the old Mentö [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད] house and we moved there. By that time, he was fed up [Tib. ཞེན་པ་ལོག] with the Chinese and said that the Chinese were telling a lot of lies. In 1959, he went to Khyungpo and conscripted soldiers and fought many times with the Chinese. Finally, the Chinese executed him. The same thing happened to the students. When they were told that they were great, they hopped up, but when they were sent to carry loads, they were grumbling. In the beginning, they did a lot, but the Chinese treated them worse and worse.   

**Q:**  When they were given money, they got duped, right?   

**A:**  Yes, then they made things more and more tight, and they made them suffer. They couldn't tolerate this and so they came from Kham. At that time, the better off chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་རིགས] and the ones in charge of the monasteries were arrested down there. So the people in Kham, Dotö, Amdo, and Dome were suppressed. At that time, the Tibetan government was still there, so they came up [to Tibet] and said that we couldn't tolerate the suffering in Kham. As a result, Chushigandru was set up and they fought [using] guerilla warfare.   

**Q:**  At that time, were the Chinese thinking that they could launch the revolution in the areas beyond [east of] the Yangtze River because they were not included in the 17-Point Agreement?   

**A:**  They were not talking about the 17-Point Agreement. They were just saying that Tibet was peacefully liberated. They were not talking about the Agreement signed in the Water-Monkey Year and about the Yangtze River being the border. Later on, they were talking about .   

**Q:**  The Chinese were not talking about that, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They were saying that they had liberated Tibet and they were saying that they had already suppressed [Tib. མནན] Tibet.   

**Q:**  Didn't they differentiate the border of the Yangtze?   

**A:**  No, they didn't.   

**A:**  Champa Yönden: Before 1959, they said that they liberated the areas beyond [east of] Chamdo [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ] through military force [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ], and the areas above [west of] Chamdo were not included in the military liberation.   

**Q:**  They were not talking about the Yangtze River [border], right?   

**A:**  Yes, they didn't say a single word about that.   

**Q:**  Didn't they sign an agreement?   

**A:**  Yes, it was signed in the Water-Monkey Year.   

**Q:**  Chamdo was above [west of] the Yangtze River, right?   

**A:**  Ngawang Rigdrol: Yes.   

**A:**  Champa Yönden: In 1951-52, when the Chinese came up to Chamdo and said that they took over Chamdo through military force, then we started the 17-Point Agreement and Tibet was peacefully liberated.   

**Q:**  Since the whole area of Tibet was under their control, they didn't talk about the Yangtze River, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did they implement land reforms in Kham?  

**A:**  No, they didn't take away the lands and divide them. They only told them to deliver the donation grain [Tib. རྒྱལ་གཅེས་གཞུང་འབྲུ] after 1959.   

