# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0031.05 : Tape 5  
##  : with Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 65  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] was a monk official who served as a tsendrön. He was from the Dombor monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང], and a relative of his had been a katsab. In this interview, Ngawang Rigdrol discusses the Dalai Lama's visit to China in 1954 to attend the National People's Congress and how people were afraid that he would not return. He also discusses the Dalai Lama's going to India for the Buddha Jayanti celebrations in 1956 and that he was part of his retinue. He also talks about how the Dalai Lama bought some trucks in India and they were brought back to Lhasa. And he talks about how Zhou Enlai told the Dalai Lama that the number of Chinese cadres would be reduced in Tibet, but when the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa this was not the case.   

---  
### Tape 5  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0031_05/H_0031_05.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time, we spoke about your stay in China. I don't remember now if I have asked you this about before the Dalai Lama went down to China; I think I did ask you. Anyway, it seems that there was talk that he should go and that he should not go down. Did you hear anything?   

**A:**  I don't think there was such talk. The State Council [Tib. རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ་ཁང] said this and that, and since the Panchen Lama was going, there was some compulsion to go. But what everyone was afraid of was that the Dalai Lama might not return.   

**Q:**  So wasn't there some talks about the going to the National People's Congress? Yes, I did ask you this.   

**A:**  Yes, you did.   

**Q:**  Anyway, to the National People's Congress, if the Dalai Lama did go, then I was thinking that people might have said that if you did go to the meeting then you sort of became part of China right? Because all the various regions of China were attending, right? So I was thinking that some may have said that the Dalai Lama should not go. Then others may have said, "Look, the 17-Point Agreement has been signed," and that "It may be best to meet the leaders." So I was thinking that they may have had such discussions.   

**A:**  Yes, there would have been, but there wasn't any choice, right? The 17-Point Agreement was implemented, and the Chinese and the Dalai Lama returned [from Yadong]. This was in 1954. [going to Beijing]   

**Q:**  Last time you mentioned that you wrote reports about the tour and you were concerned about finishing them. Then after that you returned, right? So when you came up [to Lhasa], had the motor road been completed?   

**A:**  The motor road was usable up to Chamdo, but after that it was a dirt road [Hin. kacha].   

**Q:**  So you went down in '52 and you stayed there for about a year?   

**A:**  Yes, in '52. And excluding the travel, we were there for about 10 months. On the road, it took a long time. When we went to China, it took about 1 month and some days since we rode [horses]. Then from Chengdu we took a plane to Xi'an. They told us that from Chengdu we would arrive at Beijing, but on that day they told us that the weather was not good so we landed in Xi'an. The plane was a lousy one; a cargo carrier. On both sides there were steel seats/benches. It landed at Xi'an and we stayed there for a week. They kept on telling us that the weather was bad. Actually, if they told us the truth, it would have been better, wouldn't it? We would also have been more relaxed. The reason [for the delay] was that Kungö Liushar and Kungö Dingja were coming via Hong Kong so we had to meet at Changchun. We supposedly were to go by train from Xi'an, and they were to meet at this place [I have forgotten the name]. So since the two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྐུ་ངོ] An honorific term of address for aristocratic officials. It is something like, &quot;Your Excellency.&quot;">kungö</span> were to come from there, they just kept telling us that the weather was bad, and we stayed like that for a week. Later they said that since the weather was bad so we must take the train. They should have told us that we would be there for a week since the other party had not arrived and that we should relax, take a tour, and then we would join up with the party by train. But no, since they are all liars, they lied and told us that the weather was bad. If the weather was bad, then we enjoyed taking the train since the plane was hopeless. It was frightening. At that time, Kungö <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span> Rimshi was there. They sent us in a cargo plane, right? Then we arrived at Xi'an or something like that. We arrived early in the morning and they said that there was something to see. There was nothing to see at all. Then in the evening, we went on the train and we were sitting on the train. After some time, a train came by, and it was the kungös! Then they came onto our train and we went to Beijing. If they had told us, it would have been nice, wouldn't it? Rather, they kept saying the weather was bad. Sort of like habitually lying, even when there is no need to.   

**Q:**  Actually, if they had said that, there was nothing secretive about it.   

**A:**  Yes, nothing secretive. They were our leaders and we would have been happy to wait for them.   

**Q:**  So how long did you stay?   

**A:**  In China?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  I told you, 10 months. We were at Beijing and then we went for a tour, and then we went toward Inner Mongolia, etcetera.   

**Q:**  So up to Chamdo you came by car?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  From Chamdo?   

**A:**  We rode.   

**Q:**  Then each one's servants were waiting there?   

**A:**  We each had a servant with us.   

**Q:**  What about horses?   

**A:**  We had to pay for them. In each area.   

**Q:**  You were not using the government's traditional <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འུལ་ལག] A generic term for corvée labor that had to be performed for one&#x27;s manorial estate/lord without pay. One kind of ula required people to go and work and another kind required the provision of transportation animals.">ula</span> transportation system, right?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  You could have if you wanted to, right?   

**A:**  Yes, but it was not used at that time. For the hiring of horses, the Chinese paid. As guides, there were one or two Chinese.   

**Q:**  So when you came up to Beijing, was it the end of '52 or was it already '53?   

**A:**  We spent New Year's day there, and so it was already '53, around spring.   

**Q:**  When you arrived at Lhasa, did you notice any changes, or was it the same as before?   

**A:**  It was the same.   

**Q:**  At that time, the Water-Dragon Year People's Association had already risen, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So during this time you were in China?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So you were not in Lhasa?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  When you came up, what did you do?   

**A:**  The same tsendrön work.   

**Q:**  So in '53, there wasn't any special political event of any significance?   

**A:**  No, nothing really. Though the People's Association thing was still there.   

**Q:**  It was said that the People's Association should not meet. That they were not permitted to meet.   

**A:**  Yes, it was said that the People's Association's gatherings were not at all right. That was the reason they were arrested.   

**Q:**  So sometime in '54 or '55, there was another People's Association with the likes of Alo Chöndze.   

**A:**  Yes, they were the ones who were imprisoned.   

**Q:**  What I am referring to is the People's Association of '52. The one with Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས] and Tsha Trunyila [Tib. ཚ་བ་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལགས].   

**A:**  Yes. This was like the fermenting agent [Tib. རུ་མ] for the later one.   

**Q:**  So in '53 was it the same?   

**A:**  Yes, the same. But it was obvious that there was no getting along with the Chinese. Wherever it was, there were all sorts of events where the Chinese and the Tibetans had fights. For example, when the Dalai Lama's new palace was being built, the government's horse carts were used to collect stones above Kharoshanka [Tib. ཁ་རོག་ཤན་ཁ]. And at the Kurusamba Bridge, the mule and stable worker [Tib. ཆིབས་གཡོག] [of the Dalai Lama] was shot and killed by the Chinese. So since they did that, people said that this was just too much, and their hearts and minds turned cold [Tib. བློ་ལོག་སེམས་ལོག] (they "lost faith"). However, some were saying that this was good. This was like the way Ache Nangsa [Tib. ཨ་ལྕེ་སྣང་ས] in the story came to have faith in religion. That was because her husband's aunt [Tib. ཨ་ནེ་སྙིད་མོ] persecuted her. So if the Chinese suppressed us with brutality, it was good because our enthusiasm was strengthened.   

**Q:**  Now, what you are relating took place in 1957-58, right?   

**A:**  Was it? Anyway, it was right at the time when there was new construction at Norbulinga. It was right around the time we had come from China. [If that is the case then it was in '53].   

**Q:**  So in 1952 [1953] you came up, and what were the Chinese saying about the reforms? The Chinese must have been saying that they wanted to have socialism.   

**A:**  No. No, it was not like that. Until Chen Yi came, it stayed that way [no reforms]. There was talk that the Military Administrative Committee had to begin, and that the Tibet Autonomous Region must be instituted. We said that we really didn't understand this Military Administrative Committee, since it was some military government. That this was not acceptable. There were some sort of meetings about this.   

**Q:**  Where?   

**A:**  I don't know, but somewhere.   

**Q:**  Who was there?   

**A:**  The monastic representatives and everyone was there.   

**Q:**  So you are talking about the government meeting, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span>?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. But this was after Chen Yi arrived. [in 1956]   

**Q:**  Now when you say when Chen Yi arrived, are you talking about '57?   

**A:**  Was that in '57?   

**Q:**  Are you talking about the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region [PCTAR]?   

**A:**  Yes, that one.   

**Q:**  That was in '56, after the Dalai Lama arrived [from his visit to Beijing]. [Note: According to Kündeling all of this talk was under discussion in Beijing when the Dalai Lama was there. The various items were sent to Lhasa where the Kashag probably called the general meeting. So this was just before Chen Yi arrived].   

**A:**  Yes. So they said that they wanted to start the Military Administrative Committee.   

**Q:**  But this was listed in the 17-Point Agreement.   

**A:**  Yes, it was in there! But the Chinese said that it had to start and we had to begin work on it. So it was said that we did not agree with this, and so later the so-called Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was begun.   

**Q:**  So all of this talk began at Lhasa?   

**A:**  Therefore, they came from down there [Beijing], and so this is what the Chinese were saying. The Chinese representative was there.   

**Q:**  Are you talking about Chen Yi?   

**A:**  Such things took place before he came.   

**Q:**  Now this question of not starting the Military Administrative Committee but starting the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region - was this discussed in China?   

**A:**  No. No. It was discussed here, thinking that this Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region may be better. And so it was said that they were going to get prepared to start an autonomous region, and so the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was started.   

**Q:**  I thought that when the Dalai Lama was in China talks about this took place, and then Chen Yi came.   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  So before Chen Yi, weren't they talking about beginning the socialist program?   

**A:**  The Chinese were saying that democratic reforms had to begin, and this and that - yes they were saying that. You know there were Tibetans who ran after the Chinese asses. They went here and there saying that this was just so great. However, the people were not listening to it. There were some who were - there was this <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span> who passed away - his name was Chömpel Champa [Tib. ཆོས་འཕེལ་བྱམས་པ] or something. He said that he went as propaganda for the Youth League, and he said that some old man or woman was saying that the democratic reforms must begin. It seems that they [the old man and woman] were asking to be made as beggars sooner . [Note: Recall the song: "The People's Liberation Army, the group of beggars came and they liberated everyone and made them into beggars [Tib. བཅིང་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི་སླེབས་སོང་། སྤྲང་པོ་ཁྱུ་ཚོ་སླེབ་སོང་། ཚང་མ་བཅིང་འགྲོལ་བཏང་སོང་། ཚང་མ་སྤྲང་པོ་བཟོས་སོང]."   

**Q:**  Finally, whether they were saying that democratic reforms or socialism must begin - the society itself had to be changed, right? So were they going around saying that socialism was good and things like that?   

**A:**  Who, the Chinese?   

**Q:**  Yes - I mean, how did they go about doing it? Did they go into the towns? Did they gather the poorer classes and give lectures?   

**A:**  No, they were not doing that. For example, there was a song, "Socialism is good, socialism is good [Tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཡག་། སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་ཡག]." They were even singing songs like that. But if they went to the villages saying that socialism was good, they were not going to understand it.   

**Q:**  So how did they put this into practice? Through the youth league?   

**A:**  There were Tibetans who were running dogs going after the Chinese asses. They probably told those people and also went to the villages to give lectures. I heard that they did such things. Some of them are dead, but people like Chömpel Champa were there. Some of our lay officials were there. Then [there was] Shölkang Jedrung and their kind. They said that socialism and democratic reforms will result in great happiness.   

**Q:**  Now, those people who that said this, if we were to put them into certain categories, were they the younger ones who liked new ways, or were some from the poorer sections who had a lot of loans?   

**A:**  There must have been all kinds of people.   

**Q:**  No. But if you were to just reflect on it for a while. You know, the ones who ran after the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. There must have been a poor section who could not manage themselves, and then there were also the ones who had their heads turned [Tib. མགོ་འཁོར]. [Note: What he meant is those who believed in what the Chinese said. See earlier interviews where he uses the same term] For example, people like Shölkang Jedrungla were not poor, right? They were also being fooled. And there were some tsidrung. There were many.   

**Q:**  Beside the officials, there must have been many younger ones who wanted to go to China and study.   

**A:**  There must have been many. I can't tell you this and that, but there were. They liked to do anything inappropriate and lawless [Tib. ཁྲིམས་མེད་ལུགས་མེད].   

**Q:**  In 1954, the Dalai Lama went down to China and he stayed for about a year. So during this time, you stayed as a tsendrön.   

**A:**  We were at Lhasa.   

**Q:**  So when did you become a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</span>?   

**A:**  There was no <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</span> [position] for me since I was already a tsendrön.   

**Q:**  I see. Once you become a tsendrön, then you didn't have to go to the dzong.   

**A:**  No, then we stayed at the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</span> (Secretariat).   

**Q:**  I see. You were a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</span> a long time ago.   

**A:**  Yes. This time I was the one in charge of performing rituals (Tib. ཤབདེན་དོདམཔ [Tib. ཞབས་རྟེན་དོ་དམ་པ]).   

**Q:**  When you were a Shabden Dodampa, had all the tax collections remained the same? What changes were there?   

**A:**  Nothing changed. The Shabden Dodampa does not have many taxes to collect. The government provided the grain and money. At that time we didn't have much butter, so we had to buy it in the market.   

**Q:**  There were some offices that had their taxes transported [to Lhasa] through the transportation corvée tax, right? Had that changed or did they now have to pay wages [for transportation]?   

**A:**  It had decreased quite a lot. However, the earlier, larger offices were using [it]. For example, the gold collector, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འབྲི་ཆུ] The Upper Yangtse River which formed the boundary between political Tibet and China in the 1930s and 1940s">Drichu</span> Serka, and from Tö, the butter loads tax (Tib. སག་མརདö [Tib. ས་དགའ་མར་དོས]) were using it. Otherwise, there seems to have been some problems with transportation from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</span> and the Kham side. There must have been some who said we don't have to do this and that, and so they probably found their pride too, and that's how it probably happened. I have not personally gone to use these taxes, but this may have happened.   

**Q:**  During this time, the Chinese were saying a lot of things like they were going to improve conditions, etcetera. During '51-'54 had they established, schools, hospitals, roads?   

**A:**  There was a rudimentary [Tib. ཐབས་ཆག] hospital at Lubu after they bought the Pomsur House. Later, behind the Jangsebshar [Tib. ལྕང་གསེབ་ཤར] they started another one. Roads they really did make. But it was something that they themselves needed, though it may have been for Tibet too. However, there were two routes, the Qinghai-Tibet motorable road [Tib. མཚོ་བོད་རླངས་འཁོར་འགྲོ་ལམ], and the Kham-Tibet motorable road [Tib. ཁམས་བོད་རླངས་འཁོར་འགྲོ་ལམ]. The latter was not that successful since it went via Kongpo.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama came from China, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was started, right? Was there a ceremony for this?   

**A:**  Yes, there was. When they started the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, they did it in meeting halls. And the Panchen Lama came. The Dalai Lama was already there. They [officials] also came from Chamdo and some celebrations took place.   

**Q:**  It was around this time that the Chinese may have been talking about a socialist society. Whatever it is, one day one has to go on the socialist path, right? So in '55-'56, were the government officials thinking that the estates would be done away [with]? And had you already resigned yourself to this fact, or how was the situation?   

**A:**  Well [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Now, in the 17-Point Agreement, it said that everything was to remain as it was, right? So what were the people thinking? Were people thinking that it would remain [as before]?   

**A:**  Oh, everybody knew it was not going to remain. And after Chen Yi came, it was said that they were going to experiment with democratic reforms. And Bumtang [Tib. འབུམ་ཐང] <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</span> was said to be experimenting with this at Tölung, though I did not personally see this. Sedrong Yume <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཇོ་ལགས] 1. A term of address for elder brothers. 2. A term of address for older males in general.">Jola</span> [Tib. གསེར་གྲོང་གཡུ་སྨད་ཇོ་ལགས] either gave the estates to the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</span> or leased them, and he took off his long earring [Tib. སོག་བྱིལ], cut his hair short, and tied his <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཕྱུ་པ] The traditional Tibetan men and women&#x27;s dress. It is like a robe that is tied at the waist. Both men and women wear such dresses, although they differ slightly in color and in style.">chupa</span> in a short form. This was around the time of Chen Yi's arrival.   

**Q:**  On the one hand, the 17-Point Agreement had said that everything was to remain the same whether it was [regarding the] estates or monasteries, right? Now the Chinese were saying this, but on the other hand, what were they doing?   

**A:**  They were mobilizing [Tib. སྐུལ་སློང] the people, saying that democratic reforms should be done. Actually, what the Chinese really wanted was for the people to rise up. But the people did not have that level of education and so they were not rising up. Therefore, there were very few who sort of divided something they owned. Otherwise, there was no one else doing it.   

**Q:**  So after Chen Yi came, this was being said?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  And before that?   

**A:**  There was talk that one must do it [the reforms], but there was no one doing it.   

**Q:**  However, were they instigating the people and pushing somewhat this matter?   

**A:**  They were doing this openly, indirectly and through other people [Tib. དངོས་ཤུགས་བརྒྱུད་གསུམ].   

**Q:**  However, regarding land reforms, the instigation of the people - did this start in '52-'53, or was it after Chen Yi arrived?   

**A:**  It was just before Chen Yi came. Not in '51-'53, but in '54-'55 such talks were there [happening]. Then they got more and more stern saying that we should do the reform and that socialism is great.   

**Q:**  How did they mobilize?   

**A:**  As I told you, the Chinese were behind and our Tibetan running dogs went everywhere to talk [about reforms, socialism].   

**Q:**  So they would go to the villages and places?   

**A:**  Yes, and Lhasa and its vicinity. Because if they did too much of that, there was a danger that they would get beaten up.   

**Q:**    

**A:**  It's true! They would say, "What the hell are you saying." So they went to areas near to Lhasa. They said that they went.   

**Q:**  In the Youth and Women's Association meeting, they must have been talk about this.   

**A:**  Mostly in the Youth Association.   

**Q:**  So when they had their meetings, they must have been saying something. Did they say things like socialism is good?   

**A:**  Sure. The youth were such that they had to be saying that.   

**Q:**  The reason being that they [Chinese] had to use various organizations, and that they too needed to use Tibetans who spoke the language, right?   

**A:**  Therefore, the Chinese instigated Tibetans and they did it through the Youth. Now, in these organizations there were Chinese, but there were government officials, ones who had been fed from their estates since they were conceived in their mother's womb. There were probably one or two from the people. It was like that, you know? They had until then fed off of their estates, and then they were saying they didn't want the estates. But they were not the ones to put one's own [estates] on the line, but they were good at instigating others. If one is really sincere, one should do it first. One has to be the first to become a beggar, and then ask others to become beggars, right?   

**Q:**  So looking at these things, then, were most [officials] thinking that one's estates would not last?   

**A:**  That's what must have been in their inner thoughts.   

**Q:**  No, I mean from our side, our government officials- what were they thinking? Were there, at that time, estates given to the government or monasteries, or at least an increase?   

**A:**  No it had not increased. They [the estates] may have even become more conservative and desirable [Tib. rstom 'du].   

**Q:**  Now, it was in 1955 that you came to India, right?   

**A:**  1956.   

**Q:**  Yes. In 1956 there was some problem at first, and it was said that the Dalai Lama could not go. That Trijang Rimpoche was to leave.   

**A:**  Yes, a representative was to go. The Chinese must have made this. Later from India, the Mahabodhi Society invited both, including the Panchen Lama. They did try to stop [them].   

**Q:**  In 1956, was the situation getting worse?   

**A:**  The situation was getting worse and worse year by year, ever since the Chinese came from down there. Especially after the motorable roads were built, then they [got worse]. It is said that earlier when the Chinese first came, you could slap them on the face and they would keep quiet. Later they became more belligerent [Tib. སྦོམ་དི་ཕྱིན] since the road was now joined and so many soldiers had arrived. Then they did whatever [they liked], and it was at that time they even got rid of the two sitsab. His [the Chinese] power had increased. Therefore, when the Dalai Lama was in India, and since he was not at Lhasa, it seems that there was some commotion [at Lhasa]. So they said the security was not good and that the Dalai Lama must return soon. Zhou Enlai had come to India. It is said that he said a lot, saying that they were going to withdraw the army - though we were not actually present [when he said that]. So the commotion was [going on] there. Tibetans were probably thinking of doing something while the Dalai Lama was not in the country, because if the Dalai Lama was there, then they would do that [take caution]. For example, in 1959, after people said that the Dalai Lama had left, people did what they could including sacrificing their lives. If the Dalai Lama was there, the people would not have dared to start that much commotion. They would think that the Dalai Lama was still there and that [it] would lead to disaster.   

**Q:**  I was thinking that the reason why things got worse was that around 1955-'56, the fighting in Kham started and many Khambas came, and then I thought the situation got worse.   

**A:**  Yes, that's right. They persecuted them in Kham and also <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</span> and, as I have mentioned, our director who worked in the Construction Department, Karu Pön, said, "This family [Chinese] is just full of lies, it's amazing." Earlier, when we went to China in 1952, he was the darling of the Chinese. Then when the policy got worse and worse and they lied more and more, later he just lost all belief [hope] and in 1959, he took soldiers and he lost his life. He revolted.   

**Q:**  He went to fight?   

**A:**  Yes, he did. But earlier, when we went to China, Karu Pön was a great person for the Chinese. In Tengchen the Chinese built a new house for him.   

**Q:**  In '55-'56, the revolt started in the Kham area, but in the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</span> area it is said that the fighting started around 1951. Is that right?   

**A:**  In the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</span> area it must have happened around '52-'53, because it first started in Amdo, right? Then the Dalai Lama came up in '54. Then the revolt started in Kham. That's why they degraded the name of Trijang Rimpoche, saying that he instigated the Khambas [Tib. ངན་བསླབ]. He went to Chantreng and other places, right? And Karmapa too. The Chinese talked as if the lamas instigated trouble there.   

**Q:**  When did the Khambas come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  Probably around '54, after the Dalai Lama arrived.   

**Q:**  Then they gradually increased. And was there a place where they stayed?   

**A:**  They would stay all over in Lhasa, as there were so many other Khambas. Andru Jinda was there. And then they went to Lhoka and did this and that. They stayed in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</span> and everywhere - spread out. Then they got into a group and started <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span>. And it was not just Chushigandru, but there were many monks from the three great monasteries. Likewise, there were soldiers from the army. Even from the people, there were many. For example, there was Ganden ex-shengo, Shesur [Tib. ཞལ་ཟུར]. As soon as he completed his shengo term, he left for Chushigandru and took along with him his followers [Tib. ཨ་ཕྲུག]. He is the one I heard that the Bhutanese arrested and killed.   

**Q:**  You mean earlier?   

**A:**  Yes. [His reference was to the 1970's.]   

**Q:**  When <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> first started it seemed the Drönyerchemmo Phala and Andru Dzasa [Gombo Tashi] spoke, right?   

**A:**  Yes, that is certain.   

**Q:**  I hear that the government also helped with the provision of the guns from Shang.   

**A:**  The government, of course, would not help from its side. The Chinese would say this and that, right? They themselves went and took them by force. They didn't request the government for an order - actually, that was what we wanted. [But] the government would not say to hand it over to them.   

**Q:**  I heard that Drönyerchemmo Phala discussed this.   

**A:**  Yes, he may have internally. But that I don't know much.   

**Q:**  I don't mean from the government side, but from Phala Drönyerchemmo's side.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. The government was not telling <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> to form an organization and saying, "Here are the arms." That's why the Chinese could not point a finger at them. They did it on their own. Then, besides the ammunition, on the Ganden Chöngor side and on the Lhoka side, they went on their own, spoke with the various <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</span> and just took grain.   

**Q:**  Would Phala and others be able to secretly tell people that it was good to help them?   

**A:**  To whom?   

**Q:**  The various <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</span> in Lhoka.   

**A:**  Oh, no. That you could not say, because if he said that, then Phala [would have problems], and even in the Lhoka area, we didn't know what kind of persons were in the Lhoka area. The Chinese were too cunning [Tib. གཡོ་སྒྱུ]. What if they [dzongpön] said that they were not thinking of giving [grain, etc.], but Phala said to give it. In this way, they were trying not to get involved in it.   

**Q:**  Did the Khambas say that they were fighting for the cause of the country?   

**A:**  Yes. That's why they were saying that they were the Volunteer Army to Defend the Religion, the Tensung Tanglang Magar.   

**Q:**  So in this way were the various <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</span> or the people giving anything?   

**A:**  Yes, they were.   

**Q:**  What I heard was that the Khambas just went and robbed [people]. I never heard that they [question not finished]   

**A:**  No. No. There were people who were volunteering. For example, when people like Gelongla, who was the Lhapsö Shidü [Tib. ལྷ་གསོལ་གཞིས་སྡོད], the he the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང་དཔོན] The head of a dzong in the traditional Tibetan government.">dzongpön</span> himself went together with them. That was not a case where they were bullied because the dzongpön would not go. He was the Lhapsö Shidü and he went as secretary of Chushigandru. Of course, there were some who didn't like [want] to join, right? Otherwise, people thought, I guess this is it, and they said, "So and so has joined, and some dzongpön [Tib. སྣེ་སྡོད] discussed it."- There would be some who would not speak, right? For example, some lay officials who came to Lhüntse, returned, for example the Babshib Dodam [Tib. འབབ་ཤིབ་དོ་དམ]. Others would just use their power and just rob [people]. So there were all kinds.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to India, did you go as part of the retinue?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When did you go to India and how long did you stay altogether?   

**A:**  It was around winter. When we were going to Yangpajen, we were wearing woolen gowns [Tib. ཟླ་གམ] in the car. When we returned, it was around spring. It did not take that long. Not one year.   

**Q:**  In India you went as a tsendrön, and whether it was at Kalimpong or Nathula [Tib. སྣ་སྟོད་ལ], did <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</span> come to have an audience?   

**A:**  They came at Delhi.   

**Q:**  No, before that? Like Kungö Gyalola.   

**A:**  He came to Delhi.   

**Q:**  Not at Gangtok?   

**A:**  [He] must have come later.   

**Q:**  It would seem to me that when everybody heard that the Dalai Lama was coming via Gangtok, everyone must have gone there.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, things with us were not that certain, because the Dalai Lama went from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span> first. Tempala [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ལགས] and I were left behind and brought the rest of the retinue.   

**Q:**  Brought what?   

**A:**  The servants and the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</span> monastery monks. And we stayed in Kalimpong for a long time.   

**Q:**  So you stayed in Kalimpong for a long time?   

**A:**  Yes. Then later when the Dalai Lama went to Varanasi, then we were told to come.   

**Q:**  During this time what did you hear? At Kalimpong there was the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</span> organization, with <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span> and Khenjung, and at that time, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</span> must have been there.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  And there was also the Dedön Tshogpa. Were there frequent talks and meetings?   

**A:**  At that time, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</span> was not there. He came for pilgrimage when the Dalai Lama returned.   

**Q:**  To Lhasa?   

**A:**  No. When the Dalai Lama went to Gangtok, then <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</span> was just coming for pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  Yes, he came for pilgrimage, and then he stayed there.   

**Q:**  Therefore, at that time, you did not go to any meetings of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</span>, right?   

**A:**  No never. They were not there at all. They were in Delhi. At that time, our retinue consisted of about 58 persons, including the servants. The Dalai Lama left with a selected entourage. I went to take leave, and came ahead from the Kagyü Monastery [in Yadong?] and stayed at Sabila's [a Tibetan Muslim who owned a restaurant] house. At night I briefly met [the Dalai Lama] and the Dalai Lama left very early the next morning.   

**Q:**  Later, you came to Varanasi?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama did.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama went to Delhi and all over the place, you were not there?   

**A:**  No. There was the Dalai Lama and only a select entourage.   

**Q:**  Politically, what talk was there supposed to be? There was a group saying that the Dalai Lama should stay and another that he had to return.   

**A:**  Such talk was after the pilgrimage and before he left. Some told the Dalai Lama to stay. We were not together. the Dalai Lama went towards the south and we could go wherever we wanted. We 58 persons went to Nepal.   

**Q:**  Why Nepal?   

**A:**  For pilgrimage.   

**Q:**  So you were never together [with the Dalai Lama]?   

**A:**  No. The Dalai Lama only had a select group including the two tutors.   

**Q:**  Later when the Dalai Lama was returning, he came to Kalimpong and Gangtok.   

**A:**  Then at Gangtok, the Dalai Lama stayed for a week and we went ahead to make the preparations at Yadong.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there any such talks in Kalimpong?   

**A:**  We were not there in Kalimpong, and we were so, so busy. Obviously, the people must have been hoping that the Dalai Lama would stay.   

**Q:**  It is said that there were two factions and [the] <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</span> [deity] was consulted.   

**A:**  Yes, [they] must have consulted [Nechung].   

**Q:**  It seems that Ngabö and others were to take the road and later he didn't.   

**A:**  [He] went in a plane.   

**Q:**  What was the reason?   

**A:**  That Ngabö should go ahead?   

**Q:**  No, that he should take the plane.   

**A:**  Maybe it was because he had a lot of work with the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Have you heard that there was a plan to start a fight at Sharsingma so that the Dalai Lama could not return? At that time, some officials including Ngabö were to be killed?   

**A:**  I swear by the three jewels that I have never heard [about this].   

**Q:**  I heard that .   

**A:**  Now talk like these is made [these days].   

**Q:**  Yes. Regarding the fight, I have spoken with the ones who were to go and fight.   

**A:**  I see. Start a fight - but we didn't have any soldiers. You need people to fight.   

**Q:**  At Kalimpong there were 100 or so traders [who] were to start some commotion.   

**A:**  Oh, some traders, yes. But if they were to start something, even at Lhasa, we had nothing. We had no militant organization [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་སྒྲིག་འཛུགས] except for the various regiments. Besides the regiments, one needs something from the people.   

**Q:**  Yes. It was said that even at Lhasa they were supposed to do a lot, but then they did nothing.   

**A:**  This thing about killing Ngabö and all, I have not heard. Now that you mention it, it sounds like something like that happened, since he took the plane.   

**Q:**  Yes, I heard the secret [was] leaked out and he took the plane. In India, you were working with trucks or cars, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. The Dalai Lama bought some trucks. The Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama went to the Tata Company [in Jangsebshar] and they bought [trucks].   

**Q:**  What was the purpose of the trucks going to Lhasa?   

**A:**  [For] The grain for the various salaries for the army regiments was transported in the trucks.   

**Q:**  You had to give grain to the Chinese army even in 1957?   

**A:**  Not the Chinese. We needed it for our own regiments. Earlier we used the pack animal transportation system. Then that was reduced, and so the trucks went to collect the grain.   

**Q:**  So trucks were sent and you didn't have to use pack animals?   

**A:**  For example, for 500 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁལ] A traditional volume measurement used for measuring grain in traditional Tibetan society. Sizes of this unit varied somewhat, but the official government khe (called mkhar ru or bstan dzin mkha ru) weighed about 28-31 pounds for barley. It was used to convey the size of fields. For example, a field said to be 10 khe in size meant that 10 khe of seed could be sown on that field.">khe</span>, we would have had to arrange 100 animals. It's 5 khe each [animal]. So for 1,000 khe, we had to have 200 animals. So in this way, we needed so many animals, and so we transported [the grain in trucks], and on the side we hired them out.   

**Q:**  How did this idea [of buying trucks] originate? Did it come from the Reform Office?   

**A:**  After the Reform Office, there was a separate granary, the Drukhang Legung [Tib. འབྲུ་ཁང་ལས་ཁུངས], which had to pay the military salaries, right? And so this was transported by the trucks.   

**Q:**  I see. Now after this, the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa. In India, there were talks with Zhou Enlai and it was said that the democratic reforms could be postponed for as long as possible, right?   

**A:**  I don't know about democratic reforms, but they said that if there were too many Chinese in Tibet, then they could be immediately withdrawn, except for a few cadres. I heard that that was what he said [to the Dalai Lama]. That it was imperative that the Dalai Lama now return. It must be in the Dalai Lama's biography.   

**Q:**  Then the Dalai Lama came to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, and then Lhasa. So were these cadres withdrawn from offices?   

**A:**  No, they were not. Maybe some soldiers were reduced, but not office workers.   

**Q:**  Did they reduce the soldiers? Did some of them return to China?   

**A:**  They may have, I don't know. At that time, I was working in your house where our office was situated.   

**Q:**  So when you were working at the office, did they reduce the staff?   

**A:**  Not much. Since I took a few months [trip to India], they gave me the salary. I said that I didn't want the salary since I went to work for the local government and I got paid by it. But they said that it was all right and they insistently gave [it to] me.   

**Q:**  From 1957 to 1959 - during this period there was the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</span> problem. Now, supposing that the Chinese handled the situation in Kham diplomatically, and if the revolt had not taken place there and they had not come up to Lhasa and if they had not started <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span>, then - there were so many articles in the 17-Point Agreement, and so would that have lasted.   

**A:**  It would have. The problem started in Kham with all the revolts. Then the Khambas came to Lhasa and started a militia. Then the Chinese themselves were getting worse and worse.   

**Q:**  Supposing there was no <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span>, what would have happened?   

**A:**  If they had not formed, if they [Chinese] had not lit the match down there, then there wasn't really much reason for Lhasa to revolt if they had stayed still in Kham. But the people there could not lead a normal life. And the Khambas, along with the Lhasans, and the monks of the three monasteries happened this way [formed Chushigandru]. Now, if the Chinese did not talk about democratic reforms and had they assisted us where assistance was needed, then it would have stayed that way. It would have.   

**Q:**  Until the Cultural Revolution?   

**A:**  Yeah. After the uprising they did the Cultural Revolution. Then they did all the worst things possible.   

**Q:**  In 1957, were you doing the same work (as a tsendrön)? When you returned from India what was the situation like? Were there some problems in Lhasa? Was there some urgency on the part of the Chinese? Were there a lot of soldiers? Did they go about the city with guns? I don't think there was the feeling that trouble was going to begin right away, [right]?   

**A:**  No, there wasn't a feeling that some problem was going to arise immediately. However, the belligerency [Tib. བཙན་ཤེད] of the Chinese was increasing. They would arrest and take [you] away immediately, and things like that, even though we had our own government's <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</span> Legung and others [the Nangtsesha].   

