# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0031.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1991  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 63  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] was a monk official who served as a tsendrön. He was from the Dombor monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང], and a relative of his had been a katsab. In this interview, Ngawang Rigdrol discusses some of the events that took place on March 10, 1959 when Kalön Liushar, Shasur and Surkhang were entering Norbulinga, and how Kalön Sambo was hit by a stone thrown by someone in the crowd that was surrounding Norbulinga. He also recalls the attitude of the Lhasa people when the Dalai Lama went to India in 1956, and what he had heard about the meeting between Zhou Enlai and the Dalai Lama in New Delhi. And he discusses the Chinese decision to decrease the number of cadres in Tibet in 1957.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0031_01/H_0031_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  I have interviewed Mrs. Surkhang, and we talked [about] the things [that] happened around the time when the revolt was rising. She said just before the revolt some important Sawang {Council Minister or kalön) such as Surkhang, held a meeting. I guess it was probably a meeting that was against the Chinese. Later, another meeting was held in the Tibet Work Committee [Tib. བོད་ལས་དོན་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. At that meeting, Surkhang left so the Chinese said that Surkhang was really no good and so on, and there was some trouble. My question is about what Surkhang had done during that time, because she could not tell me specifically. At that time, what were people saying about Surkhang?   

**A:**  I guess they probably held such meetings.   

**Q:**  Not all, but some Sawang held a meeting, I guess before that.   

**A:**  I guess some major Sawang probably held meetings, but it was true that the Chinese did not have a good attitude towards Surkhang. They did not trust him like we did. For example, Surkhang and Sambo were both Sawang, but Sambo had a military position with the Chinese. He had a car and a driver, and two bodyguards would always be with him. So when they went to Norbulinga, Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and Shasur [Tib. ཤ་ཟུར] arrived first. The masses were surrounding Norbulinga and they said, "You are exchanging the Dalai Lama for dayan coins. This is too much [Tib. གང་མིན་ཚད་ཡིན]." I was outside of the main gate. Then they entered the gate. After them, Surkhang arrived there. Surkhang also came in a car, and the driver was Chinese too, but he was a very clever man. When he saw that near the Norbulinga gate it was filled with people, he and his aides walked to Norbulinga from the Chango Bridge. He did not sit in the car and he probably sent the car back. People also said similar things to what they told Liushar and Shasur, saying, "Be careful not to exchange the Dalai Lama for dayan." But Surkhang just said, "Yes, yes, yes [Tib. ལ་ལ་ལ]," and [then] he was able to enter the main gate. So the masses just scolded him, but didn't have that bad kind of an attitude towards him. However, Sambo was not clever enough. He came to Norbulinga in a Chinese car with a Chinese driver and he also had Chinese bodyguards. When his car arrived near the main gate of Norbulinga, people stoned it immediately. Some people were shouting not to stone him, but no one paid attention to that and a stone hit his head.   

**Q:**  So he left his car, right?   

**A:**  He had to because people were stoning his car. When he got out of the car a stone hit his head. So he was not able to enter Norbulinga and he was taken to Dekyilinga [the Indian Consulate where there was a doctor]. The Chinese did not have a good attitude toward Sawang Surkhang. At that time, the masses knew who were standing with the Chinese and who were standing with the [Tibetan] government. You could see it from this event, could you not? Basically, Sambo might have [had] good thoughts but when he came to Norbulinga he should have sent them [the Chinese] back with the car before they came close to Norbulinga. But he did not. He stayed in the car and arrived in front of the main gate of Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  The masses probably did not know who was in the car and stoned at it.   

**A:**  That is impossible.   

**Q:**  Because it was a Chinese car, the masses probably thought it was a Chinese leader and stoned it.   

**A:**  The masses knew who he was. He was not wearing Chinese clothes. He had put on a Tibetan official's uniform made form yellow satin with a round dragon design [Tib. མཛོད་གོས].   

**Q:**  If the masses knew who he was, the masses must have thought Sambo was a person who had a close relationship with Chinese.   

**A:**  Because he had a position with the Chinese, the masses probably thought that he was that kind of person.   

**Q:**  What was his position?   

**A:**  He was a general of the army [Tib. དྲག་པོའི་སྤྱི་ཁྱབ]. He and Ngabö had Chinese military positions.   

**Q:**  This Sambo was not the Sambo Depön, right?   

**A:**  No, he was the Sawang.   

**Q:**  I heard that a meeting was held before that time.   

**A:**  I have not heard about it. But, you know, it was a secret, so I might not know about it.   

**Q:**  That meeting was not only for the Sawang, but also for some other officials.   

**A:**  There must have been the drungtsi, Jigyab Khembo and Phala, etcetera.   

**Q:**  I heard that there was once a meeting that was held by the Tibet Work Committee at which the Chinese scolded Surkhang a lot. At that point, many people were worrying that he would be seized by them.   

**A:**  I do not know what he said previously but he went to the [Chinese] Military Headquarters on the 10th purposely. I know Surkhang, Liushar, Shasur and some others went to the Military Headquarters and explained why the Dalai Lama was not able to come for the show. They said that even though the Dalai Lama had been invited to see the show, the masses were blocking him and he could not come. They [Chinese] said that the masses were mobilized by you people. Shasur told me about it. He said the Chinese were scolding them a lot, and he thought they probably would not be able to leave that place. He thought that the Chinese would probably seize them. At that time, a high official, he was probably Tan Guasan or Zhang Jingwu, pointed his finger at them and said, "Now, it doesn't make any difference to us. The point is that the Dalai Lama is in your hands." So Shasur then knew [that] they were not going to be seized and felt greatly relaxed. However, the Chinese scolded them a lot and said, "If we kill someone, we would not kill the person secretly. We would kill him openly and do propaganda about it." Then they returned to [their] homes. Before they went to the Military Headquarters, Surkhang Sawang made a speech from the top of the main gate of Norbulinga and said, "Please do not create a commotion. We will not take the Dalai Lama to see the show. You do not have to worry about it." He declared this decision. After that, they went to Military Headquarters. At that time, the masses were searching their cars because people were worried that the Dalai Lama might have been hiding in the car. I heard they were scolded a lot at the Military Headquarters.   

**Q:**  You have not heard anything about the meeting before that, have you? At that meeting, Surkhang might have said a lot in opposition to the Chinese. After that, the people and the monasteries also held [some] kind of meetings and said that they were not going to hand over Surkhang. Didn't you hear that?   

**A:**  No, I have not. Surkhang was very clever and smart, so he might have said that, and then [he] might have stayed [acted] like getting sick or something.   

**Q:**  The Mönlam Festival of 1956 was held in Lhasa. I guess it was before the Dalai Lama went to India. I heard that at the festival the People Association had an disturbance, and [they] made some trouble and held [some] kind of meetings. And three people were seized and one died in the jail. When was it and what was it?   

**A:**  Are you talking about the People Association?   

**Q:**  Oh! That was in 1952. I heard something happened at the Mönlam Festival of 1956. The Chinese forced the Tibetan government to say something.   

**A:**  I really do not remember about it. He went for the pilgrimage to India.   

**Q:**  I think it was before the Dalai Lama went to India.   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama left Lhasa in winter before the Tibetan New Years arrived [started]. The Mönlam Festival would have been held after the New Year. The Mönlam Festival would have been held during the 1st month. We took [went] to Gyantse in the New Year.   

**Q:**  The Mahabodha Association invited [the Dalai Lama]. At that point, how did the government officials and the masses feel? Did they feel glad?   

**A:**  Everybody was so happy about it because the place where the Dalai Lama was going to go was India.   

**Q:**  Did they hold some sort of celebration and give parties?   

**A:**  No, but we were very happy. The masses were also very happy about the Dalai Lama's trip. When the Dalai Lama was in India, the people and the monks remained tough [Tib. གྱོང་པོ] towards the Chinese because the Dalai Lama was [safe] in India. So the Chinese said the Dalai Lama should return to Tibet. At that time, Zhou Enlai was in India with a high commander. I do not remember his name. The man had a moustache.   

**Q:**  Was it Fan Ming?   

**A:**  No. He had the same rank of the four marshals, like Liu Bochen. I really cannot remember his name. At that time, the Dalai Lama returned soon because they said that it was not good if the Dalai Lama didn't stay in Tibet. This was because the people and the monks remained tough in Tibet.   

**Q:**  So did they kind of put it into action [Tib. འཁྲབ]?   

**A:**  There probably wasn't any bad action, but they did not listen to the Chinese orders. I guess the Chinese thought that there might be some disturbance when the Dalai Lama was not there, so the Chinese hoped the Dalai Lama would return to Lhasa. At that time, Nehru was the highest leader for India. Zhou had said [something] about [how] the cadres had made mistakes and [how] they would decrease the number of cadres in Tibet and so on.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama returned to Tibet, did they decrease their cadres?   

**A:**  I think they did reduced them a little.   

**Q:**  I heard they cancelled the Construction Work Unit [Tib. འཛུགས་སྐྲུན་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**A:**  The Construction Work Unit was sort of curtailed [Tib. ཁུ་བསྡུ]. It was not cancelled, but they made it smaller. They cut down the number of workers. I was one of those who were cut down.   

**Q:**  My father told me that in 1957 when he went to our house, there weren't any Chinese living there.   

**A:**  Yes, they had bought Mentöpa's [Tib. སྨན་སྟོད་པ] House and moved there. At that time, Zhou Enlai came to India to offer the skull of the Tangseng Lama. He came with the marshal and they met the Dalai Lama in Delhi and told the Dalai Lama to return soon.   

**Q:**  Previously, my father said that [they] were building some houses somewhere near the Kyichu [Tib. སྐྱིད་ཆུ] River in Lhasa for the Tibetan Officials to live in. This was the plan. They [the Chinese] build these houses and let Tibetan officials live in them, and everybody was kind of apprehensive. The Tibetan officials could go to their homes on Saturday and Sunday. Most of the time they had to live there and study there.   

**A:**  There might have been such a talk, but I did not know about it. They probably had such a plan.   

**Q:**  At that time, the People's Association was holding meetings, right?   

**A:**  It was not possible to hold meetings for all the masses, but meetings of delegates were held many times. At that time, people were talking about issues such as how the Military Administrative Committee [Tib. dmag srid u yon lhan khang) should not be established and the Preparatory Committee of Tibet Autonomous Region should not be established.   

**Q:**  So the Chinese talked about this to the Tibetan government in order to prohibit these?   

**A:**  Right.   

**Q:**  So was the Dalai Lama was forced to publish an announcement saying that no one should go out for street demonstrations.   

**A:**  Actually, at that time, people did not do many demonstrations because people did not know about this. But the Dalai Lama was forced to say that they should not create a commotion [Tib. ཟང་ཟིང]. At that time, the Chinese would visit the Dalai Lama and would make these things happen. For example, the reason why the two sitsab had to withdraw was because the Chinese did not like them. The power was in their hands, so we had to do what they said completely.   

**Q:**  I want to get more information about the People's Association. Could you please introduce to someone who knows about it? It should be a person who was living in Lhasa, and the government officials would not [be] involved in this, right?   

**A:**  I am sorry, I do not know. Most people [have] passed away.   

**Q:**  There might be some people, like the chandzö. The better off people, and even [if] they were not leaders, but [those] who had attended the meetings.   

**A:**  Most of them were left in Tibet. It is hard to find someone here because now the generation is changing.   

