# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0031.04 : Tape 4  
##  : with Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 65  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] was a monk official who served as a tsendrön . He was from the Dombor monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང], and a relative of his had been a katsab. In this interview, Ngawang Rigdrol discusses the meeting of Zhou Enlai and the Dalai Lama in India about the postponement of reforms, and how the Dalai Lama returned to Tibet. Additionally, he describes aspects of the March 10th uprising, the distribution of arms for the revolt and the amazing story of how he came to escape with the Dalai Lama.   

---  
### Tape 4  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0031_04/H_0031_04.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Last time [we were talking about] the trucks that were bought from India. How did this talk of buying trucks arise? Was the idea there much earlier?   

**A:**  No. The Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama went to the Calcutta Tata Company for a tour. The Dalai Lama bought the trucks and the Panchen Lama also bought 7 or 10 of them. We bought about 25 of them. The Dalai Lama was very good with mechanical things, and so he bought almost all [of them] with 4-wheel drive. [The Panchen] Labrang did not buy this version. So when we took possession of the trucks, [we disassembled them] and sent them with people carrying the parts on their shoulders via Gangtok. Later, in Tibet, with the sand and the bad roads, our trucks had no problem with this [because of] the 4-wheel drive feature. But the Labrang's trucks had problems on the road because they were [not] 4-wheel drive. So there was really such a difference between having and not having experience, and so the Dalai Lama ordered all 4-wheel drive. So when we had to descend the Shugola [Tib. ཤོག་བོ་ལ] Pass, the Chinese trucks were plodding along and we would easily catch up with them. These trucks were much more powerful [the Tata trucks were a Mercedes collaboration].   

**Q:**  So the decision to buy the trucks was taken [made] in India?   

**A:**  Yes, and I don't think there was any prior idea.   

**Q:**  Yesterday I was reading a book by Apa Pant. [Do] you remember [him]?   

**A:**  Yes, the Political Officer of Sikkim.   

**Q:**  Yes, in that book it is stated that the Chinese were forming an army for Tashilhunpo. Were they doing that?   

**A:**  No, they were not.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  What the Chinese had done was make the local Tibetan government and the Panchen's Nangma [gang] Uyön [Lhengang] separate. However, they [Labrang] were also a part of the Tibetan government, and the law, money, and army was all by the Tibetan government. However, since the Panchen Lama came from [exile in] China, one can't say conclusively that there was a Panchen Army. They were some sort of Chinese soldiers who were Amdowas and Labrang monastery people. There were a lot of Tibetans who stayed [with him] as bodyguards and it was referred to sort of as the Panchen Lama's Army. Maybe that's what Apa Pant was thinking about.   

**Q:**  Whether it was Labrang or the People's Liberation Army bodyguards, had it not increased?   

**A:**  There was sort of this Chinese army with people from Labrang and Amdo. Whether they were part of the Chinese Army or whether they just put on [Chinese] uniforms, they didn't have an army. That was not possible.   

**Q:**  If not, then near Tashilhunpo were there large regiments of Chinese troops? At Shigatse?   

**A:**  At Shigatse there was a Chinese representative and a regiment. Besides that, there were only bodyguards [of the Panchen Lama].   

**Q:**  In India, there was a lot of talk after Zhou Enlai came, and it was even said that democratic reforms would be postponed. Therefore, when you returned to Lhasa, obviously the Khamba problem was there, but as far as the Chinese were concerned, did they postpone what they were doing, be it democratic reforms or whatever?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. They said, "You don't have to do the democratic reforms until everyone thinks it's appropriate, and they can be postponed for next year or the year after that."   

**Q:**  Since they said that, compared to 1955-56, did the relations or whatever improve in 1957? Did things look more sweet, or what?   

**A:**  No, they just said that. When Zhou Enlai met the Dalai Lama, he said that the Dalai Lama should return soon because, "Since the Dalai Lama is not in Tibet, there is a danger that the Tibetans might create some commotion. And if there are too many Chinese and soldiers [in Tibet], they can be sent home." So this is what was said, and it was even said that democratic reforms could be implemented whenever we wanted. So from a mental perspective [there was some improvement]. It was like Hong Kong . "We are going to take over Hong Kong, but for the next 50 years it will remain as before." However, the point is that they are going to change it. It's like that. So it was as if the Chinese sort of made things calm and made the people relax for awhile.   

**Q:**  So in '57-58, where did you work with my grandfather? Wasn't the office moved somewhere?   

**A:**  It was as if the Chinese borrowed the house for awhile. Later, what was it called, the house?   

**Q:**  Mentöpa, isn't it?   

**A:**  The old Mentöpa House.   

**Q:**  So you used to work there?   

**A:**  I wasn't there much.   

**Q:**  After you returned, you were still at the Construction Department, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So when you returned and worked at the office, were the Chinese as before or was their disposition better? Were they more diplomatic, as far as the office was concerned?   

**A:**  It was about the same. They didn't have much work. They had some temporary [Tib. འཕྲལ་སེལ] work, but there wasn't really anything to develop. However, they just did some work, and they didn't say that the Tibetans had improved. Or that they were not doing this and that, or, we will do it. These offices didn't say these things. They just stayed around like hired hands.   

**Q:**  What was happening in 1957? Were the Chinese increasing their military preparedness? For example, on top of various offices, [did] they have their guns?   

**A:**  Oh, they were always there. They were saying that they were going to postpone the reforms, and the Chushigandru Lhoka problem was already there. But no matter what they said from their mouths, actually, the moment they had completed the motorable roads, they had developed their military preparedness. Generally, they had the New Regiment area (Tib. མགར་སརཔ [དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ]), and also they had their artillery regimen at Trip [Tib. གྲིབ]. However, they had their soldiers all over. For example, when the Dalai Lama was going to Ganden, nearby in the fields they had all of their cannons ready. As far as military preparedness is concerned, leave aside the question of actually doing it, I'm sure they even thought about this in their dreams. Really. It was always their [dream]. There is a saying that a small hawk [Tib. ཁྲ], even while asleep, thinks of killing birds. It's like that.   

**Q:**  In 1957-58, or just before the uprising, were there sort of fights between the Tibetans and the Chinese? Was the situation worse off than in, say, 1955-56?   

**A:**  [It was] not really like that, but it was getting worse and worse. The Chinese never went in the Lhasa Barkor alone or with someone else. They went in groups of 10-15 and with their guns.   

**Q:**  If that is the case, then the uprising sort of took place all of a sudden, isn't it?   

**A:**  Which?   

**Q:**  The '59 one.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  Most people did not expect it to arise that soon, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. It was a matter of having a reason or not. The Tibetans never had any belief [faith] in the Chinese, never. Therefore, when they were saying that they were going to "invite" the Dalai Lama for the show to the New Regiment [Military Headquarters] it was unlike the Dalai Lama's usual visits to the Tibet Autonomous Region when we could bring our bodyguards in whatever way we liked, But this invitation, since they had evil thoughts in their minds [Tib. ངན་སེམས་ཁོག་བཅང], they said that we could not bring this and that. They told [the Bodyguard Regiment's] Commander about this. So when they were saying this, we couldn't be hard-headed stupid fools [Tib. ལྐུགས་པ་ཨུ་ཚུགས]. What were they talking about? Usually, no matter [if] they [Chinese] would provide security or not, we would prepare our bodyguards to go with him, right? But they said that we were not allowed to bring them. And that the Sawang were not allowed to bring their servants. Therefore, the people knew that because it was like the proverb, "There is a container to hold water, but not a container to hold talk [Tib. chu 'tshogs pa'i snod yod na'i/ gtam 'tsogs pa'i snod yod ma red/]." [note: this proverb means once you say something it cannot be kept in (a secret) like water in a container.] So people said that this was no good, and that was the reason why they prevented him from going.   

**Q:**  They were asking the Dalai Lama to come to the Military Headquarters, the Silingpu, to see the drama show, right? Besides this, the Dalai Lama generally went to the Tibet Autonomous Region and other places, right? So how did he go? Did the Bodyguard soldiers go, and what about others?   

**A:**  The Gusung Regiment went and on the route, [people from] the Shöl Legung and the Nangtsesha, who usually oversaw [Tib. ལྟ་རྟོག] the routes, would send spies [Tib. མྱུལ་མ]. They would oversee the routes.   

**Q:**  The Nangtsesha and the Korchagpa and the like?   

**A:**  Yes, and the mayor, mipön, and then there was our Tibetan police.   

**Q:**  How many bodyguards were there?   

**A:**  Around 10-15. There were a few with the procession, the rest came separately.   

**Q:**  Just before the uprising began where were you? How did you hear about it?   

**A:**  We were tsendrön officials, right? We usually went to Norbulinga for the drungja and then began our work. The day before the uprising, when we were going to the drungja, it was said that the Dalai Lama was going to Military Headquarters. Generally, the kitchen provided the Dalai Lama's tea, and we tsendrön also had to go. I don't know whose turn it was to go [that morning], but we did not have to go. Now I have forgotten whose turn it was to go. I usually worked with [Sandu] Rinchen with the trucks. The morning the Dalai Lama was to go to the Military Headquarters, that morning I did not even go to the drungja, though I was supposed to go every morning. That morning, about 7-8 of our trucks were supposed to go to Yadong to get petrol, and there were also passengers going. Then somebody came and said that we could not go this morning. I asked why and they mentioned that the Dalai Lama was to go to the Military Headquarters and the people have stopped him from going. If the trucks had gone, they would have gone to Yadong. Then I rode my motorcycle, but there was no way to go as people had overflowed on the streets.   

**Q:**  You were going from Norbulinga to Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was staying at Lhasa and then I went down to Norbulinga. So since they said that the trucks could not go, I went to take a look and the road was packed with people. 'Strange,' I thought, 'as there is no audience.' Some were even crying and saying some things. I inquired and they said that the Dalai Lama was going to go to the Military Headquarters and, "We people just cannot stay still. So we are going to prostrate and beg him not to go." When I got to Norbulinga, the doors were closed. I parked my motorcycle and wondered what to do. Finally, I was able to get into Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Were the gates closed?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So how did you get in?   

**A:**  They opened when Surkhang Sawangchemmo, Shasur, Liushar, and later, Sambo came. Sambo was stoned. It was not to stone Sambo, but the driver of the car who was a Chinese. There were also one or two Chinese bodyguards. That's why they were stoned.   

**Q:**  So you were inside?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What was going on inside, what talks?   

**A:**  We were not in a position to talk. The reason I went in was that the Kashag was to announce to the crowd to calm down. So we had some loudspeaker equipment, and they were looking for me and calling out. They wanted me to prepare the equipment. So that's how I got inside. To fix the loudspeaker.   

**Q:**  So there was a loudspeaker inside?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  But they didn't know how to use it?   

**A:**  The usual people were not there.   

**Q:**  So you went inside?   

**A:**  Yes and I got the loudspeaker ready. The Kashag advised the people not to create a commotion. The Dalai Lama will not go. and will talk to the Chinese. So if you create a commotion, it is not good.   

**Q:**  So who made this announcement?   

**A:**  Surkhang Sawangchemmo.   

**Q:**  So what were the people saying?   

**A:**  They had just advised the people and all the gates were closed. Then the kalön went to the Silingpu to say that the Dalai Lama was going to go to the show, but the people were alarmed and the Dalai Lama should not go. When they went by car, the people thoroughly searched the car, thinking that they may be hiding the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  During this time, weren't the people [trusting] the officials?   

**A:**  They [people] were very powerful then and if they said that the car could be stopped or searched, then they would beat you up. They definitely would do it.   

**Q:**  Yes, masses do that. Then what happened? The Sawang went to the regiment headquarters right?   

**A:**  They went to the Military Headquarters. They spoke with the Chinese and they [the Chinese] said that they had invited the Dalai Lama for a show, but they [the Kashag] had instigated the people. But they had not instigated the people, the people had risen up. They [the Chinese] had been told that the Dalai Lama was definitely coming.   

**Q:**  Last time I was looking at what Barshi Jedrungla [Tib. བར་གཞིས་རྗེ་དྲུང་ལགས] had written, but I don't recall it very well. He had said something. [He said] that he and a few others had said that the Dalai Lama's going to the [Chinese] barracks was not at all acceptable. Now the Chinese are saying that the people were instigated. Barshi Jedrungla had said that he had said something to a few people. Haven't you heard anything about this?   

**A:**  Regarding this I don't know whether there was time to tell anyone and do anything about it. Later, when it was decided that the Dalai Lama was not going to go [to the show], everyone stayed at Norbulinga protecting [it]. Maybe during this time there was some discussion.   

**Q:**  However, I'll look at the document and ask you.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  He also mentioned that Kungö Tarala [Tib. རྟ་ར་ལགས] and others went to inform the Dalai Lama, and Kungö Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང] said something. And Tarala and Gadrang had an argument and a lot of exchanges ensued. Where was this?   

**A:**  This must have been in Norbulinga. The people remained surrounding the area, right? The Kashag has to consult the Dalai Lama, didn't they? So some of the officials who were inside must have made the request.   

**Q:**  I'll look into it and ask you. Anyway, what were you doing? You were doing something with the loudspeaker, and you were there when Surkhang Sawangchemmo was speaking. Then what did you do?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we were not able to return home and all the tsendrön stayed at the tse ga [Secretariat]. We decided that four of the tsendrön would stay at the tse ga. The people were all over the place and there was nothing to do if all of us just stayed, so we decided that four of us would stay. We choose the four so that they would represent the various age groups from elder to junior.   

**Q:**  So you had a meeting?   

**A:**  No, not a meeting.   

**Q:**  Then just a talk?   

**A:**  We decided in this way. So if there was work at the gag, then there would be people to do it the right away.   

**Q:**  How did that work? Who spoke?   

**A:**  We just discussed it among ourselves.   

**Q:**  How many of you tsendrön were there?   

**A:**  So many. Around 18-19. So we decided according to age, a senior, middle aged and a junior, like that. So about four of us were to stay.   

**Q:**  So you decided to stay according to turns and then what about [not finished]   

**A:**  For example, four of us stayed. Myself, Gyentsen Tempel [Tib. rgyal myshan bstan 'phel], Thubden Nyima [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉི་མ], and I think the younger one was Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Labrang's Kungö Pandenla [Tib. དཔལ་ལྡན་ལགས]. So we decided to stay for four days. And since the situation had reached emergency levels, I was not even able to return home. So I asked them to bring my food down [from home]. Then guns and all were being taken out from there [the armory], and a lot of guns and things arrived at Norbulinga. They brought a lot ammunition from the armory [Tib. གོ་མཛོད].   

**Q:**  From the Potala to Norbulinga?   

**A:**  Yes, a lot of guns and ammunition arrived from the armory. So I was working with that and could not go home to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  What did you have to do?   

**A:**  We had to take charge of the guns. The bren-guns had to be assembled, and the new ones boiled and things like that. Then they started the Command Headquarters or gagökang [Tib. བཀའ་བཀོད་ཁང], and so it was telling that we should distribute the guns here and there.   

**Q:**  So Kungö Kündeling and Tarala worked at this Command Headquarters, right?   

**A:**  Yes, Tarala was there, but I don't know about Kündeling.   

**Q:**  There was something about the Emergency Military Headquarters [Tib. ཛ་དྲག་དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང] or the Emergency Military Command Headquarters [Tib. ཛ་དྲག་བཀའ་བཀོད་དམག་སྤྱི་ཁང], [right]?   

**A:**  They decided on this at the Assembly meeting.   

**Q:**  So, What was this headquarters supposed to be?   

**A:**  This was started as an emergency. It was not that the Kashag and others were not being trusted, but since they were talking with the Chinese, this was an internal thing to get things prepared. The Kashag had to talk with the Chinese and meet the Dalai Lama, right? So this was left to one side, and on the other side this was to get things prepared.   

**Q:**  What preparations?   

**A:**  Things like protection [for the Dalai Lama], and all the food and things [for the volunteer people's guards]. And the arms had to be given here and there.   

**Q:**  What was being done about the people on the outside?   

**A:**  There was nothing.   

**Q:**  They didn't have any organization?   

**A:**  They must have had some leaders or representatives who were doing this. Each one brought their own arms and food independently.   

**Q:**  So when the guns and ammunition were brought from the Potala, who did the work?   

**A:**  They would send them from the Military Headquarters and deposit them where we were.   

**Q:**  So these guns were locked up for a long time and they were not working or what?   

**A:**  It's not that. All the rifles were working. There were a lot of new bren-guns.   

**Q:**  New?   

**A:**  Still unpacked. There were also many that were already out.   

**Q:**  So there were many new ones that were boxed up?   

**A:**  Yes. The new ones were oiled and in boxes. Now in order to take this off [the oil], they had to be boiled and then assembled.   

**Q:**  So they had to be boiled in water?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then assembled and oiled?   

**A:**  Yes, otherwise there was something?   

**Q:**  Grease.   

**A:**  Yes, it was stuck with that.   

**Q:**  Are these guns and bren-guns from a long time ago?   

**A:**  They must have been.   

**Q:**  The ones that the English sent?   

**A:**  They were bought from India and were bought much, much later. The new bren-guns had just come.   

**Q:**  No. I mean the British gave guns during the time of my grandfather, around 1927 or something?   

**A:**  No, no. There were no bren-guns at that time. The earlier ones were 303 English Carbines [Enfield]. The earliest ones were the 303 English Carbine with the long barrel. Bren-guns were much later, along with what is called a mortar [Tib. མེ་སྒྱོགས་གནམ་བླུག].   

**Q:**  Mortar. The one you push the shell down and it shoots up?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, that one. Something called a 3 mortar and a 2 mortar [diameter in inches]. Some could attach parachutes. These ones were fired at night [flares].   

**Q:**  So these were bought later?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So was it during [the time of] Kumbela [Tib. ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས] and the Drongdrag Regiment around 1936 or so, during the 13th Dalai Lama's [time]?   

**A:**  No, much later. There was no 13th Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  In the 1940s?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They were allowed to buy [it] at that time?   

**A:**  They bought it!   

**Q:**  Actually, they had to buy from the British in India.   

**A:**  Must be.   

**Q:**  Historically, I can't recall the English ever selling arms during this period.   

**A:**  They did. Bren-guns are something recent.   

**Q:**  I see. It's really good then that they could buy it during that time. Then what happened? You were at [Norbulinga], and what date was that?   

**A:**  I can't recall the dates.   

**Q:**  Wasn't it the 7th or 8th, or the 10th that the Dalai Lama left? It is said that the Chinese fired cannons, so when was that?   

**A:**  Yes, cannons were actually fired. That must have been on the 7th day of the Tibetan month. I think it was the night of the 8th that the Dalai Lama left.   

**Q:**  So you were there. You just stayed there?   

**A:**  Yes, [I] just stayed there.   

**Q:**  So you were distributing the guns and then?   

**A:**  Yes, distributing [the guns]. During the day [I] wore monk's robes, and at night I went through the motions of wearing laymen's clothes and carrying a gun and trying to do something.   

**Q:**  You were staying at the Secretariat (gaa)?   

**A:**  [I was at the] At the Shabden Lhagang Hall[Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་ལྷ་ཁང]. The guns and ammunitions were there. It's some distance from the Secretariat (gag). It was below where the elder tutor lived.   

**Q:**  Last time you said something about a meeting. Where did that take place?   

**A:**  It was well before all of this.   

**Q:**  After this, wasn't there a meeting with the people representatives or?   

**A:**  We were not there at the later meeting. We shifted later so that it would not be at Norbulinga?   

**Q:**  One meeting took place at Norbulinga it seems. At the Shabden Lhagang.   

**A:**  That was the one regarding subsiding the Khamba's disturbance.   

**Q:**  Was that before the uprising?   

**A:**  After the uprising there was the meeting at the Shabden Lhagang or someplace, and later they moved it to the Shöl Printing House [Tib. Shöl Parkhang [ཞོལ་པར་ཁང]). The headquarter was moved to the Parkhang.   

**Q:**  So you were not there?   

**A:**  No. I left on the night of the 8th.   

**Q:**  So you were together with the Dalai Lama? How was that? Did you come later?   

**A:**  [We were] not really together. I was at the Shabden Lhagang and there was nothing to do but stay there. At night we wore laymen's clothes. Since there wasn't much work, one evening I took my gun and a flashlight and went to see what was happening at the Yellow Wall inside the palace. Below the gaa on the west end there is the back door called Uyab Tago [Tib. དབུ་ཡབ་ལྟག་སྒོ]. One of our trucks was there. I was working with the trucks, right? When they said to send the trucks to get the guns, etcetera, etcetera, they told me and I told them [to send the truck]. There was a truck and the driver was a jupön [army rank in charge of ten]. His name was Tashi Tsering [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང].   

**Q:**  From the army?   

**A:**  Yes. All our drivers were soldiers. So I said, "Tashi Tsering, what are you doing here?" He said that he was told to go and get ammunition. I was wondering what was going on since I was the person who ordered the trucks to go and get ammunition, and there weren't any such instructions. So I got suspicious. So I went immediately to the Shabden Lhagang and went to get a 303 English Carbine. The pistol was already there [with me]. In my pockets I put some scriptures, some money and a eating bowl. I was wondering what this truck was all about since I had no instructions [to send it]. So I left, but the truck was not there. I went around the wall of the palace and saw that the truck was coming from down there. So I stopped it using my flashlight and I asked Tashi Tsering, "Where did you go?" He said that the earlier truck did not have a canvas covering and so he was told to bring one that had a canvas top. So he went to get it. I did not go around the wall and follow the truck. It was parked at the earlier spot at the Uyab. I thought, "Strange, I was not instructed to send the truck to get arms and ammunition." So I just stayed there. Then after some time, the late monk official bodyguard or simgag, called Chantrengpa [Tib. ཆ་འཕྲེང་པ], got in the truck. He was big and had a heaving breath and so I knew it was him even in the dark. Then the three personal attendants of the Dalai Lama [Tib. གསོལ་གཟིམ་རྣམ་པ] came. Then the two tutors came. So I thought now it must be definite [they are leaving], and so I got in the truck. No, no, before they came in the truck, I was already in it. From the rear entrance, Kungö Depön came. He asked Tashi Tsering who was in the truck. He replied that I was there. Then depön said, "Ngawang Rigdrol, Ngawang Rigdrol." I said "Yes," and got down and went to where kungö was. He said, "How did you know?" I said, "Nobody said anything to me. I just went for a patrol and the truck was there, and Tashi Tsering said that he had to go and get arms and ammunition. We are in charge of the arms and ammunition, and we had no plans to get any. So nobody told me to send any trucks and therefore, to tell you the truth, I thought that the Dalai Lama may be leaving. But nobody told me anything. I just came. Earlier the truck came and had no canvas, and then the one that had canvas came later. If this is the case [that the Dalai Lama leaving] then it is excellent. If we just stay here we cannot be of any service, but if we come [with you] I think we would be of service. However, if I am told to stay, I will stay. If I was told to come, then I will. I will do whatever I am told." So I told him that, and I never thought that at that time there would be such commotion. So he said, "Well, you stay here for a while." Then he went from Uyab to Norbulinga to the Dalai Lama's quarters. I thought that he would give me a reply so I waited, but he never came. A lot of people were getting in. The tutors, the Sawang.   

**Q:**  I see, the Sawang were in that too?   

**A:**  Yes, Shanka, Liushar, and Surkhang. So I thought that kungö was not sending me any reply, and if the truck left, then it would be too late, so I sat at the tail end of the truck.   

**Q:**    

**A:**  . And then the truck left. The truck stopped at the Chango Bridge. The ones who were in the truck went to Kündeling's house, which was just nearby. I did not go. I got out of the vehicle and stayed on the route which goes to Ramagang. Then they were coming out, so I took off ahead. I was lucky since I had been the Neu Shidü [Tib. སྣེའུ་གཞིས་སྡོད] [the Neu estate steward] earlier and I knew the road. So we all walked to the Ramagang ferry site, and there was no way of telling whether the Dalai Lama was there or not. The Dalai Lama came from Norbulinga to Lhoka in a coracle with Gadrang, [Drönyer] Chemmo [Phala] and the [Gusung] depön. So only the tutors and the Sawang were there. So we had to pull the rope of the ferry. On the other side there were horses, and I rode one and went.   

**Q:**  So you were not supposed to be in the group. [You] did not even know, right?   

**A:**  No, [I] did not even know. It was all because of the truck. Then from Ramagang's Neu Shiga, the kungö went inside. I stayed outside and did not go in. Then slowly I rode ahead and the kungö were coming [from] behind. I did not say anything and kept quiet. Then past Ramagang there was a small pass called Nyaseyla [Tib. ཉ་ས྄ེ་ལ]. Behind the pass our late Simyogla [Tib. གཟིམ་གཡོག་ལགས], the assistant of the Simpön Khembo [the Dalai Lama's personal attendant in charge of clothing], was lying down and could not get up. He had been riding a mule which slipped. So I was joking with him and asked in Khamba dialect, "Who are you?" and he said, "I am the simyog." So I helped him up and told him that I would pull the horse and mule from the front and for him to hit them from behind. Since the route on the pass was bad, there was no way to ride. Below the pass, I put him on the horse. He had a lot of bags and things with him. He was the Dalai Lama's attendant's assistant.   

**Q:**  He went ahead?   

**A:**  No not ahead, we were probably together. But I don't know how he went from Ramagang. We were together in the truck, but we couldn't tell who was there. While we were waiting to get a horse they had gone ahead. So I helped this simyogla and we rode together that whole night.   

**Q:**  Is that right? Who else was with you and the simyog?   

**A:**  Since he was older than us and he had a lot of things to carry, I thought he might have some trouble, so I helped him along. At dawn the next morning, we reached Kyutsa [Tib. skyur tsag ?], a place near the sand pass or Jela [Tib. བྱེ་ལ]. I thought of changing horses, but there were none. Then it was all sand. At the corner of the pass the Dalai Lama was taking a rest, so I told Simyogla to go up there. I thought that he might get some tea. I didn't go up and we had no tea; nor did it even occur to me. So I stayed nearby and the Dalai Lama was coming and said, "Oh, when did you, Ngawang Rigdrol, come?" I said I came last night . Then he asked how and I told him. He said, "Oh, it's very good. Now come, come." And so from that moment on, I was together with the party.   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  So that's how I came. Then I was together [with them], serving them.   

**Q:**  There was talk about starting a government at Yügye Lhuntse Dzong [Tib. གཡུལ་རྒྱལ་ལྷུན་རྩེ་རྫོང]. Did this idea occur en route? Or since there was commotion at Lhasa, was the Dalai Lama thinking about moving out someplace and then having discussions?   

**A:**  Yes, it may have been something like that. We just served the Dalai Lama and we never had to even bother about these things. There was no need for everyone to participate since the Sawang, the Dalai Lama, Chemmo [Phala], the Khentsab [Tib. མཁན་ཚབ] [Gadrang], and Ta Lama were there. So a government was established at Yügye Lhuntse. This place must have had some historical importance.   

**Q:**  Now if I were to ask somebody regarding the talks [about Lhuntse Dzong] who would know today? Depön?   

**A:**  He might know, otherwise there are no people. [They are] all finished [dead].   

**Q:**  What about Kündeling? How much would he know?   

**A:**  He probably knows. Kungö Tarala was only at Tsöna.   

**Q:**  He had not come yet, right?   

**A:**  He arrived one night when the party was at Tsöna Monastery. Kündeling probably knows and Depön knows. We were busy helping with the Dalai Lama's food. Except for the three personal attendants, there were no servants. All three of the kungö were old. So too was Simyogla. He died too. Now, Gusho Chöyogla [Tib. སྐུ་ཞབས་མཆོད་གཡོག་ལགས], the assistant of the Dalai Lama's personal attendant in charge of offerings, the Chöpön Khembo, was there. His name is Thubden Thabke [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཐབས་མཁས]. I was working in the kitchen and serving food for the kungö.   

