# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0031.07 : Tape 7  
##  : with Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 66  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] was a monk official who served as a tsendrön. He was from the Dombor monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང], and a relative of his had been a katsab. In this interview, Ngawang Rigdrol recalls how people were singing anti-Chinese songs on the streets in Lhasa. He talks about the way in which the Chinese had given traders capital and ordered things from India, but later stopped this practice. He also discusses the death of Karu Pön, who had joined the revolt and was killed. Finally, he describes touring China in 1952, and how the Chinese attempted to conceal the true situation in the countryside.   

---  
### Tape 7  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0031_07/H_0031_07.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Yesterday, when we were talking, we got up until Yadong, right? Some say that from Yadong, Zhang Jingwu and the Dalai Lama came later. Was there any reason for that?   

**A:**  There is nothing to that. They were already traveling and Yadong was just a stopover. So they were not going to stay at Yadong. The Dalai Lama stayed at Yadong for a very long time and they could not just go on like that.   

**Q:**  When did the Dalai Lama leave?   

**A:**  I think it may have been a month or two after Zhang Jingwu left. I can't tell you for sure.   

**Q:**  When Zhang Jingwu left Yadong, what happened? Was there a letter sent from Yadong saying that he was coming. Also, the two sitsab were there, right? And so what about protocol? How did the sitsab greet them? Where?   

**A:**  The government must have had a reception [Tib. ཐབ་བསུ]. The lay officials and tsidrung must have come. The Kashag must have come.   

**Q:**  Some say that Zhang Jingwu wanted the two sitsab to come all the way to greet them? Have you heard anything like that?   

**A:**  I doubt anything like that happened, I have not heard anything. Because they had already met the Dalai Lama and like work, it had already begun. I wonder if the two sitsab came to the government reception. Most probably they did.   

**Q:**  At Yadong, Zhang Jingwu came and he left, and so what was the atmosphere at Yadong? Did the government officials, the tsendrön, have talks? How was it? Were people thinking that the 17-Point Agreement was signed and so they guessed things might be okay, or - how was it? Were they apprehensive?   

**A:**  At that time, the 17-Point Agreement was signed and people probably wondered how it was going to turn out. Everyone was apprehensive [Tib. གཡང་བཀྱག་པ]. They had just arrived and the actual work was yet to begin. When they first came, the Chinese were very docile [Tib. སྙོམ་ཆུང]. There are examples of slaps on the face to which the Chinese kept quiet. At that time, they did not have any means of communications, right? Then the soldiers came and the government received them. They [the Chinese] always agreed with everything and they never said that this is not good enough because they just arrived and just settled [Tib. ཐབ་གསར་གཞིས་གསར]. Our vegetable sellers used to say that even if you slapped them in the face they kept quiet.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came - and you know that earlier there were a lot of songs in Tibet. Do you remember any for this period?   

**A:**  Nothing special, though in the Lhasa Barkor there were some. There were some people who were not all together beggars, nor insane; some youngsters like the person nicknamed "nice shape" (Tib. sopta yagpo [བཟོ་ཏ་ཡག་པོ]). He said things in the Barkor and the Chinese did not do severe things like arresting him.   

**Q:**  How? I didn't understand? The Chinese?   

**A:**  No, no. The Tibetans. He would first sing, and when a lot of people came he would give a lecture. Now I don't remember the words to the songs.   

**Q:**  What was it about?   

**A:**  Kind of about politics.   

**Q:**  What was said?   

**A:**  Something like, Leave aside the top floor, We don't want to stay in the basement. leave aside the white barley tsamba, we don't want to eat pea tsamba. Leave aside the Dalai Lama, We don't want to be liberated [Tib. ཁང་པ་ཏེང་ཁང་བཞག་ནི, འོག་ཁང་སྡོད་ལོང་མི་འདུག།, རྩམ་པ་དཀར་མོ་བཞག་ནི, སྲན་མ་ཟ་ལོང་མི་འདུག། ཏ་ལའི་བླ་མ་བཞག་ནི, བཅིང་འགྲོལ་གཏོང་ལོང་མི་འདུག]. Something like that, and all kinds of unusual strange words. I just mentioned a few words, but in the Barkor [he sung all kinds of songs]. His name was Sopta yagpo. He must have been about 21 years old. At first, he sang very interesting songs and then when the people gathered, he gave a lecture.   

**Q:**  The song that you mentioned now, it is saying that they didn't want liberation, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  They were saying things against the Chinese, right?   

**A:**  Yes. That they didn't want to leave the Dalai Lama and be liberated. They said that they [Chinese] wanted to liberate us, right? There was something about, "Leave aside our dual religious-political system, We don't want socialism [Tib. ཆོས་སྲིད་ཟུང་སྦྲེལ་བཞག་ནི། སྤྱི་ཚོགས་རིང་ལུགས་བྱེད་འདོད་མི་འདུག]." Anyway, they [Chinese] were saying that they wanted to introduce socialism, saying that it was great.   

**Q:**  If I want to ask about songs, who would know?   

**A:**  Nobody's around now. All the older ones are finished [dead]. For example, there was somebody from Tsang- now, what was his name? He used to wear a yellow cap [Tib. འབོག་ཐོ]. Yes, his name was Yagchö and people called him the "mad man Yagchö," (Tib. yagchö nyönpa [ཡག་ཆོད་སྨྱོན་པ]). His wife's name was Trasang [Tib. བཀྲ་བཟང]. It is said that they were from Tsang and were probably the miser of Chönjor Khangsar [Tib. ཆོས་འབྱོར་ཁང་གསར]. They came to Lhasa and stayed as beggars. Later, the wife was not crazy. It is said that the wife had conceived and she asked the People's Hospital at Lubu [for her] to be admitted. The hospital was located at Pomsur [Tib. སྤོམ་ཟུར] House - which had been sold. The hospital did not admit her, saying that it was not a child, but a scorpion or something. Anyway, since she was a beggar she was not admitted. After that, she gave birth around the Lubu area and it's said that she went to the Barkor and said, "Is this child a scorpion? I asked that I be admitted to the Chinese hospital, but they did not admit me. Everybody, take a look. Is this child a scorpion?." People in Lhasa used to say Yagchö Nyönpa had come, though he was not that crazy, the type that does all sorts of things. So she went around the Barkor asking - "Is this child a scorpion?" A scorpion or something like that. Anyway, she was not admitted to the hospital. Even this guy called "nice shape," was always singing some songs. He had wonderful words to the songs.   

**Q:**  People like him must still be in Lhasa.   

**A:**  Yagchö Nyönpa must be dead now. Maybe "nice shape" is also dead. He was young, 21 years old. I saw him once or twice. He climbed on a window and sang. He sang interesting Tibetan and Chinese songs. Then when the people gathered, he did like that [gave political lectures].   

**Q:**  Was this around the time of the first People's Association?   

**A:**  Way before that. Yes.   

**Q:**  It was just after returning from Yadong?   

**A:**  Yes, just after that. Must have been '51-'52.   

**Q:**  When you returned to Lhasa, the Panchen Lama had not yet come, right?   

**A:**  Yes, [he had] yet to come.   

**Q:**  So after you returned to Lhasa, you were not the Military Payroll Officer, right?   

**A:**  No. While I was at Yadong, there was the Gusung and Trapchi Regiments at Phari and Yadong. So I did some work with their salary. When I came to Lhasa, there was the Military Payroll Officer, right? So I didn't need to work on that.   

**Q:**  While at Lhasa, you did the tsendrön work?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So while you were at the gaa did the Chinese leaders come?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. They didn't come during the drungja. They had to make a schedule to visit the Dalai Lama when he had some spare time [Tib. མཛད་སེང་སྟབས་བསྟུན].   

**Q:**  What is [Tib. མཛད་སེང་སྟབས་བསྟུན]?   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama did not have work and people wanted to visit, we made a schedule.   

**Q:**  After returning to Lhasa from Yadong - Zhang Jingwu had already arrived. Then the Dalai Lama returned and you were with the party. So by that time, had the Chinese Army arrived?   

**A:**  When the Dalai Lama arrived at Lhasa from Yadong, during this period the Chinese had not yet come. Soon after they arrived, from the northern route came the Commander-in-Chief, Fan [Ming] [Ch. si ling]. Via the main route [Sichuan] came Zhang Guohua. The former was the one who came with camels and all.   

**Q:**  Before they arrived, did you notice any changes? The People's Association had not risen, right?   

**A:**  No, they had not.   

**Q:**  When did you return from Yadong?   

**A:**  In 1950.   

**Q:**  1951, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Summer?   

**A:**  I think it was before summer, in spring, I think.   

**Q:**  Then when did Ngabö come?   

**A:**  After that.   

**Q:**  In the same year, right?   

**A:**  I don't think so, the following year, maybe.   

**Q:**  In 1952!   

**A:**  No, 1951. Then there were things to get ready, and all of the things to be done.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese Army came, where were you staying?   

**A:**  In Lhasa itself.   

**Q:**  So when the Chinese army came, how was it? Did the Kashag go and meet [them], and did the people have to go and greet [them]?   

**A:**  When they first came, there was a welcoming reception [Tib. དགའ་བསུ]. I don't know about Fan Siling, but when Zhang Guohua came, the Chinese made preparations and a reception was ready at the new park (Tib. ལིང་སརཔ [གླིང་ག་གསར་པ]). Everybody didn't have to go, but the Kashag was there. Then the ranking officials like the drungtsi (went).   

**Q:**  You didn't have to go?   

**A:**  Not us.   

**Q:**  At that time, were there a lot of people?   

**Q:**  They would go as spectators [Tib. ལྟད་མོ་ལྟ་མཁན], right? Then the Chinese would give a speech.   

**Q:**  What did they say?   

**A:**  Like that they had come, and they were going to help and do such great things.   

**Q:**  When they came, the people's commotion and the increase in the food situation had not occurred, right?   

**A:**  Not as of yet.   

**Q:**  So after they arrived did it?   

**A:**  Then it got scarce and the population increased. On the road, they came riding and most of the soldiers came on foot. When they came, they came with the bren-guns on a frame in a militant fashion.   

**Q:**  I have seen a picture with many Chinese with red flags in front of the Potala. The Chinese were in formation and the kalön were walking in front.   

**A:**  It must have been during [one of] their celebration days, like the October first National Day [Ch. shi yi], or the August first Army's Day [Ch. ba yi].   

**Q:**  I see.   

**A:**  I saw it in a film too. Ngabö was there and he was given the Chinese military rank of Zhang Silingyuan [Ch. zhong jiang], Ragashag also.   

**Q:**  When they came, there was talk about putting flags on the Potala, and the Military Headquarters and various other places.   

**A:**  It was not when they came, but some time after that. They wanted to put a flag on the Potala. We did not allow them to do that. After the uprising in 1959, then they did put [up] a flag.   

**Q:**  Now, the two sitsab met the Chinese, and there were a lot of talks, right? What was the reason for these talks, and what were the grievances of the two sitsab?   

**A:**  There were mainly problems on the question of starting the Military Administrative Committee and doing the reforms. .   

**Q:**  As I was mentioning about the two sitsab [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes, that they wanted to start the Military Administrative Committee.   

**Q:**  That talk was in the 17-Point Agreement, wasn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, it was there. So they wanted to start this. Later, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was started. Then [there was] the question of making roads and places for the Chinese to stay. So regarding this, the two sitsab and the Kashag had a lot of problems to discuss, and so it was not just political. They [the Chinese] pestered them a lot.   

**Q:**  Aside from politics, what problems were arising?   

**A:**  For example, there were a lot of Chinese, right? So the Tibetans called the Chinese who were working in the drama troupe "boiled peas gyaling [Tib. སྲན་པོད་རྒྱ་གླིང]," since they used to eat boiled peas and their voices were like a gyaling [clarinet-like] instrument. Since they could not bring food, we have to procure everything, like grains, peas, etc. Let alone these things, firewood was scarce in Lhasa, right? The Chinese were behaving like we had to have everything prepared, but we don't have that much to prepare anyway. From the government side, they took out the grains and did a lot of things. So from the political and economic side, there were a lot of problems and the two sitsab were being rather strict.   

**Q:**  When the Chinese and the two sitsab talked where did they meet?   

**A:**  In Lhasa, in the Nangsi [Tib. སྣང་སྲིད] Hall at Labrangteng [Tib. བླ་བྲང་སྟེང] on top of the Jokhang.   

**Q:**  Did they come to see the two sitsab quite often? There was talk about the Chinese banging their fists on the table, etcetera.   

**A:**  So when the Kashag was sort of being firm, then they said that the talks were not working and that "behind the curtains there are people [Tib. ཡོལ་བའི་རྒྱབ་ལ་མི་བསྡད་བཞག]." Which means that the two sitsab were sort of acting like that [instigating].   

**Q:**  Were they referring to the rise of the People's Association?   

**A:**  Yes. But at first, mainly there was the problem of housing for the soldiers. Later, the People's Association rose and they had a lot of representatives, and they put restrictions on them. So the Chinese had to instigate and do these things, right? [make the Kashag do it]. Even the government had to do something, since if they did not, then it would look like the government was mobilizing the People's Association. So they were put in police custody and not in prison.   

**Q:**  What you are talking about occurred later, isn't it? [With] Alo Chöndze and Bumtang Trunyi?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  What I'm referring to is the earlier People's Association that took place about two years earlier.   

**A:**  Yes, it was earlier, but it was a continuation.   

**Q:**  So at that time, you were (working) at the gaa (Secretariat), and where were you living?   

**A:**  Our quarters were at Muru.   

**Q:**  Who lived in your quarters?   

**A:**  Our teacher, myself and our tsidrung.   

**Q:**  When you were staying at your quarters, did you talk much about the price increases since you had to do the shopping?   

**A:**  To tell you the truth, we said the price of things had increased, but we were quite well off. When the Dalai Lama went to Yadong, we had quite a lot of money with Shriram Arjundas. So Alo Chöndze brought brick tea and sent [it] to Lhasa. He was a trader for our household and we never told him to bring tea, but he did it on his own. He brought a lot. It was almost at a time when there were no tea bricks [being] sold. Our teacher was very apprehensive [Tib. གཡང་ཟ་པོ] and he said that stocking tea and selling when the price is high is not good at all. We had some grain coming from Lhoka and we sold it cheaper than the market value, and the grain for the Ganden Autumn Retreat, the Tönchö, also was sold like that. We couldn't leave the Lhasa traders on one side and we sell the tea bricks. So to the various monasteries, we gave one tea brick as alms for each monk.   

**Q:**  What's the reason for giving that?   

**A:**  Ultimately, it was giving alms, but if you give when it is scarce, it is better.   

**Q:**  Were the monasteries also experiencing scarcity?   

**A:**  If it was scarce in the country, then it would have been the same in the monasteries. Then grain was sold to people who were not chang sellers.   

**Q:**  Excluding who?   

**A:**  The Ganden Tönchö grains were sold to those who did not sell chang.   

**Q:**  What do you mean by those who did not sell chang?   

**A:**  If you sold grains to those who made chang then they would make chang, right?   

**Q:**  I see, I see.   

**A:**  The Ganden Tönchö grains were sold in the Phünkang house with each person getting about 3 khe. It was given by those who had [Tib. ཡོད་འདོན].   

**Q:**  So since it was getting scarce, then the various aristocratic households, shagtsang, and monasteries were selling at cheaper rates?   

**A:**  Not many households and shagtsang, but the Ganden Tönchö is the religious salary given in autumn. They had a lot of grain and so they sold in this manner.   

**Q:**  During this time, the Chinese were giving a lot of dayan.   

**A:**  No, it was not like that. It was a policy just to fool [us]. They loaned money to the traders. They didn't just lend for anything, they ordered things (from them).   

**Q:**  I see. When you say "loan money", you mean they gave capital?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. They gave capital and they asked them to bring the necessary items, like rice and bed sheets.   

**Q:**  So how much did the traders take, because they needed to make some profit too.   

**A:**  They did make a profit from that. I don't know how.   

**Q:**  Without taking the capital, didn't the traders have their own money?   

**A:**  Yes, they did have their own, but since the Chinese had a lot, they just took it. Even our Amjii Anila, he did not have much wealth. Later he took their capital and became very rich. There were many like him.   

**Q:**  The various Labrangs and monasteries must have sold grain.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  Therefore, in Tibet, when money was scarce and when there was a lot of dayan, there were many sellers, right? So many were making money, right? Like the traders.   

**A:**  Yes, the traders did. So the traders took the dayan coins, exchanged the money, and bought needed items for the Chinese. And there they paid whatever was the local price [Tib. ཡུལ་ཐང].   

**Q:**  Now, regarding the price. Could the government not set a price, since it was increasing?   

**A:**  Since they were not selling it, they could not fix the price, right?   

**Q:**  Were the Chinese charged whatever the going rate was, or were the Chinese, without knowing, paying an arbitrary price? For example, in 1951, there was a price for grain, right? So did they sell at that price or higher, or were the Chinese just [question not finished]   

**A:**  It was not like that, but the prices were going up because items were becoming scarce. Therefore, when the government took out grain and tea, they said that now things had become scarce and that it was not correct to make a profit since the people were having difficulties. So the government gave a lot of grain.   

**Q:**  When you say government, where was the grain coming from?   

**A:**  It came from the various offices that got grain.   

**Q:**  Like the Tsikhang?   

**A:**  Not really, but from the units like the Grain Interest Office (Tib. དྲུཀྱེཁང [འབྲུ་སྐྱེད་ཁང]), and places where they were concerned with grain.   

**Q:**  It was in 1952 that the People's Association rose, wasn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, it had started by then.   

**Q:**  So by that time, had the prices really increased?   

**A:**  No, not much. Of course [they rose] some since things did not remain as usual. Then it kept on increasing and later, forget about the price, availability was difficult.   

**Q:**  When you were tsendrön and there were problems with the two sitsab, did the Chinese come to petition at the gaa?   

**A:**  Later, they told the Dalai Lama that the two sitsab were not agreeing at all and that the two sitsab must resign.   

**Q:**  When they were talking, were you ever there?   

**A:**  No way!   

**Q:**  So the People's Association rose in '52 and in '53, was there anything noteworthy politically?   

**A:**  No, nothing really, but things kept getting worse and worse.   

**Q:**  Now, in 1954, there was the question of the Dalai Lama going to China, right? What was the reason the Dalai Lama went to China? There must have been some discussions about it; that it was good to go or that it was not good. At that time he was going for a meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes, the National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མེ་ཚོགས་ཆེན]. So it was said that he had to go.   

**Q:**  Did one side say that it was good to go and the other that it was not?   

**A:**  Yes, there may have been [two opinions].   

**Q:**  But you were in Lhasa!   

**A:**  I was there, but.   

**Q:**  But you must have heard something! What were you thinking? Did you think that it was good for the Dalai Lama to go down or not? A lot of people must have been talking about this.   

**A:**  Yes, they must have been, definitely. For example, when the Dalai Lama went down, so many Lhasans wept and there were many who even jumped in the river. However, the country was already overpowered, right? At that time, it was not like now. All the talk was very sweet. That the Dalai Lama was going down as a guest.   

**Q:**  Yes, however, wasn't there one side which said that it was not good for him to go?   

**A:**  Yes, there must have been, however, there may not have been someone who specially said that at that particular time.   

**Q:**  Already, previous to this, the two sitsab were being very stern, right? They did not like the 17-Point Agreement. Oh, actually, by this time the two of them were finished anyway.   

**A:**  Yes, finished.   

**Q:**  What about the Drönyerchemmo? They had an organization. It is said that they had a political group, right? Had they begun by then, in '52-'53-'54?   

**A:**  Whether they had begun before the Dalai Lama went down [China], I don't know. However, everybody would have been very concerned and hesitant [Tib. བློ་འཁྱོག་འཁྱོག] that the Dalai Lama was going down, right? However, there was no choice, right? Both he and the Panchen Lama were invited and everybody was asking what to do since they were going to have an uncomfortable journey on the way [there].   

**Q:**  At that time, did you go down?   

**A:**  No, I was the in charge of performing rituals, Shabden Dodamba [Tib. ཞབས་བརྟན་དོ་དམ་པ].   

**Q:**  Did you ever go down to China in '52-'53?   

**A:**  I went in '52.   

**A:**  In 1952 it was on the first tour group with Liushar and Dingja [Tib. ལྡིང་བྱ]. We rode all the way to Gamtog Drukha [Tib. སྐམ་ཐོག་གྲུ་ཁ]. It took about a month and a few days.   

**Q:**  At that time, what were people thinking? Were the Chinese saying that you had to go? Did they ask once, twice? How was it?   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama returned from Yadong and then they said that if the officials were sent for a tour, it would be good. We did not wish to go. Then it was said that it was a good idea and the tour groups started. Our government was called the Local Government and Tashilhunpo was called the Panchen Nangma Uyön Lhengang. Chamdo was said to be something else, like liberation. So the Panchen Nangmagang had agreed to send [a group] and so the government decided to send [a group]. Under the leadership of Liushar and Dingja, many tsidrung and lay officials were sent. We had never said that we wanted to go.   

**Q:**  How were the members chosen?   

**A:**  Maybe there was a plan from the Yigtsang.   

**Q:**  That so and so has to go and the Kashag selects the various lay officials?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, and it was not up to Dingja and Liushar. At that time, Shatra Sey [Tib. བཤད་སྒྲ་སྲས] was also there. Wasn't he your aunt's husband? So they were sent with plans.   

**Q:**  Yes, he was called Ganden Penjor [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་དཔལ་འབྱོར]. Kungö Liushar was the head, right?   

**A:**  Among the tsidrung, it was Liushar. Among the lay, Dingja.   

**Q:**  During this time, Kungö Liushar said that what he saw was very good, and there were many reports about that.   

**A:**  Yes, there must have been. But at that time, it was good.   

**Q:**  Yes, at this time they did see things as good.   

**A:**  Can't say good, but [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Yes, good may not be the right word, but the Chinese were saying that they were going to help and [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes, they were saying that, and they took us for a tour, right? So when they took us for a tour, all they ever did was take us to all of the nice places and never to any bad ones! For example, even on the road, when we were going to Chongqing, there were people on the roadside on a hill, very poor, like wild animals. So when we were going in the train, they told us that one could not take pictures and things like that. When we saw something bad, that's what they told us. When we saw nice things, then they purposely took us there, and made us tour and say how the great communist system was good and how there was so much development. The local bosses would give this kind of speech. Therefore, since we saw only the good things, we saw things as being good, to tell you the truth.   

**Q:**  I see, since you only saw the good things, later when they asked you how it was, then [what]?   

**A:**  Then we had to say that it was good.   

**Q:**  Since you only saw the good things?   

**A:**  Since we saw only the good things, we would naturally say it was good.   

**Q:**  Therefore, there was this thing that Kungö Liushar saw things as good. It is said that he spoke over the radio. In Hong Kong, or someplace, there is a book in which all of that is printed. That he went here on such and such date and what he saw was good, etc.   

**A:**  At that time, we would naturally say that it was good because they showed as all of the good things. So it was good. However, in the various factories, there was machinery made in China, but there were many American machines. We didn't know English, but we looked at the letters. When we did that, they look at us as if they were reprimanding us for looking. So that's it. They showed us all the good things and since they did that, then, the ones who narrated said all the good things. Things that were never in existence earlier [before the communists]. For example, even in the factories, they would take us to [see] the good accommodations of the factory workers, where there was a bed and bedding. Anyway, that was all they had. So they took us to all of the good places.   

**Q:**  So, for many, then, if they took you to all the good places, then you would see things as being good, right?   

**A:**  Yes . Anyway, we all understood that [people's] necks were tied, isn't [that] it?   

**Q:**  The 17-Point Agreement was already signed, so I doubt that there was anything to think about except to think in terms of now working together.   

**A:**  Then, there wasn't anything   

**Q:**  Were many thinking that it would last?   

**A:**  Yes. For example, when we went to Tengchen [Tib. སྟེང་ཆེན], there was Karu Pön [Tib. དཀར་རུ་དཔོན], who was a colleague of your late grandfather. Later he became our director [Ch. qu zhang] in the Construction Department. He was really saying how good the communist system was.   

**Q:**  He said it himself?   

**A:**  Yes, he did; that it was so great and amazing. On account of that, we did not get along somewhat. Later, after the tour and we returned, the Tibet Autonomous Region started. [Subjects always refer to the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region as the Tibet Autonomous Region]. At that time, Karu Pön became a colleague of your grandfather. The office started in your [Tsarong] house, but later the office bought the old Mentö house. At that time, Karu Pön said it, right out of his own mouth, that the Chinese were such liars, it was too much. That what they said earlier was just lies, and that it was nothing except like watching a movie. And so later, he was one of the more prominent revolters and he lost his life. In their country, they raised a militia and did a lot, and Karu Pön was killed. So it was like that. They just got fooled. When they first came, the Khambas were very good.   

**Q:**  So they were getting fooled?   

**A:**  Yes, it was the Khambas who said, "The Chinese are benevolent parents and their silver dayan falls like rain [Tib. རྒྱ་གུང་བྲེན་དྲིན་ཆེན་ཕ་མ་རེད་། དངུལ་དཡང་ཆར་པ་བབ་བབ་རེད]." So they started it all from down there . They just got duped. At first, they [Chinese] really played like kids. Then they made things worse and worse [turned the screws]. That is really their policy.   

**Q:**  How long did you stay in China?   

**A:**  Most probably when we went it was the 6th Tibetan month, when the rainy season was at its peak. It took about 10 months.   

**Q:**  You must have traveled via Nagchu.   

**A:**  We went via Nagchu and returned by the northern route [Nagchu] itself.   

**Q:**  Earlier, when government officials traveled, you could use the horse and pack animal corvée [tax]. During this time, did you use the earlier system or what?   

**A:**  No, no. You had to bring your own horses and mules. The various places to stay, the Chinese would make the arrangements. When we returned we did not have horses, but paid wages. There was no horse corvée.   

**Q:**  You did not use the transportation corvée?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  You could if you wanted. You could get a travel document, a lamyig?   

**A:**  Yes, we could, but the Chinese would not do it .   

**Q:**  The traditional system was still there, wasn't it?   

**A:**  Yes, it was, but it was not used. Each rode their own horses.   

**Q:**  Why did you not use it? Was there a reason?   

**A:**  You mean doing it the traditional way?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  The Chinese was saying that one could not do that, and so each one rode their own. Neither the Chinese nor the government paid any horse wages. Each one rode their own.   

**Q:**  Had the Reform Office, Legjö office, started by then?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Would the Legjö get involved in the question of horse corvée and those things?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  For example, like reducing the horse corvée?   

**A:**  The horse corvée and the pack animals transport had already decreased. The traditional horse corvée and the pack animal transport was provided, but there were no additional ones [Tib. འཕར་མ]. For example, the traditional ones, like the transportation for the gold collectors like the Drichu Serka [Tib. གསེར་ཁ], and the Tö Serpön [Tib. སྟོད་གསེར་དཔོན], also the butter tax load from Shelkar (Tib. ཥེལྐར་མརདö [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་མར་དོས]), the traditional ones that the offices collected -- these continued. Other than that, there were none.   

**Q:**  So what is the difference? What did they do in the old days?   

**A:**  Earlier when one went to the dzong, one used the horse corvée and the pack animals corvée.   

**Q:**  Now you didn't have that?   

**A:**  No, no.   

**Q:**  For example, when a newly appointed dzongpön had to go to his dzong, then did he have to go own his own?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  You couldn't use the government corvée?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  So did they change it so that you now could not use it?   

**A:**  Yes, and the horse corvée and the pack animals were reduced. Actually, there was a "tax base [Tib. རྟེན]" for the horse corvée and pack animal transportation corvée. But this was sort of considered a very difficult tax, right?   

**Q:**  And also, the times were not so [question not finished]   

**A:**  Yes, it was done according to the times.   

**Q:**  When you went to China, how did you go? Did you all go together or in groups?   

**A:**  Together.   

**Q:**  In 1952, how many were there all together?   

**A:**  Each one had a servant. Including the servants, the government officials, and the kudraks from Labrang. At that time, from Labrang, there was Pora [Tib. ?] Khenche who is a relative of Kungö Samjola. The Labrang had other officials. From Chamdo there was Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས] and others. From the government side there were officials and the representatives of the three great monasteries, one from each monastery. Then there were representatives of traders, like Lachung [Tib. བླ་ཆུང] and the son of Tsongkhang Sarpa [Tib. ཚོང་ཁང་གསར་པ]. All together we were about 100.   

**Q:**  When you all stay together, for example, when you are eating at a table; did they keep the same status for government officials and Tashilhunpo officials?   

**A:**  They sort of kept the same. At that time, the head of the Labrang people was Pora Khenche, and from Chamdo it was Derge Sey. We were all very friendly and got along well, and never had any bad things to say to each other.   

**Q:**  I see. That was good.   

**A:**  Our government group was called the Tour Group or Tagor Tshogpa [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ], and Tashilhunpo's group was called the Tribute Group or Denbul Tshogpa [Tib. རྟེན་འབུལ]. It was to give tenche [Tib. རྟེན་ཆས] or tribute to Mao Zedong. We were just the Tagor Tshogpa (tour group) and did not carry any tribute.   

**Q:**  What is tenche?   

**A:**  It is a kind of gift offering. And Pora Khenche said, "Kungö [Dingja], please come offer the gifts." We did not go, but Kungö did. It was said that it would be good if Kungö Dingja would head it. At that time, people like Pora Khenche were very good. [So both sides made offerings to Mao]. So us, Labrang, and Chamdo all ate together and went together. And we never went as separate groups and got along extremely well.   

**Q:**  One was the Tour Group and one was the Tribute Group. What was the name of the Chamdo group?   

**A:**  They too were probably the Tour Group.   

**Q:**  Where did you all stay?   

**A:**  We and the Labrang Kudrak were together.   

**Q:**  So was it a hotel?   

**A:**  No, some houses below. When we first arrived at Beijing, towards the north of Beijing there was the Shoyang Hotru [Ch. ?]. Maybe it was some houses of the earlier Chinese Kudrak. It had small gardens here and there. The representatives of the monasteries and the traders had other accommodations. We would not [all] fit. If we did, then we would have stayed together. Chamdo Derge Sey and others had some other accommodations. When we went on tour, we went together.   

**Q:**  How was the food?   

**A:**  It was very good.   

**Q:**  Very good?   

**A:**  Very much. In the morning, for bed tea, there was a glass of milk and a pastry [Ch. dian xin]. Where we stayed there was no running water. A wash basin was used and there was a person to pour water.   

**Q:**  They had servants there?   

**A:**  Yes. As servants there were some young students. Later, after the tour started, then there was a new guest house. At that time, there were not many guest houses. This was around '51-'52. It seems that the hotel, the Beijing Fandian, was the best.   

**Q:**  So you stayed there?   

**A:**  The night that we arrived, we ate there. Then we slept at this Shoyang Hotru. That night we couldn't even figure out where it was as there were many houses with little gardens.   

**Q:**  What places did you visit?   

**A:**  We went to the Inner Mongolia side, then Dongbei, Tianjin, Chongqing - these were the more famous places.   

**Q:**  What other places?   

**A:**  Like Hangzhou and the like. Then towards the south, what's the name of the place?   

**Q:**  Did you go to Guangdong? They called [it] Canton in English.   

**A:**  You mean Guangdong? Places like Guangdong, Guangxi, we did not go. We went to Sichuan and then Xi'an, and then Beijing. Then Tianjing, Chongqing. Then Dongbei. This means northeast. It is the most prosperous place, like Shenyang, and Lurshing [Ch. ?], Dalian. Most of the large factories are located here. Like coal.   

**Q:**  When you went for the tour, was it relaxing, like taking a holiday? Or was it like kind of busy and apprehensive [Tib. དངངས་སྐྲག་ཚ་པོ]?   

**A:**  No way! We drank our morning tea and [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Now suppose you were to relate the daily routine, from the time that you got up until night.   

**A:**  After we got up in the morning, then [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Could you get up anytime?   

**A:**  No way. They would sound the rising bell.   

**Q:**  They did?   

**A:**  Yes. Then we got up and then had breakfast, which was plenty. After that, we went for a tour. They had already made a program [schedule] and they would say, "Today after breakfast you have to go to such and such a place for a tour, and if [we] can return for lunch, then the lunch will be served here. If not, then lunch will be prepared at the tour spot. Then after that, you will tour and then return for dinner. Then after dinner, there will be such and such meeting or such and such show." That was it. There was almost no time to rest. Unless you said that you were sick.   

**Q:**  Really?   

**A:**  So after quite a lot of people stayed, and since there were not that many people for the tour, then doctors used to come and ask what was wrong.   

**Q:**  I see, they brought doctors?   

**A:**  Yes, there was one with us.   

**Q:**  So actually you were just tired?   

**A:**  Yes, we got tired because we were always going some place from morning. Then when we get there, the leader of the site gave an exhaustive [Tib. ཁ་མེད་མིག་མེད] lecture and story. Then they were trying to translate into Tibetan, but still- Along with us was Shingsar Awala [Tib. ཞིང་གསར་ཨ་ཝ་ལགས] and Driyü [Tib. འབྲི་ཡུལ]. They were our secretaries to write letters. They made notes. We pretended that we were listening, and had a pen and a notebook open , and we pretended [acted] as if we were writing something down, but we didn't. We couldn’t sleep.   

**Q:**  Now if you go to a factory, did they give something like a lecture?   

**A:**  Sure. In what year [the structure] was made and how much progress they have made.   

**Q:**  Did you have to go to any meetings concerning political matters?   

**A:**  No.   

**A:**  Not in the meeting you say were held at night?   

**A:**  Sometimes we'd have to go and listen to lectures.   

**Q:**  What were they about?   

**A:**  Who knows! It was all in Chinese .   

**Q:**  You didn't understand anything? They didn't translate?   

**A:**  No. If they met for our purposes, then there would be a translator.   

**Q:**  Yes. Didn't you have to go to lectures?   

**A:**  Sometimes we'd go. It was as if one was going to go and sleep. Then if there was some drama, and if they put on the White Beard Opera, then it was not worth staying and we quietly ran away. Then they reprimanded us for leaving, saying that there were bad elements out there and that one could get lost.   

**Q:**  So you just got up and left?   

**A:**  We behaved [acted] as if we were going to pee and then left.   

**Q:**  What did they show?   

**A:**  If they showed something about the army, then it was worth watching.   

**Q:**  Army?   

**A:**  There is something called Hogyü [Ch. ?], military exercises. But if they put on their opera, the White Beard Opera, it was lousy; but Chinese were wild about it.   

**Q:**  Wild about it? .   

**A:**  Really! Even their mouths were wide open. Sometimes they said it was an evening get together [Tib. དགོང་ཚོགས], and we go and dance.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  To dance. There were some dancing places.   

**Q:**  And so did you go and dance?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. I stayed in a corner and had some snacks.   

**Q:**  From our side, who were the ones that were not bashful and would take to the floor?   

**A:**  Driyü and Shölkang Targye [Tib. དར་རྒྱས].   

**Q:**  Did they play English music?   

**A:**  No way. It was their own-you know, the one called slow dance. The one that goes like this and that! [motions]   

**Q:**  Oh, Waltz.   

**A:**  They did that and then they told us that we had to learn. They brought some Chinese and since we didn't know [how], we stomped on their feet. They tried once or twice and after that they didn't ask since we stepped on their feet. I just ate the snacks, and you know there are some corners. That's where I stay. Now they liked to dance a lot, Driyü, and Shölkang Targye, and some traders and Tashilhunpo persons. We never liked dancing.   

**Q:**  After the tour was over - earlier I told you that Kungö Liushar had written a report, right? Before the report was written, did all of you get together and then divide into smaller groups?   

**A:**  We got together. We had to write what we saw [Tib. མཐོང་ཚུལ] on the various tours. That we saw such and such things. Then based on what we saw, we had to write what we thought [Tib. བསམ་ཚུལ]. So we had to have a meeting. The ones who wrote the reports were Driyü and Lobsang Gelekla [Tib. བློ་བཟང་དགེ་ལེགས་ལགས]. They were our tour note takers. So unless we wrote what we thought about what we saw, it was said that we could not return. We were not good writers, but we called them and wrote the reports, then made a fair [amount of] copies. I was mainly concerned with that. I was dying to return and they said that unless this was done, we could not return. Towards the beginning, I was also sick for a while. I was a little depressed [Tib. རླུང]. I used to think about escaping -even if I did, there no way of getting home.   

**Q:**  When the reports were given, how much freedom did you have to express your opinions? Would they look at it and then return it?   

**A:**  What we wrote we had to show to them. As the Chinese representative, there was Baba Ngawang Kelsang [Tib. ངག་དབང་སྐལ་བཟང]. He would examine it. He was good in Tibetan, though he could only write in printing script. He was good with wording [Tib. རྗོད་བྱ].   

**Q:**  When you were there, could you just as an outing go shopping and do things like that?   

**A:**  There were many who went. I have never even seen Beijing city properly because we went on a tour and I had to write reports of what we saw and what we thought, right? So out of eagerness to return, I was working on this. I went to [the] baths a few times. There is the Chu Ngoyo [Ch. ?]-where I went to bath a few times. Later, when we got to the new guest house at Harbing the place to bath was right there. The ones who made the report also got better meals. You could ask [for] whatever you wanted and they would bring [it]. We always ordered western food [Ch. xi cai].   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  The Chinese have what's called [Ch. si cai yi tang], 4 dishes and 1 soup, then rice and steamed momo. This was usual [typical]. When we wrote reports, we ordered western food.   

**Q:**  In India they say Sichuan food.   

**A:**  No, no. Western food, English food.   

**Q:**  I see. The food was very good.   

**Q:**  When you wrote the reports, how did it work? Did you have a meeting? Did everybody get together? All 100 people?   

**A:**  No. No. We got together.   

**Q:**  You mean the ones who wrote got together?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So, how many writers were there?   

**A:**  Kungö Liushar and others were there. Then we made a draft, which the Kungö checked.   

**Q:**  Who said that at first you had to write this and that?   

**A:**  This was told by this Chinese interpreter [who] was there. This Ngawang Kelsang. He was always present.   

**Q:**  When one started what did they say? That you had to make a report?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So who were you going to tell to write?   

**A:**  They had asked us, and Ngawang Kelsang was there, and so one would make it like that.   

**Q:**  Was there a list to refer to?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  One that said on this day, we went here and there, etcetera?   

**A:**  Yes. The report was noted by Lobsang Gelek and them. [Driyü].   

**Q:**  I see. When they went, [did] they have to make notes?   

**A:**  Yes, where they made lectures and all of that. One had to make notes.   

**Q:**  One had to?   

**A:**  Yes. As I told you, the ones who took notes were the two of them [Lobsang Gelek and Driyü]. We took a pen, but we [would] never write.   

**Q:**  So the notes were referred to when making the reports?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Earlier you mentioned that they asked what one's opinion was.   

**A:**  Which one?   

**Q:**  The one that was written; to give one's opinion on what one saw.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. That one. [They asked] "What is your opinion on what you saw?" For example, one saw a factory and said how good it was. They asked what our opinion was about that. So one could say that it was good, however, the machinery was not really Chinese. That it was Western.   

**Q:**  You could say that?   

**A:**  Yes, you can state your opinion. In some cases there was no need to state opinions, right? So there was no need to say it.   

**Q:**  When all of this was written, then, you showed it to Kungö Liushar?   

**A:**  Then we all meet and made the report, and then we had to give it to the Chinese. After it was all done, the Kungö stayed behind for a month. We celebrated the New Year, Losar, and returned when the report was finished - or else they said that we could not return. I wanted to return so much that even if they told me to walk I would have. I was just so anxious to return that I was nervous.   

**Q:**  Kungö Liushar stayed there?   

**A:**  The Kungö stayed for a week and came via Hong Kong, to Calcutta and via Kalimpong.   

**Q:**  It was easier?   

**A:**  Sure, they didn't have to ride. Unlike these days - how many hours is it from Calcutta to Hong Kong? From Delhi?   

**Q:**  From Delhi to Hong Kong? I don't really know, maybe 2-3 hours. Maybe 3.   

**A:**  In those days, I don't know if it was the inferior planes and I don't know where they would land, but they say it took about 5-6 days or 3 days. We rode [on horseback] from Chamdo. Up until the other side of the river, the motorable road was completed. We stayed for some days at Chamdo, and then we rode.   

