# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0031.03 : Tape 3  
##  : with Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** April 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 65  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1928  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Dombor, Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. གདོང་པོར, ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ] was a monk official who served as a tsendrön. He was from the Dombor monk household [Tib. ཤག་ཚང], and a relative of his had been a katsab. In this interview, Ngawang Rigdrol discusses the 17-Point Agreement and how there were two different opinions among the government officials: some thought it might be acceptable, while higher ups like the sitsab and Phala thought that the Agreement was just a bullying maneuver. He also describes being a representative at the meeting to mollify the Chinese, the disagreements over what action to take, and how some, including himself, advocated talking with the Chinese because they were not prepared militarily to resist the Chinese. Finally. he discusses how the Chinese became harsher in 1957-58, how some government officials, like Shölkang Jedrung, became pro-Chinese because they couldn't manage their loans, and going to Yadong with the Dalai Lama in 1951.   

---  
### Tape 3  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0031_03/H_0031_03.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  In 1950, Chamdo was lost, and in 1951, the 17- Point Agreement was signed. Around this time, the Dalai Lama was staying in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, and then Zhang Jingwu came to Tibet. Then the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa, and after that a lot of Chinese came to Tibet, right? So from 1950, in the 50's, as I see it from one point of view, some officials thought that maybe it was not so bad with the Chinese. The 17-Point Agreement was already signed and in that there were a lot of various articles, and they thought that this should be implemented. On the other hand, whether it was the two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</span> or Phala Drönyerchemmo, it seems that they had no interest in working things out. So what was it, how was it?   

**A:**  Since it that was a political work, it is difficult for us to say exactly that they thought in this way and that way. Our rank was tsendrön and we wouldn't have known that much. However, at that time, the Chinese came and the 17-Point Agreement was signed. And in the Agreement there were things that they [said] were going to help Tibet and make it better, and do such wonderful things, right? So as you have said, one side was thinking that maybe it was not so bad and another that this was impossible. The reason why some thought that it was not too bad is that the 17-Point Agreement was signed. In addition to that it was said that Tibet had lagged so much behind and that they were going to help, and like looking after a child, when it reached a point where it could fend for itself, then Tibet would be given to the Tibetans. So they said that, and those who thought that it may not be so bad were being fooled [Tib. མགོ་འཁོར] by this. Now, for those who were in the higher positions who were thinking that this would not work out at all- they knew the real thoughts of the Chinese no matter how sweet the talk. For example when the 17-Point Agreement was to be signed, they just bullied [Tib. དབང་ཡོད] [them]. So what they were saying was different from their policy. Anyway, because of what they said, certain sections thought that maybe it was quite okay. Now, if you ask what was the reason why the higher officials thought otherwise; the reason was that when the 17-Point Agreement was signed, they just bullied [them] and made them sign the Agreement. They said to implement what had been written or else they would forcefully liberate. This is what they were saying. It was like someone giving candy to a child, and telling the child, "Tell the truth and I will give you this candy. If you don't, then I will beat you." It was for this reason the two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</span>, Phala, and others thought in this way. So the reason why there were two groups was that the ones who thought things may not be so bad, they were preoccupied or fooled with what the Chinese were saying and the 17-Point Agreement. When the 17-Point Agreement was signed, the way they forced things, that even you know, right? Even the seals were made, though they did have the Kashag's seal. So the discussions, the work, and the wording were already prepared by them. Therefore, the higher ups had heard about this, so they sort of had to be stern. I think this was the case. Now, these are just my thoughts.   

**Q:**  Among the higher ups, what about people like Ngabö?   

**A:**  Ngabö was there. He did go sign the 17-Point Agreement, and he also had power as a Kashag member. However, regarding this, there was no choice but for him to be secretive about this. We can't say for sure that Ngabö heard this secret and he said this and that, but it might be like the proverb, "Looking at the way the cow is sleeping, a calf will be born with a crooked jaw [Tib. བ་འདིའི་ཉལ་སྟངས་ལ་བལྟས་ན། བེའུ་འགྲམ་ཀྱོག་ཅིག་སྐྱེ་ས་རེད]." So there must have been some reason why they [Kashag] had to keep some secrets from Ngabö. Ngabö has a Chinese rank, and at that time the Chinese were very trusting of him, at least they were behaving that way. They had to because they needed to be nice to someone from the other side because if they did not, then they couldn't get their work done. So that was the reason they were not fully telling everything to Ngabö. But this is natural.   

**Q:**  The work that Phala was doing, the secret organization that he had with <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</span> Gyentsenla [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས] and others, they also had connections with the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. The first beginnings of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</span> with Andru Dzasa, a few of them discussed first. Just, "Now the Chushigandru are saying this and that, but when they first started, Drönyerchemmo was there." That's what was said.   

**Q:**  Yes, this and then the connection with Kalimpong. Phala Drönyerchemmo was doing that, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  Regarding these things, some say that the Kashag did not know and some [say] that they did know. So how was it?   

**A:**  At a particular time, it would seem that they had to behave like they did not know. We had to do the work in three ways: internally, outwardly and secretly [Tib. ཕྱི་ནང་གསང་གསུམ]. If one said something clearly at the Kashag, then there was the fear that the Chinese would know about it right? At the same time, it seems that the Kashag must have known something too. For example, people like Liushar and others were there.   

**Q:**  As I see it, it seems that Kungö Liushar was among those who thought that it was not so bad.   

**A:**  Maybe that was the case. I can't tell you exactly, but it may have been something like that.   

**Q:**  So at this time, what were you thinking?   

**A:**  As you have said now [before interview] regarding the meeting [meeting to alleviate the anger of the Zhongyang and to pacify the Khamba disturbance]. We were in there as representatives and [what we] most wanted [was] "What was torn to be fully torn, and what's broken to be fully broken [Tib. རལ་པོ་རལ་རྐྱང་འཆལ་པོ; ཆལ་རྐྱང] [let all hell break loose, no compromise]." So they were very stubborn. But a few of us were saying that we didn't think that they should all of a sudden resort to that and make things turned upside down [Tib. གན་རྐྱལ་ལྷ་སྦུབ]. We were saying, "This is not good because we are not prepared militarily, [we have] just a few Khambas. We do have the military but it is difficult to just give the command, since we have relations with the Chinese." So we were saying to try and calm things down, and that it might be alright to gradually talk with the Chinese. At that time this is what we said, and that was also what we were thinking. If something happened immediately and an uprising took place, we were not prepared. The Chinese were saying all kinds of sweet things, but they were prepared. They had cannons ready from on the roads. When the Dalai Lama went to Ganden it was unbearable, as there were cannons. Likewise, in front of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</span> House, when the Dalai Lama was giving a teaching, it was very dangerous. They were just ready to suppress [us]. At that time you [were] very, very young, and you had already come to India. If something happened all of a sudden, then the Dalai Lama was there. Then it would have been a disaster. So we had such talks.   

**Q:**  This was really towards the end, right? In the '50s, '51-'54, the Chinese were being very polite and diplomatic, right? In 1949?   

**A:**  Up to 1956, they did their best. The reason being that the Dalai Lama was in India, and so during this time, the Chinese did things peacefully as possible, because they were thinking that if there were a lot of problems, then the Dalai Lama might not return. Then in India, they were saying that unless the Dalai Lama returned, the Tibetans were creating a lot of commotion and it was not good. So when the Dalai Lama was in India, Zhou Enlai and the Chinese general. I have forgotten his name. They came to give the skull of the Thangsen Lama to India. In order to present this, Zhou Enlai and the general came. So they said that the Dalai Lama must return. That regarding workers there and anything, they would do what they could. They said that if the Dalai Lama did not return, then the people were not behaving themselves. They said whatever needed to be done was the Dalai Lama's wishes. I doubt that they were willing to withdraw completely, but they said that they were really going to do so much. They were worried that he may not return. After the Dalai Lama returned, then in '57 and '58, Chen Yi came and they made things worse and worse. Then some of our Tibetan people who had no brains [were playing up with the Chinese], the young ones.   

**Q:**  On the one hand, I feel there might have been something like this- in the traditional times there were among the officials those who had power and those who did not. So when the Chinese came, some may have been happy - those who had difficulties during the traditional government.   

**A:**  Yes, there must have been a few. But those who were overburdened with court cases and loans, to tell you the truth, were being close to the Chinese. For example, people like Shölkang Jedrung and Surkhang Jedrung, and many others - these people who could not manage they were close to the Chinese with the hope to be able to get rid of their loans.   

**Q:**  What was the situation with those two?   

**A:**  The two, there was something [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Shölkang Jedrungla had this problem with taking pictures.   

**A:**  No, no. The problem with taking photographs was that he was the Lhasa Nyertsang, right? Now, if he wanted to take photographs, one could seek permission and take [them]. But he just took them like that, and so he was removed as Lhasa Nyertsang. He must [should] have kept that in mind. But there was nothing about working for the government, and then he went to the Chinese and began behaving like he was somebody. I don't know whether the Chinese trusted him or not. Then Bumtang <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</span> was another one. But since his teacher was Bumtang Drunyichemmo, he was not in a desperate situation [Tib. འ་ཆད་འུ་ཐུག] at all. Bumtang Drunyichemmo was a very intelligence person [Tib. བློ་གྲོས་ཆེན་པོ]. He was an elderly [man] with rich experiences [Tib. དུར་རྒན]. Surkhang Jedrungla and Shölkang Jedrungla were sort of care free and irresponsible [Tib. ཏེ་འཆལ་པེ་ཆལ].   

**Q:**  They were what?   

**A:**  [Tib. ཏེ་འཆལ་པེ་འཆལ]. What should I say, sort of "happy go lucky [Tib. སྣང་བ་སྐྱིད་པོ]." When the Chinese came, they thought of doing all sorts of things unrestrained from laws and customs [Tib. ཁྲིམས་མེད་ལུགས་མེད]. Then later when the Chinese looked after them, they became kind of enthusiastic and didn't have [any] choice but to do that [follow the Chinese] .   

**Q:**  At this time, many were getting a lot of money from the Chinese, right? Regarding trade, things must have been much better.   

**A:**  It was sort of all right [mediocre] [Tib. དེ་འདྲ་ཅིག་རེད]. We don't have what we trade in, right? We get the loan from the Chinese and buy things that they couldn't do [get]. They ordered through the traders to bring building supplies, cement, and bedsheets from India. But this was only in the beginning. Later, things got worse and worse. That was their policy, right? Making things worse and worse, and in the end, they did not give [business loans].   

**Q:**  The reason I am asking you this [is] that after the Chinese came, then if people got a lot of money and trade increased, then humans invariably will not think much about politics, right? So I was thinking that there was a section of people who were preoccupied with this and did not think much about politics.   

**A:**  So they would not give just like that, right? At that time, they would make a small loan. Then they waited for the order [to be filled] and saw how it went. If the profit was quite all right, then they'd make an increase. This is for the large traders. The people had nothing. They really didn't have anything. They were not given loans and told to do something. It was very rare that there was someone who could trade unless one had good capital to begin with. So to the traders, they gave a small loan, and then an increase later. Then later, when the people did not come to like the Chinese, they decreased [loans]. It was like - just to fool them.   

**Q:**  Then there was this whole problem with the two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</span>. During this time, some say that the two sitsab were not realistic and were too stubborn.   

**A:**  Yes, they did say that. However, if the two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</span> became soft-headed [Tib. དབུ་སླ་པོ], then those under them, the Kashag and all would become soft too. The two were not at all in agreement [with the situation] [Tib. འདོད་པ་མ་གནང་བ]. Because the two were not at all in agreement [with situation], even the People's Association held their meetings, and this was with the support from the two sitsab. Therefore, they say the sitsab "instigated [Tib. ངན་བསླབ་བཅུག]" the people. Whether they were or not doing this, I don't know. The people themselves never liked the Chinese at all. In the lower regions (Kham), since they were not that educated in politics, it was said that the Khambas said, "The Chinese Communists are the parents to whom we are grateful, and the silver <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</span> [is] falling like a rain [Tib. རྒྱ་གུང་བྲེན་དྲིན་ཆེན་ཕ་མ་རེད། དངུལ་རྡ་ཡང་ཆར་པ་བབ་བབ་རེད]." So when the Dalai Lama went down [to China] in 1954, in Chamdo he asked them, "Now, tell me, is it really raining?" Now there is no rain, right? So because the two sitsab were hard-headed, the People' Association also supported them and rose up. If people at the head don't do it, then the people won't do it, right? Regarding the Kashag and sitsab, since they had to meet the Chinese and discuss, then there would be some friction [Tib. ཕྱོགས་འགག་རྒྱག], right?   

**Q:**  So, Kungö, as you see it, the reason why the first People's Association rose was in support of the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</span>?   

**A:**  Which one, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</span> one?   

**Q:**  No, no. The first People's Association in 1952.   

**A:**  Oh, oh - yes. They were in support of the sitsab. Yes. The head was being hard, and so the people said, "That's right." It's hard to say that all the people were there, but the more educated of the people were all representatives in the People's Association.   

**Q:**  Therefore, the Chinese were saying that the two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</span> instigated the people, right? As you look at it, you don't think there was any special connection, [right]?   

**A:**  I can't tell you about Kungö <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</span> since we don't have much [of a] connection. However, Sitsab Lobsang Tashi and I have very good relations. He and our late teacher were both staff at Tashilhunpo. He is not the type that used secret and deceptive means [Tib. ས་འོག་དར་འཐག]. I think that he did not tell the People Association at all that we were doing such and such things, and so you guys must rise and do this and that. He's the type that just stays moderately.   

**Q:**  Last time, I mentioned to you about the meeting. How did it come about and what was the reason for the meeting?   

**A:**  The reason for the meeting is the following. The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</span>s had come to Lhoka and the Chinese said, "You better try and stop them or else we are going to send in the army." This was the reason for the meeting which was to 'subside the Khamba's disturbance and to alleviate the anger of Zhongyang' [Tib. khams pa'i zing cha 'jags ya dang zhongyang dgongs pa dangs thabs]. So there was a lot of talk at the meeting. I mentioned [it] earlier, right? How a section of the people said, "Whatever you want to do, there is nothing to be done. What is already tattered should be fully torn and what is already broken should be completely broken." So if they sent in the army against the Khambas it would harm us, right? So in order to subside the Khambas, the government sent Kungö <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</span> and Thubden Samjola [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བསམ་མཆོག་ལགས]. So the government said that they were going to try and subside the Khambas, and told Zhongyang please don't be angry.   

**Q:**  How did the meeting take place? Did the Dalai Lama tell you all to meet?   

**A:**  No, the Chinese told the Kashag.   

**Q:**  I see. The Chinese told the Kashag that this <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</span> disturbance had to be put down.   

**A:**  Yes, and so they said how it should be done. Then the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</span> [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  I see, the Large Assembly was called?   

**A:**  I think it was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</span> (Abbreviated Large Assembly). Maybe it was the large one. No, it was not the large assembly since there were representatives.  

**Q:**  How many officials came? I heard about 70-80 or so. Is this the one? [the meeting that I'm referring to]   

**A:**  Yes, this is the one.   

**Q:**  Who first spoke at the meeting?   

**A:**  Whenever there was a government meeting, it was the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</span> that presided over the meeting.   

**Q:**  During this time the kalön didn't come?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  No? To the meeting at the Shabden Lhagang?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  So you were in the meeting, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was a representative.   

**Q:**  Who spoke at the meeting? Who were the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</span>?   

**A:**  The <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</span> would say that Zhongyang was telling us such and such things and so what should we do? I don't remember who said it exactly, maybe Kungö Ta Lama.   

**Q:**  Who was at this meeting?   

**A:**  There were the 4 tsipön and the 4 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</span>, and then there were the other members of sub-groups [Tib. ཚོགས་ཆུང]. There were the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫ་ས] 1. A high rank in the Tibetan government. 2. A top manager-like official for the labrang of important incarnate lamas, especially those who in the past had served as regents of Tibet.">dzasa</span>, the fifth rank letsen [Tib. ལས་ཚན] and the other lesser (common) officials [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ]. Likewise, among the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་དྲུང] A monk official in the Tibetan government.">tsidrung</span>, there were the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མཁན་ཆེ] A high monk official of the third rank in the traditional Tibetan government.">khenche</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</span>, the fifth rank letsen and the lesser officials.   

**Q:**  At the meeting, who spoke?   

**A:**  Oh, I swear by the three jewels that I can't remember now. However, the gist of the matter is that some said we were going to let tattered things be torn and things that were about to break, [to] break- and that nothing could be done. It was said [by others], "Don't take such an attitude since we have to really try and subside the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</span>'s revolt and appease the anger of Zhongyang." Anyway, this was the resolution of the meeting. At first, it was not about subsiding the Khamba revolt and appeasing the anger of the Zhongyang. After this meeting, then it was about that and it was said that we were going to send people to cease the Khamba's revolt and appease the anger of the Zhongyang.   

**Q:**  In 1950, '51 and '52 the Dalai Lama was very young, wasn't he?   

**A:**  Yes, when he came to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span> [1950], he was 16.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama was always saying to calm things down, isn't [that] it?   

**A:**  Yes, he was thinking along those lines, so that there would not be a disturbance.   

**Q:**  I wonder how much he knew during this time. For example, the secret work of <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</span> and Phala Drönyerchemmo, and the connection with the US. Do you think Drönyerchemmo told the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  Oh, I don't think he informed the Dalai Lama. I don't know really how it was. He should have known, but he would not say to do this and that. The ones who did the political work below, they would do it, right? Actually, the way it should have worked, even for the Chinese, was that one approached the Kashag. Then they consulted the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</span> and informed the Dalai Lama. The Chinese didn't do that at all. The Kashag and drungtsi were just stepped on, including the sitsab. The likes of Zhang Jingwu would go straight to the Dalai Lama and say that this must be done. They would get all worked up and they said some bad comments in a coarse manner [Tib. གདུག་རྩུབ]. It's said that they spoke like that. So he [Dalai Lama] did not have any choice. Yes, you would not know, but when the Chinese first came, even when you slapped the Chinese on their faces it is said that they kept quiet. Then as the army gradually increased in strength, then they got tougher and tougher [Tib. མཁྲེགས་སུ་ཕྱིན]. Otherwise, they said that they liberated Tibet peacefully, at least that's how they made the Agreement. What they said was that they were going to stay until Tibetans could stand on their own. So a group of the people would really get carried away [Tib. མགོ་འཁོར] with that, right? They gobbled up [took over] all of Tibet. And when they said that they were going to make roads, how much of the people's agricultural land was lost? Likewise, they gave some wages, but all the work was done by our Tibetans. Then the grain in all the granaries was taken out for them. They were giving <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</span>, though it was not falling like rain.   

**Q:**  In 1948-49, one hears a lot that the Chinese were going to liberate (Tibet) and all of that, right? During this time, what did you think? Did you think that they were going to come and liberate it and take over everything?   

**A:**  It never occurred to me. We went down to China in 1951 and they said that they were going to start a railway, and they were going make it so that vehicles could come to Tibet. We had to ride (on horses) from Chamdo for 3-5 days. They were saying that we were about to meet the vehicles and I doubted very much that we would meet the cars. Since there was mountainous terrain everywhere, I thought that they were just saying like that, I did not believe is at first. After 4-5 days from Chamdo, we passed the mountain passes called Chabila [Tib. བྱ་འཕུར་ལ] and Tagmala [Tib. སྟག་མ་ལ] and (came to where) they were making the road. We Tibetans did not make the road. It was all by soldiers. So they were making it in various sections of the hills. Then I thought, "Oh my three jewels! They're are really going to do it." Later when they said that they were going to build railway tracks, one started thinking that they would do it.   

**Q:**  In 1950-55, they were being very clever [Tib. མཁས་པོ], right? Around '52-'53?   

**A:**  They were not being artful around '52-'53.   

**Q:**  No? In '52-'53?   

**A:**  No. By then they had already stiffened. The reasons being that a lot of soldiers had already arrived and the road was joined [built]. In '54 the road had already come to Lhasa. Right after that, they became stern [Tib. སྦོམ་དུ་ཕྱིན]. That's it. Then the Chinese were no longer the type who kept quite when you slapped them.   

**Q:**  In 1950, the Chinese came up and Chamdo was lost. Where were you at this time and what work did you do?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa and I was the Military Payroll Officer [Tib. དམག་ཕོགས་དོ་དམ་པ]. The country had regular regiments like the Kadang Gusung, Khadang <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</span>, <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ག་དང] The army regiment whose troops were recruited from the Shigatse area. &quot;Ga&quot; refers to the third letter of the Tibetan alphabet.">Gadang</span>, etc. I was in charge of the military salary and my colleague was the late Jagtrag [Tib. ལྕགས་སྤྲགས] Rimshi. One had to bring the grain from the various dzongs and the estates, and pay the salary to the military.   

**Q:**  Whether [it was] in 1948 or 1949, there were a lot of people saying that the Chinese were going to come. The Chinese were also saying that they were going to liberate Tibet and a lot of other things, right? So in 1950, Chamdo was lost. Therefore, were there any changes in the military salary department? [For example, did] you have to send rations down or did you had to increase the military, etc.?   

**A:**  Yes, there was the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</span> Regiment, or the Junyidrugna [Tib. བཅུ་གཉིས་དྲུག་སྣ] (12-6 system). From every 12 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྐང] The basic land measurement unit for tax obligations in the traditional Tibetan society. One gang was considered a full tax unit of land. A gang was measured by volume, specifically by the amount of seed (sönkhe) that could be sown. This amount was not standardized and the size of one gang varied under different lords.">gang</span> and 6 <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འདོན] A volume measurement used for fields on aristocratic and religious manorial estates. One dön was equal to two gang.">dön</span>, one soldier had to be sent, right? Yes, like that, and more soldiers had to be recruited and an additional salary was paid.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came? When they said that they were coming, were additional soldiers recruited?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  When you say <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</span> Regiment, there was one earlier under the favorite, Jensel Kumbela [Tib. སྤྱན་བསལ་ཀུན་འཕེལ་ལགས], which fell apart.   

**A:**  That was not there [any more]. They were all sent back home. Then later there was a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</span> - what should I say, it was the 12-6 system.   

**Q:**  So this was started in 1950?   

**A:**  It was planned before 1950, and recruited and stationed at Dosenge [Tib. རྡོ་སེང་གེ]. Remember the Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] Dosenge?   

**Q:**  I have heard of the Lubu.   

**A:**  Yes, there was the Lubu Dosenge, on this side of the new army headquarters , inside [of] the Lingkor road. We didn't have to send salary down from here to Chamdo. Those <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</span> lands [in Chamdo] were set aside for what they would provide. We only paid the regular regiments, and when the soldiers traveled, we gave a traveling salary [Tib. ལམ་ཕོགས].   

**Q:**  What is Lamphog?   

**A:**  The salary (rations) for the road.   

**Q:**  So when the Chinese came, then you recruited new ones [soldiers]?   

**A:**  Yes, we called up the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. གྲོང་དྲག] The army regiment created during the 13th Dalai Lama&#x27;s reign whose members were recruited from better families. The name &quot;Drongdrag&quot; means &quot;better families.&quot;">Drongdrag</span>, I mean the 12-6 Regiment, and distributed rifles, and they had target practice.   

**Q:**  How many were there?   

**A:**  I think at that time there many on the 12-6 system. They were called [up], and there were probably a few thousand.   

**Q:**  How many years did you work?   

**A:**  Until the Dalai Lama went to Yadong.   

**Q:**  I see, the Chinese had still yet to come in numbers, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Since I was taken to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, the Military Payroll Officer was appointed separately. Before that, there was the [one] in charge of the ammunition [Tib. གོ་རྫས་དོ་དམ་པ], the late Rimshi from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</span> Khangsar [Tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཁང་གསར]. This office was also part of the Military Payroll Office, and we were working for both offices and working on guns, etcetera - there are many useless [broken] guns at the Military Headquarters, right? They were disassembled and repaired.   

**Q:**  What did you go to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span> as?   

**A:**  I went to serve the Dalai Lama's <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</span> (Secretariat). Under the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</span>, doing the tsendrön work.   

**Q:**  I see, while you were the Military Payroll Officer, you were a tsendrön.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Previous to this you were at the gaa.   

**A:**  I did the regular work at the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</span> and the other work I had was the Payroll Officer.   

**Q:**  So when the Dalai Lama went to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, while he was staying there, you were there, right?   

**A:**  Yes. [I was] there until the Dalai Lama returned.   

**Q:**  Now how did it happen? While you were the Military Payroll Officer, the Dalai Lama was going to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, right? Then you went to serve there, right? During this time there was talk about the 17-Point Agreement, right?   

**A:**  When he went there, the talk was not there. When he arrived there, then it started.   

**Q:**  Now, the idea of going to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, how did this [question not finished]   

**A:**  For the time being, they sort of decided to have a main government and a traveling government [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཁབ་གཞིས་བྱེས་གཉིས]. The Dalai Lama did not stay at the capital and went to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, and at Lhasa, the two <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</span> were appointed. Most of the kalön were there [at Yadong] and as Katsab, Shasur and Thubden Ramyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས] were appointed.   

**Q:**  Was there any talk about this before going to <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>? Was there a meeting called? Who said that they thought it was good that the Dalai Lama should go to Yadong? That he should not stay here and must leave, etcetera?   

**A:**  They must have reported that from the tsondu. They must have said that for the time being it was better to have two governments, the main and the traveling one. At Lhasa, there were the two sitsab. The Dalai Lama was with the traveling government in <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, at Chumbithang [Tib. ཆུ་འབི་ཐང].   

**Q:**  When you say, jay [Tib. བྱེས] it refers to one who stays there?   

**A:**  It refers to the one who [is] on the outside. We call even our traders "jay" [Tib. བྱེས་པ]. It refers to the one who goes to the outside. Even today, we who are outside Tibet are "jay." The "Shi" [Tib. གཞིས] refers to those inside Tibet. Today there are phrases like <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 师] A division in the Chinese Army.">shi</span> jay nyi (both those who are outside and inside)[Tib. གཞིས་བྱེས་གནིས] etcetera, etcetera.   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama was at <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, then how did all of this talk about the 17-Point Agreement arise? And even before this, did not some go to India to discuss this?   

**A:**  Before that [the 17-Point Agreement], Mindrubu [Tib. སྨིན་དྲུག་སྦུག] and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</span> were sent.   

**Q:**  Mindru what?   

**A:**  Mindrubu, who was a tseja (official). The two were not able to go to China, right? It is said that they wanted the talks to not be held in China, but on the border between China and Tibet. Then they had some problems with visas and they got stuck [in India].   

**Q:**  So the Chinese were saying that representatives should be sent for talks?   

**A:**  Finally, when they arrived at Chamdo, Ngabö went, right? From Chamdo, Ngabö and some of them went, and from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span> who was that - Depön and Künsangtse [Tib. ཀུན་བཟང་རྩེ]. Drunyichemmo Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར].   

**Q:**  When they went there, there was this talk about the seals put on the 17-Point Agreement, right? It is said that Ngabö had the Doji seal, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. He had it. The Doji seal is no different from the Kashag seal. It carries the same weight.   

**Q:**  Even if one Kashag member sealed it? And from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, no seals were sent?   

**A:**  No. The government would use only one seal. The Bugdam [the Dalai Lama's seal] would not be used. The Kashag is the main political government.   

**Q:**  And so the Doji seal is Kashag seal?   

**A:**  It is no different from the Kashag's. The design is the same. Therefore, he had brought it, but did not use it. The 17-Point Agreement was made by the Chinese and they made them put seals it. So they made false ones. The reason why we are saying that we were forced to sign the 17-Point Agreement is that we had brought our seal, but we did not use it. So they had all new seals made. It is said that they have kept everything, including pens [for records, and for archives].   

**Q:**  It is said that Ngabö and Lhalu had different ideas. I don't remember, but someone mentioned that Ngabö was sent just to give him a hard time [in jest] [Tib. bkyag-bkyag byed].   

**A:**  It wasn't in jest. Lhalu was there and Ngabö was appointed as the new Doji.   

**Q:**  Was Lhalu's term up?   

**A:**  Yes, his term was up and a new one was appointed. Therefore, when Ngabö went down the two became the old and the new. I cannot say exactly, but Ngabö said that Lhalu should stay.   

**Q:**  That he should stay?   

**A:**  Yes, but Lhalu gradually came up, right? And Ngabö and his staff stayed there.   

**Q:**  When he was there, it seems like Ngabö already had the idea of not fighting, right?   

**A:**  It is said that Lhalu was going to fight as much as possible. Ngabö thought that this was not possible. With our military strength and all aspects [considered], [he thought] that we could not take a militant position. Ngabö and the others returned to Drugugon [Tib. གྲུ་གུ་དགོན], and from there he was taken to Chamdo. Later he had the ammunition dump set ablaze. Ngabö said, "Just say that I gave the order to destroy the dump. "Nothing will happen [don't worry]." He said that later our ammunition was going to fall on our heads [be used against us].   

**Q:**  So Ngabö was thinking from the beginning not to fight, right?   

**A:**  So it was decided to peacefully discuss things. The Chinese told that to Ngabö and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span> was wired. And so Ngabö went down and from the capital [Yadong], the others went.   

**Q:**  Later there was talk that they were not permitted to consult the country [to Yadong].   

**A:**  Yes. they did not allow this.   

**Q:**  There was the means to send wireless [communication], right? There was even a [code] book, right? So couldn't they have sent it via that?   

**A:**  There wasn't time to send that. It had to be done from China itself. They were already there. In China, there were the 10 points, and based on our discussions, it is said that the basic ten points were retained, but 7 others were added.   

**Q:**  So what you are saying is that there were the 10 points. So when the 10 points were there, then they must have consulted <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span> right?   

**A:**  No, they did not have time for that. They said, "If you want to do this, then do it [agree]." "If you want to sign, then sign. If you don't want to sign, then we will forcefully liberate [Tibet]." So now since we had landed in their hands [palms], they could say whatever they wanted to, right?   

**Q:**  Could they not have said, "Let me first discuss this with the government [in Yadong]"?   

**A:**  If possible, this is what they should have said.   

**Q:**  It seems they did not say that.   

**A:**  It seems that this was not permitted. I can't tell you whether they told the Chinese and the Chinese did not listen to them, or they decided not to consult [with them]. It seems that some of them had this discussion.   

**Q:**  Maybe Ngabö thought that if he did consult, then it might not work.   

**A:**  It is possible that he did have such thoughts. Anyway, the 10 points were made into 17, and they made them sign it.   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama went from <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span> to Lhasa, and Ngabö and others came later [to Lhasa], right?   

**A:**  Yes, he came later.   

**Q:**  Right, and it is said that the matter was reported to the Kashag and the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</span> was called. At the Assembly meeting, Ngabö spoke for many hours, and he said that that was all there was to do. Then the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> said that they guessed that was about it and that maybe it was best to accept the 17-Point Agreement. The matter was sent to [the Dalai Lama] and the Dalai Lama sent a telegram saying that - and I cannot tell you specifically - but after meeting, "I have accepted the Agreement." Mao sent a telegram which said, "It is good that you have accepted." All of these telegrams have been published in a book.   

**A:**  This may be.   

**Q:**  So what happened?   

**A:**  At the meeting, Ngabö met [came] and there was a lot of talk. Ngabö gave the reasons for why the 17-Point Agreement had to be signed. Most of the people were not in agreement with him. The Chinese said that the Agreement had been signed and that they had to send a telegram saying that things were good. All of this had to be done under the instigation [Tib. སྐུལ་སློང] of the Chinese. If we had the freedom, then, when we were discussing the 17-Point Agreement, they should have [consulted Yadong] saying, "The 17-Point Agreement contains such and such points, and the Chinese are saying such and such things so what should we do?" So the Chinese did not allow us to consult [with Yadong] and when we returned, the Dalai Lama had to send the telegram saying that it was all right.   

**Q:**  After the Dalai Lama came to Lhasa, Ngabö and all were down there [in Beijing], right? Then he would have had to come up [to Lhasa] and they would have had to meet, right? So regarding [the 17-Point Agreement], they must have asked Ngabö about this, right? There had to be some talk about it, isn't that right? That you went down to China and then what happened? Therefore, in order to have had this talk [about the Agreement], was the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</span> called?   

**A:**  They must have had a meeting saying that such was the situation with Ngabö. I cannot be sure, but they would have had to call a meeting. However, it was already ruined and finished like the proverb, "The [fabric] was already wrongly cut off [Tib. བཟོ་ཉེས་དྲས་ཐལ]."   

**Q:**  It is said that Ngabö spoke for many hours. Is that correct?   

**A:**  He must have. At that time, there was the 17-Point Agreement, but at that time, the Chinese were not behaving as they are now. They were to develop Tibet and after the Tibetans could manage to stand on their own, then they were to withdraw. That Tibetan culture would not be altered and internal affairs would not be interfered [with]. All of that was there. Then they became more and more stern.   

**Q:**  Therefore, at the time the 17-Point Agreement was signed, as there was no alternative, the people saw that it was not bad, isn't that right? They [Chinese] said that everything would remain as it was; the government, monasteries, estates, and they were also very diplomatic and saying that they had come to help and then they would return [to China]. They were saying all of these sweet things, right? Therefore, those who were working, like Ngabö, they must have thought that then this may be quite all right.   

**A:**  Yes, they would think that maybe it would not be so bad, but [because] it was something that was already done, right? The 17-Point Agreement was already done and when one takes a quick glance at its various articles [it may not seem so bad], but when one examined it closely, then there are a lot of problems. They had worded it in such a way [that] it could be pulled anywhere. Therefore, later when they completed the road construction, then they became adamant [about the policy]. Like a tool, it was already caught in their hand, right?   

**Q:**  As I see it, from one perspective I do not think it was really bad to accept the Agreement because we were requesting outside help from so many quarters, but we did not get any. From the Chinese side, they were saying that if we accepted [the Agreement], then that was it. If not, then they were going to forcefully liberate [Tibet]. So there wasn't really anything else to do, right?   

**A:**  Yes, nobody guaranteed any help, economically or militarily. And even in the 17-Point Agreement, they did not do [say] what they are doing now. In 1956, when the Dalai Lama met Zhou Enlai, they said that they were going to withdraw the Chinese for the time being and that the Dalai Lama has to return. They said such things. All of this was just bullying tactics.   

**Q:**  Yes. It was just bullying, but I don't see that what they did was very incorrect [with respect to the 17-Point Agreement].   

**A:**  There was no scope for discussions. In the 17-Point Agreement, they said that there was going be no changes in various aspects of the government and that they were going to help. So they were like that.   

**Q:**  You were the Military Payroll Officer and you were at <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, right? What was your main work? as a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</span>?   

**A:**  There was nothing except to do the ceremonial work at the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</span> (Secretariat).   

**Q:**  You were where the Dalai Lama was staying, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  During this time, wasn't there a lot of talk about not returning to Tibet and maybe going to India? There were two sides. Who were involved?   

**A:**  The Kashag was there and the drungtsi.   

**Q:**  If there were some political discussions, just as in Lhasa, at <span class="tooltip" data-text="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</span>, the Kashag and the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</span> met?   

**A:**  Yes, they did. And there were the representatives of the three great monasteries.   

**Q:**  So mainly, who was there that said that the Dalai Lama should go and that he should return?   

**A:**  The Kashag was there, the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</span>, and the representatives of the 3 monasteries. The two sides were from these, and one must have had the majority, the one that said the Dalai Lama should return. But the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ་རྒྱས་འཛོམས] The largest assembly of the traditional Tibetan government.">tsondu gyendzom</span> was not there.   

**Q:**  It seems there was quite a bit of friction between the two sides.   

**A:**  Yes, [there] must have been a little.   

**Q:**  Since you were working there at that time, should you not know the details?   

**A:**  We wouldn't know much about this.   

**Q:**  You were at the <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</span>, and so didn't they petition. You must have heard that they were meeting and that so and so was on this side, and they were saying that the Dalai Lama had to go to India. So these things you must know, since you were there.   

**A:**  The Kashag and the (tsondu) <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཧྲག་བསྡུས་རྒྱས་པ] The enlarged abbreviated assembly of the traditional Tibetan government. It included the trungtsigye, the abbots and ex-abbots of Sendregasum and representatives from all the government ranks.">hragdu gyepa</span> were there, and it was not like meeting at Lhasa since there was some secrecy.   

**Q:**  After the 17-Point Agreement was signed, Zhang Jingwu came to Yadong. Were you there at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there. Zhang Jingwu - the three of them came.   

**Q:**  Who?   

**A:**  Zhang Jingwu, he was the [Ch. dai biao] representative.   

**Q:**  Are Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Dai Biao the same?   

**A:**  Zhang is his surname and dai biao means representative. Then there was Alo Buzhang, and as his interpreter there was Phüntso Tashi [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས], wasn't it - who was <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</span> or Khamba. Remember the one who had grey hair?   

**Q:**  I don't know. You know, I was one or two years old .   

**A:**  Isn't that a fact. He said that he was the representative of the Zhongyang and that the Dalai Lama had to come and meet him. This, we said, would not do, and from the Foreign Office, Kungö Liushar went to meet them at the Nathula [Tib. སྣ་སྟོད་ལ] Pass. There were preparations and they stayed at Sharsingma [Tib. ཤར་སིང་མ]. Then they came up and the Dalai Lama was staying where they met at Dunggar Gomba [Tib. དུང་དཀར་དགོན་པ] Monastery. So it was really bullying because the Dalai Lama should be seated at the head, and through the Kashag and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. དྲུང་རྩིས] The drunyichemmo and the tsipön.">drungtsi</span>, they should state their matters. They did not do that and spoke only with the Dalai Lama, who, at that time, was only 16-17.   

**Q:**  Where was the Dalai Lama staying at that time?   

**A:**  at Dunggar Gomba.   

**Q:**  Zhang Jingwu came right? And so you and the others must [have] made preparations, right?   

**A:**  Of course, we had to get tea ready, and in front of the monastery there was a grassy area where a tent was erected, and then he went to meet the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  In front there was what, a grassy area?   

**A:**  In front of the monastery there is a rocky area where there is a grassy area.   

**Q:**  Where did they meet the Dalai Lama?   

**A:**  At Dunggar Gomba. He went into the monastery and <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</span> were exchanged. At first, he was saying that the Dalai Lama had to come down to where he was staying in Sharsingma since he was the Zhongyang representative. It is said that Kashag and all said a great deal about this, saying that this would not do.   

**Q:**  What was this thing about putting a tent in front of the monastery on a grassy area?   

**A:**  This was [for] a reception [with tea].   

**Q:**  Tea and what?   

**A:**  Tea and assorted snacks.   

**Q:**  Where were you at that time?   

**A:**  At Dunggar Gomba.   

**Q:**  Inside the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes, inside the monastery, and when they come to meet the Dalai Lama, we had to be there serving tea. At that time, they would probably only drink Jasmine tea, right?   

**Q:**  So did they come?   

**A:**  Yes, they did.   

**Q:**  How many of them?   

**A:**  The three of them.   

**Q:**  All three came?   

**A:**  Alo Buzhang, Zhang Jingwu and Phüntso Tashi.   

**Q:**  Were you in the room at that time?   

**A:**  Yes, we served tea and then we went outside.   

**Q:**  Yes. I'm trying to get some details. How did it take place? They came in standing and presenting a khata.   

**A:**  The Dalai Lama would get up, right? And they would offer a <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཁ་བཏགས] A Tibetan ceremonial scarf given to lamas, visitors, etc.">khata</span>, and then he would give them a khata. Then they would sit down and tea was served and greetings were exchanged. When they talked in detail, then we were not there, right?   

**Q:**  Phüntso Tashi, is he <span class="tooltip" data-text="[tib. ཨ་མདོ་བ] A person from Amdo.">Amdowa</span>?   

**A:**  I wonder if he is. They said something like that.   

**Q:**  When he came in, did he prostrate or something?   

**A:**  No, they wouldn't do something like that.   

**Q:**  What?   

**A:**  Internally, they would say things.   

**Q:**  He was the interpreter?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How long did they stay?   

**A:**  After the audience, they went down to the Kashag.   

**Q:**  Where was the Kashag staying?   

**A:**  At Dunggar Monastery, in various rooms below.   

**Q:**  So they met below?   

**A:**  Yes, and gave them a feast, and then they left for Lhasa.   

**Q:**  So during that time didn't they have any talks?   

**A:**  They must have had some talk about speaking to the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  There must have been some talk about the 17-Point Agreement. One had to say something.   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Do you remember what was said to the Dalai Lama and what the Dalai Lama said?   

**A:**  I wonder if they would [have] talked about that, but they would go through the motions of saying how everything turned out so nice. That it was good and that everything was peaceful. Something like that.   

**Q:**  How many days did they stay?   

**A:**  I doubt they stayed for more that 3-4 days.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

