# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0120.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Wang Gui  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2012**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Beijing, China  
**Date of Interview:** August 4, 2012  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and Chinese and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Anonymous  
**Name:** Wang Gui  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 80  
**Date of Birth:** 1932  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Wang Gui was a soldier in China's Southeast Army. In this interview, he discusses how he learned Tibetan, his arrival in Tibet with the PLA, building a house so the Chamdo Liberation Committee could meet, and building a road from Ganzi to Chamdo. He discusses in detail the Lhasa Revolt, the Dalai Lama's decision to see the Dance Troop performance and the controversy surrounding this decision, as well as the Dalai Lama's escape from Tibet. Additionally, he discusses the fighting at Norbulinga, Chinese and Tibetan propaganda, and the death of Phagpalha. Finally, he talks about Kapshöba Chögyal Nyima's involvement in the revolt, the different regiments of the PLA and Tibetan Army, and Tan Guansan's decision to fight.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0120_01/H_0120_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:** [Editor's note. Goldstein and Wang Gui sometimes spoke in Tibetan, but when Wang Gui spoke in Chinese, a translator translated that for Goldstein] You were among the Northwest Army [Ch. xibei jun], right?   

**A:**  No, I was among the Southeast Army [Ch. xinan jun] and I was among the Advance Troops [Tib. མདུན་སྐྱོད་དམག་དཔུང] [Ch. xian qian bu dui] of the 18th Army [Ch. shi ba jun] who came the first time to Tibet.  

**Q:**  Was that in 1951?   

**A:** It was in 1950 and I was there when the Chamdo War took place. I came to Lhasa along with Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan, and when the Chamdo War took place, I was with Wang Qimei.   

**Q:** At that time, Wang Qimei was the Committee Member of the Chamdo Liberation Committee [Tib. ཆབ་མདོ་བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང་གི་ཨུ་ཡོན], right?  

**A:** Yes, you are right, and I was there when they set up the Liberation Committee.   

**Q:**  You know a lot about the history, right?   

**A:**  When they started the Chamdo Liberation Committee, they needed a house which could hold about 300-400 people, and when Chamdo was about to be liberated, there wasn’t such a big house. So we didn’t have a house to hold the meeting. Therefore Wang Qimei hurried up and took the section leader [Ch. ke zhang] of our Reconnoitre Section [Ch. zhen cha ke] and went around Chamdo to find a house which could hold about 300-400 people. The assembly hall of the Chamdo Champaling [Tib. བྱམས་པ་གླིང] Monastery could hold about 200 people. However, it was not good to hold the meeting in the monastery, right? Our section leader said that we could build a house, and after about a month, they built the house. There was an abundance of wood in Chamdo, but they didn’t have many bricks. At that time, we were hungry and food was scarce, but they could build the house in a little more than a month. Chamdo was liberated in October and they built the house in December, and it took a little more than a month. The meeting was held in that house. Ngabö, Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ], Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ], and Traya Londen Sherab [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ་བློ་ལྡན་ཤེས་རབ] et cetera, and all the Huthogthu attended the meeting. Also the people from Jomda [Tib. མཇོ་མདའ], Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ], and Riwoche [Tib. རི་བོ་ཆེ], Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས], Dzogang [Tib. མཛོ་སྒང], Sanggna Chödzong [Tib. གསང་སྔགས་ཆོས་རྫོང] and Pomi [Tib. སྤོ་མི] attended the meeting.   

**Q:** At that time, you were young, right?  

**A:** I was 19 years old [laughter] when I came to Chamdo and 20 years old when I arrived in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  After you came to Lhasa, did you stay in Lhasa continuously?   

**A:**  Mainly, I stayed in Lhasa. I also stayed in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> for about 5 years at the border, and I also stayed in Posumdzom [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གསུམ་འཛོམས] for quite a long time. And then I also stayed in Tö Tradün [Tib. སྟོད་བཀྲ་མདུན] and Drongpa [Tib. འབྲོང་པ] for a couple of years.   

**Q:** Where is Drongpa located?  

**A:**  It is located at the north side of the Mustang [Tib. གློ་སྨན་ཐང] which is a completely nomad area. I also stayed in Shigatse and Gyantse. Your Tibetan is quite good and you can understand what I say, right?  

**Q:**  It is just so-so [Tib. ད་ག་སེ་རེད]. You went from the east to the west, and from the south to the north to many different places. When did you stay in Lhasa, I mean from what time?   

**A:**  I came to Lhasa in October 1951 along with Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan. Then after about a month, I went to Gyantse. I stayed about 8 months there and then I went to Shigatse. I came back to Lhasa in 1952 and stayed in Lhasa until 1954, and then I went to Yadong. And in 1959, I came to Lhasa, and I was in Lhasa when they made war in Lhasa and the revolt took place. In 1963, I went to Potramog [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་སྤྲ་རྨོག] Sumdzong and in 1964, I came to Lhasa again. In 1965, I went to Tö Drongpa and Tradün, and stayed there for about a year. And then I came back to Lhasa and mainly stayed in Lhasa, and I also went everywhere, like Chamdo.   

**Q:** How did you learn Tibetan?  

**A:** I learned Tibetan by myself with great effort.   

**Q:**  Your Tibetan is fluent and your pronunciation is good.   

**A:**  As for us, learning Tibetan was our duty. We were told that all the members of the 18th Army must learn the Tibetan language and writing well, and that Zhang Jingwu of the Tibet Party Committee [Ch. qu dang wei] was very concerned about this and talked many times that we must learn Tibetan. We were in the Reconnoitre Section, which was the Intelligence Office [Tib. གསང་བའི་ལས་ཁུངས].   

**Q:** It was very important to know Tibetan, right?  

**A:** Yes, our section leader would stress that very much, saying that if you don’t know Tibetan, it is like [being] a deaf and blind [person], and you can’t do any work in Tibet because we'd have to ask the Tibetans for information. And at that time, interpreters were very rare. In our office there was only one interpreter and about ten cadres, so I learned Tibetan [the] hard [way] from the interpreter, who was the teacher, and he wrote a dictionary by hand. In Kangding [Tib. དར་རྩེ་མདོ], they found a Chinese-Tibetan dictionary [Ch. han zang zi dian] compiled by the Teacher’s College [Ch. shi fan xue yuan] of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. abbr. 国民党] The Nationalist Party of Chiang Kaishek.">GMD</a>, and about ten of us copied this dictionary by hand over about 2 years. This dictionary had about 300-400 pages. Even now, this dictionary is displayed in the Military Exhibition [Ch. jun shi guan] in the Tibet Military Command Area.   

**Q:** This is very good. I also compiled a dictionary where I did the same by studying by myself and writing a few words on paper, and when I got many words, then I published a book.   

**A:**  You have great devotion to one’s work [Ch. shi ye xing hen qiang] [Tib. ཁུར་སེམས་ཆེན་པོ་འདུག].   

**Q:** No matter if it is useful or not, if I am doing a lot of work I feel happy, and I don’t feel happy if I stay relaxed [not working].   

**A:**  We Chinese also hard working people, like you, who do some real works [Ch. shi shi] internationally.   

**Q:**  Thank you.   

**A:**  I will write something for you to keep as a remembrance [Ch. ji nyan] [keepsake]. It is written in the love song of Tshanyang Gyatso [Tib. ཚངས་དབྱངས་རྒྱ་མཚོ], “The bright moon arose from the top of the mountain in the east and the face of the mother who didn’t give birth to me appeared in my mind [Tib. shar phyogs ri bo’i rtse nas/ dkar gsal lza ba shar byung/ ma skyes a ma’i zhal ras/ yid la ‘khor ‘khor byas byung] [Ch. zai dong fang de shan ding shang/ sheng qi liao jiao jei the yue liang/ wo jian wei sheng mu qing de lian pang zai wo xin zhong dang yiang]. This was a famous poem.   

**Q:** Your handwriting is good.   

**A:**  It is just ordinary [Tib. སྤྱིར་བཏང]. Do you like Tibetan songs?  

**Q:**  I don’t like them that much because I don’t know the songs and those things well.   

**A:**  There are many good Tibetan songs, and the best are the songs in Markham and Batang. I know a lot of those songs because, at that time, we danced along with the Tibetan miser.   

**Q:** My teachers were Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> in America and they didn’t know many of those <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> and Batang dialects and songs.  

**A:**  Who were those Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> you met?  

**Q:**  One of them was the Nornang Geshe La [Tib. ནོར་ནང་དགེ་བཤེས་ལགས].   

**A:**  Norgye Nangpa [Tib. ནོར་རྒྱས་ནང་པ], right?   

**Q:** Yes, he was a Geshe from the Dagpo [Tib. དྭགས་པོ] Tratsang. In 1960, they invited a Tibetan teacher, as the Americans [profedssors] didn’t know [spoken] Tibetan, so there was Geshe La and there was another teacher called Gyarsib Lhadrön La [Tib. སྐྱར་སྲིབ་ལྷ་སྒྲོན་ལ], who was not from a big family. The two of them were the Tibetan teachers.  

**A:** Lhadrön La was a girl, right?   

**Q:**  Yes, both of them were kind people. So I studied hard like you and learned Tibetan. Since my teachers were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, I learned fluent Lhasa honorific dialect, like say asking, “Is it like this or is it not like this [Tib. ཡིནཔ་ནོ་མན་པ་ནོ]?" Later when I went to the countryside and when I asked them, “Is this the toilet or is it not [Tib. འདི་གསང་སྤྱོད་ཡིནཔ་ནོ་མན་པ་ནོ]," they laughed at me and they didn’t understand [the honorifics]. Later, they got used to it.   

**A:**  I haven’t met Norgye Nangpa, but I worked with the Norgye La [Tib. ནོར་རྒྱས་ལགས] in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> for about two years.   

**Q:** In the past, I married the daughter of Surkhang who was the daughter of the elder sister of Surkhang Kalön.   

**A:** Surkhang Kalön’s wife was from Yuthok.   

**Q:** [misunderstood] No, she was the daughter of the Surkhang sister who was married to Shelkar Linga [Tib. ཤེལ་དཀར་གླིང་པ]. Now we are divorced, but we are still friendly and there are many relatives in Lhasa.   

**A:** Have you met Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>?   

**Q:** Yes.  

**A:** I have been to the home of Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> many times and have talked with him many times. At that time, the Vice Commander [Tib. ཕུ༹་སི་ལིང་ཡུཨན] of our Military Command Area was called Lijun, do you know him?   

**Q:**  No.  

**A:**  Zhang Guohua and Tan Guansan were the Commanders [Ch. si ling yuan] and the Political Commissar [Ch. zheng wei], and the Vice Political Commissar was Wang Qimei and the Chief of the Staff [Ch. can mou zhang] was Lijun, who arrived in Lhasa and was promoted to the Vice Commander and became the combined Vice Commander and the Chief of the Staff. When they built the highway from Kham to Tibet, Cheng Mingyi was in charge of the work in the rear area [Ch. hou fang], where he had two divisions [Tib. ཤི] working for the 18th Army. We were the Advance Troops [Ch. xian qian dui] and there were more people behind us. They were to build the road from Ganzi to Chamdo and went through a lot of hardships. When our regiment built the road from the west to the south, we took mainly about 10 thousand Tibetan farmers and built the road. These people were recruited from 48 dzongs and estates located in the places from Lhasa to Kongpo. At that time, they call them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འུལ་ལག] A generic term for corvée labor that had to be performed for one&#x27;s manorial estate/lord without pay. One kind of ula required people to go and work and another kind required the provision of transportation animals.">ula</a> (corvee laborers); we made the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> work but paid them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> silver coins. At that time, the Tibet Military Command Area and the Kashag jointly set up a Road Building Committee [Tib. ལམ་བཟོའི་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང], with the director [Ch. zhu ren] being Tan Guansan. There were also three vice directors. The first was Surkhang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, the second was Lijun, and the third was the Director of the Political Bureau [Tib. ཞེང་ཞི་བུ], Liu Zhenguo. When the road was being built, it was decided that we [the Chinese] shall pay the money and they shall make the miser work and provide the grain, and we shall pay the cost of the grain. We bought the implements, like hoes and shovels, from India. We made the work assignments like this and there was a lot of work, and the Joint Road Building Committee held a meeting once a week. When they held the meetings, Lijun needed a young interpreter, and I was appointed as the interpreter by the section leader of the Reconnoitre Section. He insisted on me doing that, though at that time, I didn’t know Tibetan well, and I could [only] say some of the words, but couldn’t say some others. However, I worked hard, and when I couldn’t say some words, they would laugh at me. Anyway, I worked hard by being the interpreter, and also learning Tibetan, and Surkhang taught me quite a lot. After being the interpreter for about a year, I improved a lot. I had been to Surkhang’s home many times as the interpreter for Lijun regarding the road building. Surkhang was eloquent and would talk with us nicely, but he had done a lot of rubbish [Tib. ཟ་རེ་ཟོ་རེ] works from the behind the scene.[laughter].   

**Q:** This was the work style of the aristocrats.  

**A:**  Yes, you are right. However, Surkhang would do more of these things and he was kind of a mediocre [Tib. ཁྲིག་ཁྲིག] person, verbally saying that it is important to build the road, but when the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> treated the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> very nicely, the miser never thought that they would get paid wages because there wasn’t any wages paid in the past. So when we paid the wages, they were very glad. However, the money was taken by the heads, like the estate managers, and they told the miser that this was not for them. They did that because those people were agricultural serfs [Tib. ཞིང་པ་བྲེན་གཡོག]. However, later we took [used different] methods, and gave them boots and tea bricks, which the heads couldn’t keep, and we treated the miser very kindly. When the heads and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཕྱག་མཛོད] A senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic or monastic estate, or the senior manager/treasurer of an aristocratic family or a monastic unit. Generally chandzö handled both internal and external issues and were considered higher in power and status than nyerpa (stewards), who typically only handled the storerooms.">chandzö</a> beat the miser, the miser liked the PLA and they didn’t like the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞིས་སྡོད] An estate manager.">shidö</a> or the shinyer. After 1-2 years, the miser knew about these things, and Surkhang untied his head knot and wore an ordinary Tibetan dress, and went to watch the road building sites from Lhasa to Metrogongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] and those places. When there was a situation where the miser became very friendly with the PLA and they didn’t like the kudrak, Surkhang was very much worried about this, and on the way back to Lhasa, Surkhang told me, “There will be an earthquake in Tibet.” He was very much worried that their system will not be stable. In the beginning, Surkhang himself told me that, “There will be an earthquake in Tibet,” but later these were the reasons for launching the revolt.   

**Q:**  Nowadays, I am doing some research on how the revolt took place, so please tell me a little bit about this. You were in Lhasa in 1959, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was there.   

**Q:**  In what month did you come back to Lhasa?   

**A:**  It was in February when I came to Lhasa from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, and the revolt was just about to break out. And at that time, I was in the Intelligence Office [Tib. སོ་པའི་ལས་ཁུངས].  

**Q:**  Where was the Intelligence Office located?   

**A:**  It was in the headquarters [Ch. si ling bu] of the Military Command Area, which was then called the New Regiment or Magar sarpa [Tib. དམག་སྒར་གསར་པ], and the Combat Department [Ch. zuo zhan chu] was in Magar sarpa, and I was staying in Polingga [Tib. སྤོ་བོ་གླིང་ག]. Do you know Polingga?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  This is the place where the sport field [Tib. ལུས་རྩལ་ཐང] [Ch. ti yu chang] is now built. We moved there for the time being and when the war took place, we were in Polingga. As for the main reason of that [the revolt], the CIA [Ch. zhong yiang qing bao ju] [Tib. གསང་བའི་ལས་ཁུངས] of the American government, starting from 1951, 1952, 1953 and 1954, through Taktse Rimpoche [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར་རིན་པོ་ཆེ] and Gyalo Thondup [Tib. རྒྱ་ལོ་དོན་གྲུབ], made relations many times with Surkhang, Liushar [Tib. སྣེའུ་ཤར] and those <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, saying, "We can support Tibetan independence. However, there should be a condition [Tib. མཐུན་རྐྱེན] or reason [Tib. རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན], and the main condition is that the Dalai Lama would need to go [Tib. ཕེབས་དགོས་ཀྱི་འདུག] abroad. If the Dalai Lama would be held in the hands of the CCP, we cannot support Tibetan independence. If the Dalai Lama would be able to arrive abroad, then we can [Tib. བྱེད་ཆོག་གི་རེད] strongly support Tibetan independence." They had this talk. Surkhang and Liushar kept the talk of the American CIA in their mind and they had great enthusiasm [Tib. སེམས་ཤུགས་ཆེན་པོ] toward taking the Dalai Lama abroad. They were saying that as long as they could do that, the US would support us. They tried to do that three times. The first one was in 1951, when the Dalai Lama went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and around the time when the 17-Point Agreement was signed, they said that he must go to India, but this didn’t work out and failed because Zhang Jingwu came over. There were two groups in the Kashag. Some of them were saying that the Dalai Lama should return to Lhasa and some of them were saying that the Dalai Lama should go to India. They debated a lot and then he came to Lhasa. The second was when the Dalai Lama went to India for the Buddha Jayanti. At that time, Taktse Rimpoche and Gyalo Thondup both came, and Zhou Enlai and Nehru talked with the Dalai Lama. This also failed and he came back. In 1958 and the beginning of 1959, there was the revolt in Kham and Tibet and many people of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> came the places around Lhasa. When I was in Yadong, Chushigandru came through Kalimpong and Gangtok to Yadong, and then they went to Dowa Dzong and Lhoka Drigu [Tib. གྲི་གུ]. Everyday, they came in groups of ten, and about 20-30 altogether. There were about 700-800 of them. At that time, we wouldn’t stop them and they were free to go. They lost the revolt in Kham and then went to Kalimpong, and the US helped them and they came back. After they came to Drigu, they came to Lhasa, and there was Andrutsang Gombo Tashi [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་ཚང་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས], Jagötsang <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje [Tib. བྱ་རྒོད་ཚང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་རྡོ་རྗེ] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Lonyendra [Tib. ས་འདུ་བློ་སྙན་གྲགས]. They were the main ones who launched the Lhasa revolt. At that time, Surkhang, Shasur [Tib. བཤད་ཟུར], Phala Drönyerchemmo, et cetera, were saying that this was the chance to take the Dalai Lama abroad, and if we launched the revolt and fired many guns, the Chinese <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> would not have any choice but to fire back. They purposely launched the revolt. At that time, we had a discipline [rule] from the Central Committee (Zhongyang) and the Military Command Area saying that we were not allowed to fire the first shot [Ch. bu xu da di yi qiang] [Tib. མེ་མདའ་ཨང་དང་པོ་རྒྱག་ཆོག་གི་མ་རེད]. "If they fire, let them do it, and we must propagandize [Tib. དྲིལ; བསྒྲགས] [Ch. xuan chuan] to them. Do not get deceived [Ch. bu yiao shang dang] [Tib. མགོ་འཁོར་མ་ཐེབས་པ་བྱེད]." Like this, they fired a lot of guns and launched the revolt. The main reason for launching the revolt was the matter of when the Dalai Lama was to go to the Military Command Area to watch the show. The performers of the Dance Group [Ch. wen gong tuan] of the Military Command Area were very skillful in singing and dancing Tibetan songs and dances. Every year, they had to go several times to do the performances in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and when the Dalai Lama wanted to watch the show, the Dance Group would go there right away. The Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> were saying that they were better than the Tibetans [Tib. བོད་པ་ཕར་བཞག], and that the dances and songs were so good. The Dance Group of the Military Command Area was really performing well and the Dalai Lama liked it very much. It was in February of 1959, which was on the 29th of 12th month in the Tibetan Earth-Dog Year, when they performed the opera [religious dance] on Tsegutor, at the east side of the Potala, in Deyangshar, where the Dalai Lama invited the leaders of the Military Command Area and [where they] watched the show together, as they would do every year. On that day, the Vice Commander, Deng Shaodong, went there as the leader of the Military Command Area, and [so did] Guo Xilian, the General Secretary [Tib. མི་ཤུ་ཞང] of the Tibet Work Committee [Ch. xi zang gong wei]. Did you ever meet the two of them?   

**Q:**  No. Is Guo Xilian a female?   

**A:**  Guo Xilian was the General Secretary [Ch. mi shu zhang] and later became the Vice Party Secretary [Ch. fu shu ji] of the Tibet Work Committee. The Dalai Lama was with them when watching the show and the Dalai Lama told Deng Shaodong in person, “I heard that the Dance Group [Tib. ཝེན་གོང་ཏུཨན] of the Military Command Area has studied and performed some new shows in China. So I thought of watching it [Tib. ང་ཅིག་ལྟ་དགོས་བསམ་བྱུང]” Deng Shaodong replied, “If the Dalai Lama wants to watch, we can make preparations right away and send them to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>." The Dalai Lama said, “This time, how about not coming to Norbulinga [Tib. ད་རེས་ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ག་ལ་མ་ཕྱིན་ན]? It would be good to perform it in your newly built hall [Ch. da li thang] where they have good lights and stages and everything.” This hall was built in 1958. The Dalai Lama and Deng Shaodong had that talk directly [face to face]. After the opera, Deng Shaodong came back to the Military Command Area and he told all of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a>, “The Dalai Lama himself told me that he will come to the Military Command Area to watch the show.” And all of the Kalön, like Surkhang, Shasur, Liushar and Phala Drönyerchemmo already knew about it, but they took a chance by outwardly telling the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> that the Dalai Lama going to the Military Command Area was a plot [Tib. ལྐོག་གཡོ་ངན་བྱུས]. There was no custom that the Dalai Lama would go to the Military Command Area. In the past, all the shows were performed in Norbulinga and this time, if he went to the Military Command Area, the Chinese would take him to China in a helicopter [Ch. zhi sheng fei ji]. There was no helicopter, but they made up this bad talk and told this lie. Another lie was that they said that when the Military Command Area would have the banquet, they would poison the Dalai Lama and our Dalai Lama would die, and there would be danger that Dalai Lama would die. Therefore, all people must stop him from going to the Military Command Area. As for the time, the Dalai Lama said that they [the Chinese] must confirm the date by talking with Jigyab Khembo Gadrang [Tib. དགའ་བྲང]. Do you know him?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:** I have met Gadrang many times. This was the time when the Dalai Lama was taking the exam for the Lharamba Geshe [Tib. ལྷ་རམས་དགེ་བཤེས]. So he said that after taking the Lharamba Geshe exam, he would go to the Military Command Area. Later, Li Zuoming talked with Gadrang. Li Zuoming is still in the Zhongyang United Front Bureau [Ch. tong zhan bu], and the date was fixed [set] for March 10th. On March 9th, Göshampa [Tib. རྒོད་གཤམ་པ], who is a good person, told Ngabö, “Surkhang, Shasur, Liushar and Phala are putting forward a plan to stop the Dalai Lama from going to the Military Command Area by making up talk [Tib. སྐད་ཆ], and making the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> rise up along with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, by [saying that] we must stop the Dalai Lama by surrounding <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and we should not let him go to the Military Command Area." On the night of March 9th, there was such talk in Lhasa. At that time, sometimes I was wearing a military uniform and sometimes I was wearing civilian clothes [Ch. bian yi]. There were several teams keeping abreast [Ch. zhang wuo] of the situation. One was the East Side team and the other was the West Side team, and I was keeping abreast of the situation in the urban area, like in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a> and Lubu [Tib. ཀླུ་སྦུག] [areas]. At that time, I heard this talk. The one who made this talk was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྣང་རྩེ་ཤག] The main administrative office in Lhasa that was headed by the &quot;mayor&quot; or mipön.">Nangtsesha</a> Mayor [Tib. མི་དཔོན] of Lhasa.   

**Q:**  You heard these things from the people, right?  

**A:**  Yes, the people had great faith toward the Dalai Lama, so when they heard about the Chinese taking the Dalai Lama to China and killing him, they were shocked [Tib. འདྲོག་འགོ་ལངས]. They didn’t know the real situation and they heard those lies. During the morning of March 10th, there were 2,000-3,000 people who went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and surrounded it. Therefore, the Dalai Lama didn’t have freedom and couldn’t come outside of Norbulinga. Like this, they launched a very disturbing [Tib. ཟང་ངི་ཟང་ངི] revolt and held the demonstration.   

**Q:**  At that time, were you in the Tibet Military Command Area?  

**A:**  Sometimes I was in the regiment and sometimes I was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a>, Lubu and [the area] at the bottom of the Potala. There were several people with me keeping abreast of the situation and reporting to the Tibet Military Command Area, and then they went back. I saw it myself when they killed Phagpalha Khenjung Sonam Gyatso [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ་མཁན་ཆུང་བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་མཚོ].   

**Q:**  Wow!  

**A:**  They killed him in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> by stoning him, saying he was working with the Chinese. After killing him, they tied his legs with a rope, and attached him to a horse and dragged his head on the floor. I saw this when they dragged him around the Barkor. It was very cruel [upsetting] to see all the blood on him and all people were scared. They were saying, “Whoever goes along with the Chinese will have this final result. Tibet has gained total independence. The Chinese and the soldiers of the CCP must go back." They shouted a lot that Tibet is completely independent. Some of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> were scared and some of them followed them, and the situation was chaotic. All the shops and the tea shops were closed, and there was a big revolt. They fired a few guns and canons toward the Tibet Military Command Area, but we didn’t fire back against them at all. We just propagandized using the loudspeaker, saying, “Don’t get duped, these talks are lies. It was the Dalai Lama himself's desire to come to the Tibet Military Command Area.” Not only did I myself see this situation, [but] there were some good <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a>, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> Pema [Tib. གླང་མདུན་པད་མ], [who] was also with us propagandizing. Shölkang Thubden Nyima [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉི་མ] was also good and he also spoke through the loudspeaker.   

**Q:**  Where did you place the loudspeaker?  

**A:**  We placed one on the main gate of the Tibet Military Command Area and also on the roof top. The sound was very loud. At that time, the Dalai Lama didn’t have freedom.   

**Q:**  Did you propagandize once or did you continuously do that?  

**A:**  We spoke continuously and we went out to detect [get a feel of] the situation, and then came back and spoke again. And after 1-2 hours, we went out again.   

**Q:**  Did you talk with the leaders [Tib. དཔོན་པོ] when you came back?   

**A:**  Yes. I made a report to the director of the Intelligence Department. I was doing both the propagandizing and reconnoitering [Tib. སོ་ལྟ་ཉུལ་ཞིབ་དང་དྲིལ་བསྒྲགས] at the same time. When they stopped the Dalai Lama on the morning of March 10th and he couldn’t come to the Tibet Military Command Area, the Dance Group was making preparations, like doing their makeup and the reception work, like preparing fruits, sweets and the chairs for the Dalai Lama to sit [on]. The Political Commissar, Tan Guansan, led the preparation work in person. At that time, Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua were not there because they were sick and they had taken sick leave in China. So the main one [in charge] was Tan Guansan. Chairman Mao was in Wuhan. Tan Guansan came back at noon and he was very much worried. We were all worried very much because the situation was in chaos, and Phagpalha Khenjung had been killed and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Tsewang Rinzin [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་ཚེ་དབང་རིག་འཛིན] was almost killed. They mistook him as Ngabö, who was then the Vice Commander of the Tibet Military Command Area, who was driven in a small car, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> stoned him. He was injured and had to be hospitalized. In the afternoon, around 2-3:00 p.m., Surkhang, Liushar and Shasur, the three Kalöns, came to the Tibet Military Command Area and met the Political Commissar, Tan Guansan. Surkhang said, “The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> don’t agree [Tib. མོས་པོ་མི་འདུག], so the Dalai Lama cannot come to the Tibet Military Command Area.” Then Liushar said, “We didn’t know about the matter that the Dalai Lama [was] coming to the Tibet Military Command [Area].” Right away, the Political Commissar, Tan Guansan, refuted [Tib. དགག་པ་བརྒྱབ] him saying, “It was confirmed by the Dalai Lama himself to come to the Tibet Military Command Area, and Gadrang was to fix the time. And he reported to the Dalai Lama and he prepared, and we also made preparations. All of you know about this because Vice Commander Deng Shaodong told all of you. But now Liushar is saying that he didn’t know about this. Don’t the two of you also know about this?” He asked the two other Kalöns. They didn’t have any answer to give because it was a lie and they didn’t know how to answer. So Tan Guansan said, “Today’s revolt was an evil plot [Tib. ལྐོག་གཡོ་ངན་བྱུས] and it was planned from the early times. This was not an ordinary thing, so you must severely punish the murderer of Phagpalha and the ones who wounded Sambo, and ensure that such things will never happen again. Now the Dalai Lama didn’t have the freedom to watch a show. What kind of work are you the Kashag doing?” He spoke [in a] serious [manner]. I was there when Tan Guansan said that, and they [the Tibetans] were embarrassed and didn’t have much to say. So they just said “Yes, yes [Tib. ལགས་སོ་ལགས་སོ]," and left for Norbulinga. After they left, they didn’t meet Tan Guansan again. Zhongyang knew all about this, and they were saying that in order to win over [Tib. བརྩོན་ལེན] the Dalai Lama and avoid danger, as you know, Tan Guansan sent three letters to the Dalai Lama, and the Dalai Lama also replied to the letters.   

**Q:**  At that time, what kind of suggestions [Tib. བསམ་འཆར] did Zhongyang give you people?   

**A:**  They [Tibetans] were saying that if they made a terrific effort to take the Dalai Lama out [of Tibet] [Tib. ཨུ་ཚུགས་བྱས་ནས་གདན་འདྲེན་ཞུ], then the US would support them. They made this kind of plan. Zhang Jingwu said that the Dalai Lama was at a loss and didn’t know what to do [Ch. na bu ding zhu yi]. [He said] That the Dalai Lama was not very bad, but he was uncertain [Tib. གཏན་གཏན་ཡོད་མ་རེད], and since he is a Bodhisattva, in order to have Buddhism flourish, he had to make good relations with all people. So he had good relations with Ngabö, Surkhang, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> and also <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a>, and he didn’t want to harm anyone and wanted to be friendly. This was an empty hope. From the early times, Zhang Jingwu came to know this fault of the Dalai Lama, namely, that regarding politics, he didn’t have a main position[Ch. zhu xin gu] and a firm idea [Ch. jian ding de zhu yi].   

**Q:**  I mean, what instructions did the Zhongyang send; what instructions did you receive in Lhasa?  

**A:**  We received the instruction that we must continuously win over [Ch. zheng qu] [Tib. བརྩོན་ལེན] the Dalai Lama. It was possible that they would abduct him [Ch. jie chi]. Chairman Mao said, “If we cannot win over the Dalai Lama and if he were to go out, do not stop him [Ch. bu yao zu dang] [Tib. བཀག་རྒྱུ་ཡོད་མ་རེད]."   

**Q:**  Did he say that before the revolt or after the revolt was launched?   

**A:**  It was after the revolt took place on the 10th. On the 12th, Chairman Mao gave this instruction from Wuhan. He said, “If the Dalai Lama goes abroad, do not stop him. There are two main reasons not to stop him. One is in terms of politics because he is the Vice Chairman [Tib. ཨུ་ཡོན་ཞང་གཞོན་པ] of the National People’s Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན] and a leader of the state. It is not good to stop him and it would not be good internationally that he didn’t have the freedom to go abroad." Basically, this would have an influence on his freedom. This was the political consideration. And there was a military consideration that if we stopped him with our soldiers, the Dalai Lama had his Gusung bodyguard troops, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> so altogether there were about 200-300 people and if about 200-300 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> stopped them, they would exchange fire. If ordinary people got killed it would be a little better, but if the Dalai Lama got hit, then it would be very dangerous and it would not be good at all [Tib. རྩ་བ་ནས་ཡག་པོ་ཡོད་མ་རེད] because the guns don’t have eyes. So these were instructions given by the Chairman Mao in person. This was an internal talk and [was] not public before, but today I can tell you. At that time, actually, we could have stopped him, and it was not the case that we could not stop him because we had an air force paratroopers battalion [Ch. kong jiang ying], who could be parachuted [in] and stop him in Lhoka. We also had that plan, but Zhongyang didn’t approve it. The Dalai Lama himself didn’t want to have riots [Ch. sao luan]. He wanted to watch the show, and he opposed the revolt and the Chushigandru people who surrounded <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and he didn’t have freedom. The one who first delivered Tan Guansan’s letter to the Dalai Lama was Gyamtsoling [Tib. རྒྱ་མཚོ་གླིང] Trülku, who was then the debate partner [Tib. ཚན་ཞབས] to the Dalai Lama. Gyamtsoling was one of the three personal attendants of the Dalai Lama wsho were in charge of food, clothing and offerings [Tib. གསོལ་གཟིམ་མཆོད་གསུམ]. [Translator Note: Gyamtsoling was not the [Tib. མཆོད་དཔོན་མཁན་པོ]]. I met Gyamtsoling many times and I asked him about this in 1961. He said that he went to Norbulinga and delivered Tan Guansan’s letter, and found that the Dalai Lama showed an angry face [Tib. གདོང་ནག་པོ], and was distressed [Ch. you shang], very unhappy and lost his appetite. The Dalai Lama called the Kalöns and scolded them [Tib. གཤེ་གཤེ] saying, “Don’t I even have the freedom to watch the show?” The Dalai Lama criticized [Tib. སྐྱོན་རྗོད] the Kalöns saying, “You should not do this. You are not allowed to launch the revolt in Norbulinga." Now, there are all of these records [Tib. ཡི་གེ]. Zhongyang had been thinking that it was the Dalai Lama’s idea to hold the meetings in Norbulinga and oppose the Zhongyang, but the Dalai Lama said, “I don’t want to do this. This is done by the Chushigandru and you should not do this. If you insist on holding the meetings, you should not hold them in Norbulinga. You must hold them outside.” Like this, the Dalai Lama scolded them and then, in reality, they didn’t hold the meeting in Norbulinga and moved it outside to the printing house in Shölkang [Tib. ཞོལ་པར་ཁང], that was located at the foot of the Potala. I have also been in that printing house many times.   

**Q:**  Did the high ranking Zhongyang officials underneath give the instructions that it would not be good internationally to stop the Dalai Lama, or did Chairman Mao himself gave the instruction?   

**A:**  Chairman Mao himself gave the instruction. Do you have Mao Zedong’s Select Works in Tibet [Ch. mao ze dong xi zang gong zuo wen xuan]?"   

**Q:**  Yes, I have that. Are these written in that book?   

**A:**  Yes, it is written there, “Do not stop [him]. Let him go [Ch. bu yao zu dang/ rang ta zou]." They moved to the printing house in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ] The walled town beneath the Potala Palace in Lhasa.">Shöl</a> on March 12th and most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྡེ་བ་གཞུང] The name of the traditional Tibetan government.">dewashung</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> (Tibetan Governmnet officials) attended the meeting. Some of the better kudrak, like Shölkang Thubden Nyima, Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> and Phagpalha, who were in the Military Command Area and in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a> [Tib. རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིག་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང], moved into our offices. There were instructions from Zhongyang saying, “For safety, let the patriotic personal move in [Ch. wei le an quan rang ai guo ren shi ban jin lai]." So there were about 500-600 people who moved in. However, the majority went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to attend the meeting, and among these, there were double-headed [two-faced] [people] like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a> [laughter].  

**Q:** Was that the old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>?   

**A:**  Yes, it was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, Chögyal Nyima [Tib. ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཉི་མ], who had been the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> in the past, and was later banished and then became a Teiji. I have met him many times, and after the liberation, he came to see Lijun, and I was the interpreter. Kapshöba neither went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> nor to the Military Command Area; he stayed home. I later heard that he asked his servants, “If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and Tibetan soldiers come to call me to attend the meeting in Norbulinga, tell them I am not at home and I have already left for Norbulinga. If the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> come to invite me to [join] their regiment, tell them that I went to Ngabö.” [Laughter] Actually, he stayed home and didn’t go anywhere.  

**Q:**  I have never heard this.  

**A:**  He was a two-faced person. So he was not involved in the revolt, and after the revolt he was among the ones who got the buyout policy [Tib. བླུ་ཉོའི་སྲིད་ཇུས] [compensation policy] implemented. The ones involved in the revolt had their property confiscated and distributed to the farmers. And later he also became the committee member of the Political Consultative Conference [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད་གྲོས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཨུ་ཡོན]. In 1960, when they held the meeting of the Political Consultative Conference, Tan Guansan was the chairman of the Political Consultative Conference and Tsögo was the vice chairman. Janglojen [Tib. ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན] was good and he was also in the Military Command Area. [T.N. Note: At that time, it was widely known in Lhasa that <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>=had=attended=some=meetings=in=<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>=after=March=10th,=[and] he was indeed at home until the war started. However, as soon as he heard the first cannon shot, he asked his servants, “If the Khambas come, tell them I went to Norbulinga, and if the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> comes, tell them I went to [see] Ngabö.” Actually, he sat on the backseat of his motor cycle driven by his servant, and went to [see] Ngabö and knocked on the gate saying, “Now, my house is full of Khambas, so please save my life.” Then Ngabö called the Military Command Area and asked, “Now, Kapshöba has come to my house to surrender, shall I accept him?" And the Military Command Area told Ngabö to accept him. That’s how he became a progressive [Tib. ཡར་ཐོན].} When the meeting of the Political Consultative Conference was held, Tan Guansan told Kapshöba, “You must study well and transform yourself well. As for your label for the revolt, I can label you, if I want to [Tib. ཟིང་འཁྲུག་གི་ཞྭ་མོ་དེ་གཡོགས་ཆོག་ཆོག་ཡོད་རེད]." [Laughter] Kapshöba was called a “two-faced drum [Tib. ད་རུ་མགོ]." When Reting [Tib. རྭ་སྒྲེང] was demoted, Kapshöba was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> and he wrote two letters on two message writing boards [Tib. སམ་ཁྲ], and sent one to Reting saying that he would serve him and sent one to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> saying that he would stand on Taktra's side. The servant mistakenly delivered the writing boards [laughter]. This was the reason why Kapshöba was banished. At that time, in general, people didn’t know whether the PLA would win or if the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> would win the victory because there was a small number of PLA then and Chushigandru had about 6,000-7,000 soldiers. The Military Command Area Combat Troops [Ch. zuo zhan bu dui] had only two regiments with a little more than 1,300 infantry soldiers and all the others were cadres in the offices.   

**Q:**  The canon regiment was not included in 1,300, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They [Tibetans] didn’t know much about the strength of the canon regiment.   

**Q:**  How many canons did they have then?   

**A:**  There were three canon battalions. One was the Jianong Canon Battalion [Tib. ཇིཨ་ནོང་པཨོ་ཡིང], which was flat fire [Ch. pin she], and the Liudan Canon Battalion [Ch. liu dan pao ying], which was curved fire [Ch. qu she] that shot behind the mountain [Ch. shan bei hou], and one was the heavy mortar battalion [Ch. zhong paiji pao ying]. [Translator Note: Jianong is the Chinese pronunciation of canon, for example, Canada is pronounced as Jianada. I found this in the dictionary written [Ch. jia nong pao] = canon. Liudan might also be an English word pronounced in Chinese, but I can’t find it in the dictionary.]   

**Q:**  The canon regiments were in Trip, on the south side of the river, right?   

**A:**  Yes, they were in Trip [Tib. གྲིབ], so they were not very attentive to them and their reconnoitering situation [Tib. ཞེན་ཆ; ch. qing kuang] was also very poor. So they didn’t know the situation and the situation was chaotic, and their military standard was very low. We were very skillful militarily and we had rich experience. At that time, they bullied our soldiers very much, which made us very angry, and were saying that we must fight. The soldiers were itching to fight [Ch. qiu zhan qing xu hen gao], but the Zhongyang Military Committee [Ch. jun wei] and the Military Command Area were saying, "You are not allowed to fight [Ch. bu xu da]." Why were we not allowed to fight? The first [reason] was that if we fought, we didn’t know whether we would win [or not] because the number of our people was much less and they had many people, and also because the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> (populace) also were coming towards to them.   

**Q:**  You said there were several thousand people. Those were <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How many Khambas and Tibetan soldiers were there?   

**A:**  There were 4 regiments [in the Tibetan army]. The Gusung (Bodyguard) Regiment, which was the Kadang Regiment located in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and [it] had about 600-700 soldiers. Its <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Phüntso Tashi [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་ཕིན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས], who was related to the Dalai Lama [his brother-in-law]. The Khadang Regiment was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment. It was located in the north (of Lhasa), and had 1,000 soldiers in the past, but at that time, there were only 600-700 soldiers because about 100-200 soldiers went over to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> in Lhoka carrying their guns. The fourth regiment, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> Regiment, was called the Gyantse Regiment, and at that time, it was located in the place called “Stone Lion [Tib. རྡོ་སེང་གེ]," just near to the Military Command Area; they had about 400 soldiers. And they also had the Canon Regiment, which was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Regiment. The depön of the Ngadang Regiment was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> [Tib. རགས་ཁ་ཤག], or Dokharsey [Tib. མདོ་མཁར་སྲས]. I have seen him many times. His father was a nice person [who] died in 1957 when the Dalai Lama came back (from India). If he hadn’t died, he wouldn’t have been involved in the revolt. He was a stable person, almost like Ngabö. However, his son was quite bad like Surkhang, and he was the depön of the Ngadang Regiment. The depön of the Chadang Regiment was Jünpa [Tib. འཇུན་པ]. The Chadang Regiment was from Dingri and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇ་དང] One of the regiments in the traditional Tibetan Army.">Jadang</a> Regiment was from Shigatse. The depön of the Chadang Regiment was Numa Rimshi, who was a nice person. The depön of the Jadang [Tib. ཅ་དང] Regiment in Dingri was Dragjun [Tib. བྲག་འཇུན]. Altogether, there 3,000-4,000 Tibetan soldiers, and they had about 2,000 in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  From among the 2,000 soldiers, didn’t most of them go to India when the Dalai Lama went there?   

**A:**  No, most of them didn’t go. When they made war in Lhasa, we arrested most of them. Part of the Gusung and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldiers went with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> and then went to India. The Tibetan soldiers did many disturbing things [Tib. ཟ་ངི་ཟིང་ངི] and fired guns, and the Tibetan <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> stood on their side. So the kudrak who were acting nice [Tib. ཡག་པོ་བྱེད་མཁན] to us were afraid, thinking that if they cooperated [Tib. མཉམ་པོ་བྱས་ན] with the Chinese, it would be like [what happened with] Phagpalha Khenjung and [they] would be killed. At that time, people didn’t know whether the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> would win or [if] the Chushigandru will win. Therefore, most of the people went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to attend the meeting and signed their names, and [they] said, "From today [on], we will not cooperate with the Chinese and we will stand on your side." Later, we got all of these documents written [about] who was involved [in the revolt]. They couldn’t take that over [the Transportation Station?], so they fired guns. On the 16th, they mainly fired guns toward the Military Command Area, and among the local offices, they fired against the Qinghai-Tibet Highway Transportation Station [Tib. མཚོ་བོད་མོ་ཏྲའི་འགྲོ་ལམ་ལྷ་སའི་འགྲིམ་འགྲུལ་ལས་ཁུངས; Ch. qing zang gong lu yun shu zhan] located on the west side of Lhasa, in between Norbulinga and the Potala, where there were many of our militia who didn’t wear military uniforms, but were given guns and machine guns [Ch. ji guan qiang] because the situation was tense. There were many discharged soldiers [Ch. fu yuan jun ren] in the Transportation Station.   

**Q:** What do you mean by many? Were there like a thousand?   

**A:**  There were 2,000-3000 of them, and their duty was self-defense [Ch. zi wei] and to guard [Ch. fang shou] one’s own unit, but they could not go on the offensive [Tib. ཕར་རྒོལ་བྱེད་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་མ་རེད]. Among them, there was one policeman named Zeng Huishan, who was an economic policeman [Ch. jingji jingcha], who violated the law [Tib. ཁྲིམས་འགལ]. On the 16th and 17th of March, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> fired a great many shots, and there was the danger that the gasoline pipe in the Transportation Station would catch fire. They [Tibetans] fired tens and hundreds [Tib. བཅུ་ཕྲག་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག] of shots from the Potala. Therefore, he was angry and violated the law of not firing against them, and he fired two shells from the small mortar called 60 Paiji Pao against Norbulinga.   

**Q:**  Was this on the 16th?   

**A:**  It was at 2-3 p.m. on the 17th.   

**Q:**  Did he just fired casually [Tib. ད་ག་སེ] by himself?   

**A:**  Yes. This was against our discipline because the Tibet Military Command Area said it was not allowed for us to fire first, but he fired. These two canon shells didn’t reach inside <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and fell outside Norbulinga at the distance of about 100 feet. Then Surkhang, Shasur, Liushar and Phala said, “Now, the Chinese have fired the canon against Norbulinga, so there is danger to the Dalai Lama," and they insisted that the Dalai Lama leave on the 17th.   

**Q:** Now, they got the chance, right?   

**A:** Yes.   

**Q:**  What is the name of the person who fired the canon?   

**A:**  His name is Zeng Huishan. You can find this in the book titled, “Chinese Communist Party, 55 years of records of big events on the work in Tibet [Ch. zhong guo gong chan dang wu shi wu nyan xi zang gong zuo da shi ji]."   

**Q:**  What was the third canon battalion you mentioned?   

**A:**  In our 308th Regiment, located in Trip, they had the infantry regiment and also the canon regiment, and the third canon regiment was the 120th Heavy Mortar Battalion [Tib. ཞོང་པཻ་ཇི་པཨོ་ཡིང]. The 60 mortar [Ch. liu ling pai ji pao] is the smallest and the 82 mortar [Tib. བ་ཨེར་པཻ་ཇི་པཨོ] is the middle size.   

**Q:**  Is this the name of the book?   

**A:**  Yes. In this book, the events of March 17th and the name of Zeng Huishan were written, and later he was punished [Ch. shou chu fen] for his wrongdoing. What he did matched Surkhang, Liushar, Shasur and Phala’s plan [Ch. zheng zhong liao ta men de ji hua], which was to “provoke and provoke again, and then you have to attack them, and when you attack, then I take the Dalai [Lama] away [Ch. tiao xin tiao xin de shi hou ni yao gong ji/ zhi yao ni gong ji wo ba da lai dai zou]."   

**Q:** [Looking at a book] What was he doing here?   

**A:**  {another Chinese said] This is talking about his job and the name of his position, and what he was doing and [how] his responsibility was to fire the mortars.   

**Q:**  Where was he stationed at that time?  

**A:**  I don’t know where he is now. He's probably dead.  

**Q:** No, I mean where was he stationed at that time?   

**A:**  He was stationed at the West Side Transportation Station, located in the northeast of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and near the Lhasa Middle School. Even now, the station is still there, but it has been developed very much.   

**Q:** Why did Zeng Huishan got angry and fire the mortar?   

**A:** This Transportation Station was at a very crucial point, like a throat to go from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> to the town, and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> wanted to wipe it out because the rebels had to pass by this Transportation Station, as it would not be convenient for them to move [Ch. xing dong bu fang bian]. So they fired many guns and canons at this station. So it would be too bad if the gasoline pipe caught fire. Therefore, he got angry and went against the discipline [Ch. wei fan ji lu] and counter-attacked [Tib. ཕ༹ན་ཇི] even though the Military Command Area said not to counterattack. Though these two shells didn’t reach Norbulinga, Surkhang and Phala said that the Dalai Lama must leave, and on that night he left. When he [Dalai Lama] left, he was not well prepared, and his mother and sister were also not well prepared, but he had to leave all of a sudden. The Dalai Lama even left his quilt, which is still there now, and he didn’t take his things, and didn’t have much money also. However, Surkhang, Liushar, Shasur and Phala were well prepared and loaded all of their valuable things, like gold and silver, on horses and mules. At that time, the Dalai Lama’s mother and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> Tsering Drolma [Tib. ཡབ་གཞིས་ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ] [his sister] were not well prepared and had to leave all of a sudden. When they crossed the Lhasa River at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> ferry site, Yabshi Tsering Drolma didn’t have a horse to ride, so they brought an inferior horse from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> which didn’t have proper saddlery, and they went to Lhoka in a chaotic manner. At that time, the Indian Consul General [Ch. zong ling shi guan] was Mr. Kiper. I saw him many times. He used to be the Indian Commercial Representative [Ch. shang wu dai biao] in Yadong. I saw him many times. He was a little fat. Later he was appointed as the Consul General in Lhasa. He received those rebels and helped them send several telegraphs to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and those people in India, saying a disturbance broke out in Lhasa and war might ensue. But, we received [intercepted] the telegraph sent that night.   

**Q:**  Did they receive that by accident or what?   

**A:** In that telegraph, it said, “That man already left <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> [Ch. na ge ren yi jing zou le] [Tib. མི་དེ་ནོརྦུ་གླིང་ག་ནས་ཐོན་སོང]." So we analyzed [Ch. fen xi] it and speculated that the Dalai Lama had left.   

**Q:**  How did the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> get the telegraph?   

**A:**  We could get that message from our telegraph station [Ch. dian tai] because it was a plain code [Tib. མིང་མ་དིཨན་བཨོ] telegraph and not a secret code telegraph [Ch. mi ma dian bao]. But in the telegraph, they did not say the Dalai Lama, but only said, that person.   

**Q:** At around what time did you get that telegraph?   

**A:** It was around 12 p.m-1 a.m.   

**Q:** What time did the Dalai Lama leave?   

**A:**  He might have left at 11 or 12, and then they sent this telegraph. When they sent that telegraph, only a few people knew about that and Lhalu [Tib. ལྷ་ཀླུ] didn’t know. At that time, we also invited Lhalu to the regiment. Lhalu had been a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> and then was an ex-Kalön [Tib. བཀའ་ཟུར]. Lhalu had done quite a lot of good things. [Another Chinese person] You have talked for about an hour.   

**A:** Is it useful what I have told you?   

**Q:** It is very useful. How can you remember these things, because many years have passed? You have a very amazing memory.   

**A:** I wrote these details in my book. Did you read that book?   

**Q:**  Yes, I did.   

**A:**  These are written in my book titled, “The Historical Status of Tibet [Ch. xi zang li shi di wei bian] [Tib. བོད་ལྗོངས་ཀྱི་ལོ་རྒྱུས་གོ་བབ་དཔྱད་ཞིབ]." This is the fourth edition. It was published in 1995 by the Ethnic Publishing House [Ch. min zu chu ban she], and you can still buy it.   

**Q:**  I can ask a Chinese student and she can buy it.  

**A:**  I spent 4 years from 1991-1995 writing this book, which has about 600,000 characters, and I got a prize for that. [Other Chinese person translates from Chinese:] Mr. Wang asked why you wanted to ask for these, since these all are written in the book. So I told Mr. Wang that Dr. Goldstein can read what you have written in the book, but he wants you to talk about that. [Wang Gui:] He is right. one’s personal experiences is of much more influence than reading the book. [The other Chinese person tells Wang:] Yes, for example, you were talking about you being beaten and tied up. We can’t see these in the book. [Wang Gui:] It was really cruel, and my head was broken and bleeding [Ch. tou po xue liu].   

**Q:**  In that book, did you write about 1959?  

**A:** Yes, I wrote all of it.   

**Q:** When you got that telegraph, you suspected that he [Dalai Lama] left. Then what did you do?   

**A:**  I need to tell you a little bit about the war (fighting). After the Dalai Lama left, the Military Command Area and the Tibet Work Committee did ane investigation [Tib. ཞིབ་འཇུག] and said that now, perhaps [Tib. ཕལ་ཆེར] we should fight the battle because there was no choice but to fight [Tib. དམག་མ་རྒྱག་རང་རྒྱག་རེད]. In that case, if we fought the battle, there was some danger for us because we had a small number of people and their [Tibetan] number of people was increasing. After the Kashag launched the revolt, they sent an edict, and the main content was to recruit people from age 18-60 [Tib. བཅོ་བརྒྱད་དྲུག་ཅུ] and tell them that they must fight against the Chinese. They sent this edict mainly to the dzongs and estates under the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞོལ་ལས་ཁུངས] The Tibetan government office responsible for law and order in Shöl (tib. ཞོལ), the walled town beneath the Potala, as well as for 18 districts (tib. རྫོང) around Lhasa. It handled mainly criminal cases including murder.">Shöl legung</a>, like Lhasa, Metrogongkar [Tib. མལ་གྲོ་གུང་དཀར] and to Chushul [Tib. ཆུ་ཤུར]. So our Intelligence Team [Ch. qing bao zu] got this information. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> didn’t know about the situation and they had deep faith in the Dalai Lama. And when they heard that the Dalai Lama would be taken to China, poisoned and killed, naturally [Tib. རང་བཞིན་གྱིས], they were coming over, bringing their food, guns, swords and spears. Every day, there were about 200-300-400 and the numbers increased.   

**Q:** They were coming to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, right?   

**A:** They were coming to Lhasa. There were also monk soldiers [Tib. སེར་དམག] from the three great monastic seats of Sera, Drepung and Ganden coming. At that time, among the rebellion troops, there were more and more masses coming who were duped and under duress [Ch. guo xie]. At that time, the chairman of the Zhongyang Military Committee was Peng Dehuai and the Chief of Staff was Senior General [Ch. da jiang] Huang Kecheng, and their order was to wait and to hold fast to [one’s position] [Ch. jian shou], and not to counter attack for half a month or a month. That we should wait, and make preparations, such as storing up [Ch. tun] on grain and water, and building bunkers. Get well prepared to hold fast to [one’s position] and be firmly entrenched in [Ch. zuo hao jian shou gu shou de zhun bei], and wait for the two divisions coming later [reinforcements] to destroy the rebels. Tan Guansan was determined to put this command into action. However, the subordinate officers and soldiers like me were eager [Ch. ji zhe] to fight, and we were saying, “We must fight. If we don’t fight, there is danger. On the one hand, we won’t be able to handle them because their number is increasing. On the other hand, if we fight too late, more and more masses who are duped and under duress [who have] joined the rebellion will be mistakenly injured [Ch. wu shang]." At that time, Tan Guansan kept very silent and he knew what to do. And there were three work units that were under the greatest danger. The first was the Qinghai-Tibet Road Transportation Station, which was attacked, but we fought back courageously and defeated [Ch. yiong gan da thui] them.   

**Q:** Where was the Transportation Station located going from Jokpori [Tib. ལྕགས་པོ་རི]?   

**A:** It was located between Jokpori and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, slightly in the north, and in between there was the big sandy river [Ch. liu sha he] [Tib. བྱེ་རག]. Now this river has been filled and reclaimed. The second was the Lhasa Middle School, which was attacked and they got inside.   

**Q:** What and who were there in the Lhasa Middle School?   

**A:**  The principal’s surname was Lu. I forgot his name. [Other person] Was he Lu Huihan? [Wang Gui:] No, his surname was Lu. He is probably dead now. The third was the Lhasa Construction Brigade [Ch. jian she gong cheng dui], located near the Foreign Office [Tib. ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཁུངས] held in the Somphü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད] House and the Tibet Daily Newspaper Office. This was also near to Ramoche.   

**Q:** You don’t remember which unit was in the Lhasa Middle School? What was there? Were there troops there?   

**A:** There were no troops. They were all militia organized by the teachers. The middle school was attacked and broken into. The Lhasa Construction Brigade fought very courageously, where even the female comrades also joined the fight. So they [rebels] attacked the Lhasa Construction Brigade, but they were stopped outside and couldn’t enter it. At that time, the People’s Hospital and the Tibet Daily Newspaper Office got attacked as well. But those three I mentioned were under the greatest danger.   

**Q:** This was on the 17th or the 18th?   

**A:** This was on the night of 19th. At midnight of the 19th, a meeting was held in the Tibet Military Command Area. There were only two regiments in Lhasa, the 155th Regiment and the 159th Regiment, who attended. The Political Commissar of the 155th regiment was Qiao Xueting and the Regimental Commander [Ch. tuan zhang] of the 159th Regiment was Guo Zhixian, and the Political Commissar of the 308th Canon Regiment located in Trip was Song Shengxiang. These main leaders of the regiments attended the meeting. And there was also the headquarters of the Military Command Area, the director of the Logistical Department [Ch. hou qing chu] of the Tibet Military Command Area, the director of the Intelligence Department and the director of the Combat Department [Ch. zuo zhan chu] who also attended the meeting. They held the meeting from midnight until morning. They discussed the situation and the general idea was to fight and that it was not okay not to fight [Ch. bu da bu zing]. We were waiting for the two divisions to come from Qinghai Province, especially the 134th Division led by Ding Sheng. Ding Sheng was actually the Army Commander [Ch. jun zhang]. The Division Commander [Ch. shi zhang] was someone with the surname of Bai, and the Political Commissar was called Lan Yilong. Another week had to pass before the two divisions arrived. At that time, there were mainly three leaders of the Military Command Area. The first was Political Commissar Tan [Guansan], the second was Vice Commander Deng Shaodong, and third was the Vice Political Commissar Zhan Huayu. The three of them had a meeting and in the end, Tan Guansan made the decision, and said, "The three leaders made up their minds, mainly based on one piece of intelligence provided by the Intelligence Department, that all men between the ages of 18 and 60 are to come [to Lhasa]. This is dangerous, for it means a great number of masses might be injured or killed [if they come]. So now it is time to attack. However, we could potentially hurt a great number of masses, whereas the main forces of the rebels already followed the Dalai Lama and went to Lhoka. As a result, if we fight, we cannot smash the main force." On that night, I didn’t attend the meeting, but the leaders who attended the meeting told me that they discussed again and again, pacing around, and finally, Tan Guansan said, “Let’s attack! I will take responsibility for this [Ch. da ba/wo lai fu zhe ge ze ren]."   

**Q:** This meeting was held on the 20th, right?   

**A:** They held the meeting at 3-4 a.m. in the early morning of the 20th. They discussed for about half of the night, and later they made the decision. Then they decided the first target should be Jokpori, since it was one of the two commanding heights [Ch. zhigaodian] in Lhasa. The other one being the Potala, since [they are] the two mountains, Jokpori and the Potala, in Lhasa. Jokpori was the most dangerous because their artillery soldiers could attack our Military District from above. Thus, Jokpori must be attacked and taken first. So, the 308 canon regiment started to shell Jokpori.   

**Q:** Did the Tibetans have canons?   

**A:** Yes, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Regiment was the canon regiment and they had sent some canons to Jokpori. Tan Guansan sent a telegraph to the Zhongyang saying, “It is not okay not to fight [Ch. bu da bu xing]. So we have decided to fight and I, Tan Guansan, will assume responsibility for all the results [Ch. yi qie hou guo wo tan guan san fu ze]," and the two other leaders also said, “Not only Tan Guansan, but also the two of us will take responsibility for all the results. We will also sign.” Like this, the canon regiment made the preparation. At 10 a.m. on the 20th, The canon regiment started shelling Jokpori. The bombing lasted about 30 minutes, and after the bombing, only a few people there survived. The previous night, the 4th Company of the 159th Regiment...Guo Zhixian, the regiment commander of the 159th Regiment, said that we should not approach Jokpori during the daytime since the enemies were high above [and thus could attack us easily]. Instead, we should sneak there in the dark. Guo Zhixian was an old Red Army soldier, and an excellent commander, whose regiment was strong in combat. However, in order to do that, a tunnel [Ch. di dong] was needed. So the same night, one battalion dug a tunnel, which was about 800 meters long, starting from the TWC [Tibetan Work Committee] compound. On the one hand, they dug the tunnel, and on the other hand, they covered it with timbers and planks [Ch. mu ban]. The tunnel was about 1.4 or 1.5 meters deep and went throughout the tunnel to the foot of Jokpori. Around 7-8 a.m., the company [the 4th Company] got to the foot of Jokpori through the tunnel. [Other Chinese person: Was that 21st?] No, the 20th. At 7 or 8 a.m. on the 20th, they arrived at the base of Jokpori, and the bombing started at 10 a.m. After the bombing ended, they [the 4th Company] rushed uphill and got to the top in 20 minutes. The bombing lasted about 30 minutes, and then the soldiers went up and took Jokpori. At that time, in the Potala, they [Tibetans] also had quite a lot of machine guns and sand bags on the windows. They did some shooting from above. [For attacking the Potala], we used the regimental artillery force [Ch. uan shu pao bing], the artillery company of the 159th Regiment. The 308th canon force was an army artillery force [Ch. jun shu pao bing]. The regimental artillery force was based inside the military district. The regimental artillery force had measured the distance [Ch. ce liang], targeting the windows of the Potala Palace a long time ago. The artillery company had flat trajectory [Ch. ping she], middle range artillery. The shooting range of their weapons was about 800 to 900 meters. The had done the measurements a long time ago. They had an extremely beautiful battle [Ch. fei chang piao liang]. Tan Guansan said that we must strongly protect the ancient architectural places [Tib. གུ་ཇིཨན], like the Potala, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and Jokhang. That we could only destroy the places from where they were firing machine-guns, but not to destroy the whole architecture. The canon forces had done the measurement very nicely, so when they shelled the Potala, like 15 times, they only destroyed the windows. You could see the dust rising, but the architecture of the Potala still remained undamaged. The rebels were terrified by this shelling and escaped. At this time, the Bodyguard Battalion [Ch. jing wei ying] of the Military Command Area led by the Battalion Commander Zhou Xiusan was very successful [Ch. hen de li] in attacking the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> Regiment, and they eliminated it in less than an hour, although the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> escaped.   

**Q:** Where was this regiment located?   

**A:** It was located at the Stone Lion, Dosenge. So like this, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ང་དང] The Gyantse Regiment of the traditional Tibetan Army.">Ngadang</a> Regiment was destroyed. The military action was mainly commanded by Deng Shaodong. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> headquarters was the next target. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དམག་སྤྱི] 1. Commander-in-Chief (of the Tibetan Army). 2. Commander of a regiment in Chushigandru.">magji</a>, Lhalu, was the General Commander [Ch. zong si ling], and Tara [Tib. རྟ་ར] Khenjung and many others were there. If the general headquarters was smashed, they would lose their command ability [Ch. shi diao zhi hui].   

**Q:**  Wasn't Dosenge taken after Jokpori?   

**A:** These two were finished off at the same time, and the third was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, where two regiments, the 155th and 159th Regiments, made the attack. The 155th Regiment attacked from the east and the 159th Regiment coordinated [Ch. pei he] from the north. The 155th Regiment also sent a company to the west, and the Automobile 16th Regiment [Ch. qi che 6th tuan] also assisted [Ch. xie zhu] in the attack by transporting weapons, hauling the war prisoners and such duties. When we attacked Norbulinga, the canon regiment and the infantry jointly fought very nicely.   

**Q:** The canons were fired from Trip, right?   

**A:** Yes. From Trip, the 120th Mortar [Regiment] shelled the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བར་སྐོར] The inner circumambulation road that goes around the Tsuglagang (Jokhang) Temple in Lhasa. This circular road was a main market area.">Barkor</a>, and they also brought the heavy mortar to Trungji Linga [Tib. དྲུང་སྤྱི་གླིང་ག] and the place on this side of the Lhasa bridge. When they shelled <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, they used neither the Jianong Canon nor the Liudan Canon because the Liudan Canon is curved fire. So they used the 120th Heavy Mortar [Regiment] because in Norbulinga, there are many trees so mortars were good for that, and it was shelled from the side of the Lhasa bridge and Trungji Linga. Some part of the 155th Canon Regiment moved to the west gate of Norbulinga. When they attacked Norbulinga, the Gusung Regiment didn’t make much resistance [Ch. di kang] because our canons were extremely powerful, which killed some of their commanders. Later, when we went in the Norbulinga to look, the officials of the Tibetan government were not wounded very much, but they were scared to death [Ch. xia si] and died from heart attacks because they had never seen such heavy shelling. One <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> had a good relationship with our 155th Regiment from when they did united front work [Ch. tong zhan gong zuo] with the Tibetan soldiers, and in 1955, we gave military uniforms to the Tibetan soldiers and gave military ranks to the Tibetan military officers. Phüntso Tashi was a colonel [Ch. shang xiao]. At that time, this rupön was saying that, "The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> [has] treated us very nicely by giving us uniforms and other things, and building houses for us. So we should not fight with the PLA," and he collected about 250 guns from the one battalion, and voluntarily handed them over to the 155th Regiment. In the afternoon, around 5-6, or 4-5 p.m., Norbulinga was finished off.   

**Q:**  They sent the guns while the fighting was going on or after they stopped? Did they have those 250 guns inside <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>?  

**A:**  These 250 guns belonged to the soldiers inside <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, and they didn’t fight and handed the guns over. At the east gate, there were some battalion soldiers of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> who fought a little, but not so much. I heard this from Qiao Xueting, the Political Commissar Shaodong of the 155th Regiment. He told me about this in great detail. At that time, the Military Command Area, on the one hand, was propagaandizing, and on the other hand was looking at the situation. The fourth [target] was the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Khadang Regiment, and it was finished off on the night of that day. The Trapchi Khadang Regiment had two depön. One was Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ], who went to India, and the other was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Sey Tenzin Thöndrub [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་སྲས་བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ], who was the son of the Vice Commander Sambo. Sambo Sey Tenzin Thöndrub didn’t leave Norbulinga and the Trapchi Khadang Regiment because his father was injured from being beaten by Chushigandru and was in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> hospital. Tenzin Thöndrub was one of the delegates who signed the 17-Point Agreement. So he was a little bit familiar with the CCP and the PLA, and he was not one of the culprits who launched the revolt. Sambo Tenzin Thöndrub gave orders to about 500-600 people, but he was not that determined [Ch. bu jian jue] to fight. So when they surrounded the regiment, after fighting for about 20 minutes, he handed over the weapons and surrendered. On that night, around 11-12 p.m., the Trapchi Regiment was finished off.  

**Q:** Was that on the 21st?   

**A:** It was on the 20th   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there under the Khadang Depön?  

**A:**  At that time, there were probably 400-500 soldiers because a little less than 200 had left for Lhoka to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> led by Andru Gombo Tashi [Tib. ཨ་འབྲུག་མགོན་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. In 1958, they went along with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་གསལ་གླིང] The family name of a well-known aristocratic lay official.">Namseling</a> [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང].  

**Q:**  There was a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a> with Namseling  

**A:**  Yes. Some of the soldiers were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> and Barkor. There were 400-500 soldiers who were in the regiment who surrendered, and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> Regiment was finished off. Then the only [ones] left were the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆུ་བཞི་སྒང་དྲུག] The anti-Chinese Khamba insurgency force in Tibet that began in 1957 in Lhasa and launched an uprising against the Chinese the following year. The name means, &quot;four rivers and six mountain ranges,&quot; and refers to Eastern Tibet.">Chushigandru</a> in the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཇོ་ཁང] A most famous temple in Lhasa that houses a holy statue of the Buddha. It is often used to mean the Tsuglagang Temple of which it is a part.">Jokhang</a>, Ramoche and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྨེ་རུ] Name of a monastery in the northern part of Lhasa.">Muru</a>, where the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆ་དང] A regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army that specialized in artillery.">Chadang</a> Canon Regiment was stationed, and the Potala was also left. At that time, Tsarong [dzasa] was in the Potala. On the morning of the 21st, the most stubborn [Ch. wan gu] were the Chushigandru in Ramoche, where they fought a little bit and where there were quite a lot of casualties on our side. There were a little more than 20 casualties including a Vice Company Commander who was killed. The 6th <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མདའ་དཔོན] A commander or general in charge of a regiment in the traditional Tibetan Army. If a regiment had only 500 troops, there was usually only one depön, but if there were 1,000 troops, there were usually two.">depön</a> in Muru was finished off quite fast and surrendered on the morning of 21st. Some of their canons were in Muru and some of them were brought to Jokpori. As you see, Jokpori was taken pretty quickly, so they didn’t have many canons left. Then only the Jokhang and the Potala were left. At noon on the 21st, our 155th Regiment surrounded the Jokhang and the armed forces wanted to blow up the Jokhang by using explosives [Ch. zha yiao] and by not using canons. However, the Political Commissar, Tan Guansan, resolutely stopped [Ch. jian jue zhi zhi] them from using the explosives. I heard this from the Vice Regimental Commander of the 155th, Wu Tingwu. Tan Guansan and Deng Shaodong analyzed the situation and said that the enemy had already been depressed and they didn't have enthusiasm to fight. So they decided to take the political offensive [Ch. zheng zhi gong shi] of propaganda by using big speakers, and making them hand over their weapons and surrender. And they said, “If you hand over your weapons, we will not kill you [Ch. jiao qiang bu sha]." At that time, I was one of the speakers and there was also Shölkang Thubden Nyima and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a> Pema. We recorded the words and said them over and over again through the speakers. The loudspeakers were set up on the roof of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཤད་སྒྲ] The name of the family of an important lay aristocratic official.">Shatra</a> House and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐྱིད་སྟོད་པ] The name of the house in Lhasa where the Guomindang government&#x27;s offices and school were located.">Kyitöpa</a> House, which used to be the office of Guomindang. The speakers were placed on these houses, which were close to the Jokhang. Like this they shouted for about half an hour. Then when it became night, they didn’t dare fire at us, and we didn’t attack them. From time to time, we saw a Khata waving from the window. Throughout the evening, I saw there were about 20-40 Khatas. Like this, we continued to broadcast, and in the morning of the next morning [the 22nd], there was not much fighting, and about 700 to 800 people, including the monk soldiers, the 2nd depön, and the Chushigandru, surrendered from the Jokhang temple.  

**Q:** How many were captured from the Potala?   

**A:**  The Potala was the last place to surrender and there were about 300-400 people who surrendered. That was the end of the last battle, at around 10-11 a.m. Tsarong surrendered there. Like this, the battle lasted for three days, the 20th-21st and the 23rd, and then they surrendered.  

**Q:** How many were captured from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>?   

**A:**  One of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རུ་དཔོན] A military officer in the traditional Tibetan Army just below a depön (commander). Rupön were usually in charge of half of a regiment (something like a battalion).">rupön</a> surrendered and from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, some fled through Drepung by crossing the mountain and fled to Phembo, and some people from Lhasa City also fled to Phembo, and then to Lhoka through Kongpo, where there were officials and also solders; we arrested some. In Norbulinga, there were 200 to 300 shot to death during the attack. In three days, we eliminated more than 5,600 people from among the 7,000 rebels, and some of them escaped.   

**Q:**  This amount includes the killed and captured, right?  

**A:**  This includes the killed and wounded, but the majority were captured. The number of shot to death was no more than 800-900 people, and the others were war prisoners [Ch. fu lu] and the wounded. In this battle, we won a battle with fewer forces than the enemy. Our strategy was to concentrate the armed force and destroy them one by one [Ch. ji zhong bing li/ ge ge ji po].  

**Q:**  How many people did you <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> lose in the battle?  

**A:**  There were around 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཅིངས་འགྲོལ་དམག་མི] People&#x27;s Liberation Army.">PLA</a> soldiers killed and wounded. About 40-50 [were] killed and the others were wounded. After one week, Ding Sheng and his 134th Division arrived in Lhasa from Qinghai. They then moved to Lhoka and joined the fight, and we welcomed them. Do you have any questions?  

**Q:** I just have one other question. I just got a new book two weeks ago where [it discusses] Tan Guansan’s letter when he apologized to the Zhongyang for attacking first. Do you know about that?   

**A:** It was not to apologize. He said, “I will self-critique [Ch. jian tao] and I will assume this responsibility [Ch. zhe ge ze ren wo fu]." The Zhongyang Military Committee sent people to investigate [Ch. cha] and I was there when they did this. When they started investigating, in the beginning, Yang, the Political Commissar, who was wearing eye glasses, said, “The Zhongyang Military Committee asked, 'Did you or did you not have the conditions to obey the instructions from the Zhongyang Military Committee to hold fast [to the positions] [Ch. ni men you mei you zun shou zhong yiang jun wei yao jian shou de zhi shi]? Were there conditions to hold fast or not [Ch. you mei you zhe ge jian shou de tiao jian]? Was it possible or not not to fight [Ch. bu da zhang xing bu xing]? Was it possible or not to wait for the 134th Division coming [Ch. deng dai yao san si lai xing bu xing]?'" This meeting was held for 2 hours and I was there the entire time. At that time, I was transferred to be the secretary to Tan Guansan. After the battle was over, for a month, my job was to collect the documents we got from the rebels from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང] 1. A famous incarnate lama whose lineage served as Regent of Tibet. The Lhasa monastery of Kundeling Rimpoche.">Kundeling</a> and from others. We gathered 15-16 translators, both Chinese and Tibetans, from the local force, and I was the team leader [Ch. zu zhang] of the translators. After that, they set up a translator’s team and translated the documents that show that they [rebels] attacked first. We needed this material for the international propaganda. We translated more than 100 documents and supplied them to the leaders of the Military Command Area to report to the Zhongyang   

**Q:**  After the war, you started doing the translations, right?  

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  How long did you translate the documents [for]?  

**A:**  We translated for more than a month, and among the translators, there was Drokar [Tib. སྒྲོལ་དཀར], the late wife of Dorje Tseden [Tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཚེ་བརྟན].  

**Q:**  When did the Zhongyang Military Committee do the investigation?  

**A:** After the translation was done, I was transferred to be the secretary of Tan Guansan, and there was another secretary called Jing Yangping. I was told to stay in Lhasa because there were still some translations to do and Jing Yangping accompanied Tan Guansan, when they were called to Beijing to make the reports to Premier Zhou and Chen Yi. While they left for Beijing and I was in Lhasa, General [Ch. shang jiang] Hong Xuezhi, the general director of the Logistic Bureau [Ch. zong hou qing bu zhang], led a work team which also included Director Yang [Ch. Yang Chuzhang], the director of the Combat Department [Ch. zuo zhan chu zhang]. When they came to Lhasa, they questioned us why we didn’t stick to the Central Committee’s instructions and opened fire early. Did we [not] have the condition to hold fast to the position [of not fighting]? They criticized us for that bombing [at <a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a>], which was wrong, and investigated this. By that time, we had already received punishment and we were criticized. I accompanied them to inspect the outside of the Norbulinga. Even until today, the Dalai’s propaganda was that their flight was due to the two bombs fired at Norbulinga. The Han attacked Norbulinga, and so we had to flee. It was said the two bombs landed inside Norbulinga, but they actually landed outside of it. I went to see that. [Other Chinese: How many investigating teams were sent to Tibet?] A very big work team [was] sent to Tibet to investigate. Hong Xuezhi was there because it was decided that suppression of the rebels would be carried out in Tibet. In the past, the policy was ‘no reform in 6 years’ and ‘appropriate contractions,’ but now, the policy was to put down the rebellions and carry out land reforms. This was a very big military operation, and stable logistical support [Ch. hou qing bao zhang] was important. So, General Hong Xuezhi [the director of the Logistics Department] came personally. At the same time, he took other cadres along to investigate. Director Yang from the Staff Operation Department [Ch. zhong can zuo zhan chu] also came along. From his combat standpoint, he was especially interested [in investigating the combat].   

**Q:**  How did they answer when they were asked, “Did you or did you not have the order to hold fast to [one’s position]?  

**A:** At that time, Wang Kang, the Chief of Staff of the Military Command Area, who was not in Lhasa during the Lhasa battle, came back to Lhasa with Zhang Guohua after the battle was finished. He presided [over] a meeting, and the Director of the Combat Department [Ch. zuo zhan chu zhang], Zou Hongming, the Vice Director of the Intelligence Office, Jiang Wenqi, and some others, attended the meeting. I was there when they answered the questions.   

**Q:** What did they ask him?   

**A:** Director Yang from the investigation team asked questions like, “Was it okay or not not to fight [Ch. bu da xing bu xing]? Why did you fight without waiting for the [reinforcement] division to come?" Wang Kang and Director Zhou answered by saying, “Look, [the rebels] gave orders asking people between the ages of 18 and 60 to come. So how is it possible for us not to fight? We think that the decision [to fight] made by Political Commissar Tan Guansan was correct. [There is a Chinese saying, ‘When the general is out in the battlefield, they may not listen to the order from the emperor [Ch. jiang zai wai jun ming you suo bu shu].'"   

**Q:** Were these three people talking to Yang Chuzhang or were there a bunch of people?   

**A:**  They were only talking to Yang. Hong Xuezhi didn’t come.  

**Q:**  How long did that take?  

**A:** It took 2 hours for them to debate [Tib. རྩོད་པ་བརྒྱབ] whether it was possible [or] not to fight. Finally, Yang became quiet [Ch. bu keng qi]. In the beginning, he was questioning and criticizing us, but eventually, he could not argue anymore. He did not know the situation well. And we gave a very detailed report of the situation.   

**Q:** Did he only talk to the three people?   

**A:** No, he talked to 7 to 9 people, including me.   

**Q:** What could they ask for [in] 2 hours?   

**A:** We debated. Initially, he [Yang] thought we should not fight and should just hold fast, and wait for the division to come. But we felt it was impossible not to start the battle   

**Q:**  Was the 2 hours for each person or for all of them?   

**A:** For all of them. This matter was not decided until 2 months later in the second half of May, when the Zhongyang Military Committee finally stated that Tan made the right decision and the Lhasa battle was justified. Because of this, when we write history, Tan Guansan was always highly praised [Ch. ping jia], saying that he has great style, as he stood up for the people [Ch. dui ren min fu ze] and [was] willing to take responsibility for starting the war. Even though he might have made a mistake, he was courageous to take the risk, as well as the responsibility. And he was correct and highly praised [even] until today. This was written as [one of] his achievements.   

**Q:**  He had a very high status and he was talked about nicely, and I have noticed that. Your comments were fantastic; just like a movie, and it is very useful. Thank you.  

**A:** I am also glad because we all all the same in thinking about Tibet. Now, my mind is in Beijing and you are in the US, but your mind is in Tibet.   

**Q:** This is true. We are from a long distance, but speak the same language.   

**A:**  I will present this, which is written by me and [speaking English] “Good, better, best."  

**Q:** The good is better and better is the best. Did you make this?   

**A:**  Yes, I wrote this, “Good, better, best [Ch. hao hao geng hao]." Never stop and go forward [Ch. yiong yuan bu ting di xiang qian pao] from good, and then go to better and then go last to the best [Ch. cong hao dao hao dao geng zui hao]. The Tibetans also have a song saying, “We must unite as one and we must unite into the warp and woof of the white Khata [Tib. ང་ཚོ་གཅིག་ལ་སྒྲིལ་ཤོག། ང་ཚོ་ཁ་བཏགས་དཀར་པོའི། རྒྱུ་དང་སྤུན་ལ་སྒྲིལ་ཤོག]." This shows that Tibet emphasizes unity very much.  

**Q:** Thank you. [Translator: Note on how the battle started in Lhasa: Until the battle actually started in the early morning of 11th day of 2nd lunar month, I never heard any gun shots and canon shots, and didn’t even hear the two canon shells fall near Norbulinga. Wang Gui says that the rebels fired many guns and canons on the Transportation Station. I think this is only propaganda.]   

