# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0072.01   
##  : with Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས]   
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Lhasa, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Melvyn Goldstein and Tashi Tsering  
**Name:** Gyentsen Phüntso [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕུན་ཚོགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1925  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Gyentsen Phüntso was an important pro-Chinese monk official in the 1950s. In this interview, he describes how he became a monk official (tsidrung) and then about his experiences in Chamdo in 1949-50 when he was on Lhalu's and then Ngabö's staff and then when Chamdo was taken over by the Chinese. He also discusses being sent to Lhasa from Chamdo with a letter from Ngabö saying the government should start talks, and discusses returning to Chamdo and then going with Ngabö to Beijing for the 17-Point Agreement talks. Finally, he talks about his role in starting the first trial democratic reforms in Tölung Dechen Dzong. [Note: TT = Tashi Tsering's questions]   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0072_01/H_0072_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  I don't know Chinese characters and I [only] knew a little bit [of the] Chinese spoken language. I am saying 'thank you' according to the modern system. Please write your name in Tibetan on your card.   

**Q:**  TT: Are any of your relatives still alive? Were those ordinary tsidrung and shabdöba in your [monk official household] related to you?   

**A:**  Yes, they were my relatives, but we were separated from the household. My own family was a farmer's household in Phembo Lhundrup [Tib. འཕན་པོ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྫོང] Dzong. We were not landlords [Tib. ས་བདག]. My family members are still alive. In short, you want me to talk about the history from 1951-1959, right?   

**Q:**  TT: Yes, especially regarding you going to Chamdo as a staff [member] of the Doji and [how] later, you went to Tölung Dechen Dzong. In between that, there was the People's Association. So if you were in Lhasa, then, we want to ask [you] about that also. Now, there are just a few people who actually saw and heard those things.   

**A:**  In the past, according to the custom, we talked [would say] one thing to [those on the] inside and talked [would say] another [thing to those on the] outside. But now, since you told me to say the truth, I will introduce you to whatever I know.   

**Q:**  Thank you, this is my biggest hope.   

**A:**  In the old society, at first, I became a monk. Then at age 18, I became a kudrak of the local government called a tsidrung.   

**Q:**  What tratsang were you from?   

**A:**  Drepung's Gomang Tratsang.   

**Q:**  What khamtsen?   

**Q:**  Samlo Khamtsen. Among the kudrak, there were two types; the lay officials and the tsidrung. Among the tsidrung, there were two types. One was conscripted as a tax from the monastery and trained in the Tse labdra. They were called trachag, and they were conscripted when they needed students in the Tse labdra. But I didn't become a Tse labdra [student]. My gegen was a big kudrak in the Tibetan government. He was one of the four Trunyichemmo.   

**Q:**  What [was] his name?   

**Q:**  His name was Chömpel Thubden.   

**Q:**  Oh! He was very famous and he was called Bumtang, right?  

**A:**  Yes. At the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, which was during the Guomindang period—there were two ways of calling [two names for] the office in Nanjing. Some called it the Dalai Administration Department [Tib. ཏ་ལཻ; Ch. ban shi chu]. Some called it the Representatives of the Tibetan Government [Tib. sde pa gzhung gi sku tshab don gchod khang]. During the Guomindang, my gegen stayed in Nanjing for a long time, and I was the child of his younger brother. In this way, I became the tsidrung. According to the custom in the old society, if your gegen was powerful, you became a shabdö [official] a little bit easier [than others]. I was among this category and I didn't go to the Tselabdra school. I studied a little bit at home. In 1947, I went to Chamdo as a staff [member] of Doji Lhalu. The term of the Dome Jigyab was three to four years. I was then a tsendrön, which was a position of the fifth rank. I stayed in Chamdo for four years. When Lhalu left and Ngabö came, he asked me to stay [on] as [part of] his staff. He reported to the local government and I was told to stay [on] as a staff [member] of Ngabö. Then I stayed there. It was after two and a half or three months that Chamdo was liberated. At this time, I had no wife or kids. I was a monk official kudrak. I was in charge of sending the horse corvées and the people as a corvée tax. This was work like the Mayor of Lhasa, that is, the mipön in Lhasa. In Chamdo, there was [something] like a mipön who was the person in-charge of the horse corvée tax and the head of the misers. My lay official colleague was Thönpasey [Tib. ཐོན་པ་སྲས]. When Chamdo was liberated, I was in Chamdo, and Ngabö and the other lay and monk officials of the fourth rank and the fifth rank were also there. Probably on the 18th of the 10th Tibetan month, before dawn, we the staff [members] and Ngabö fled together from Chamdo because Chamdo was liberated and the situation was tense. But, on the evening of the 17th, Ngabö called a meeting of all the kudrak regardless of their ranks and he said, "Chamdo is [about to be] liberated and Derge [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ], Jomda [Tib. འཇོ་མདའ], Denma [Tib. ལྡན་མ], Markham [Tib. སྨར་ཁམས] [and] the areas on both sides of the Yangtse River are lost. We [have] received emergency petitions from those places. So given this, what do you suggest we do? All of the kudrak should think about this." Although it was in the old society, Ngabö was more knowledgeable than us and he knew clearly that we didn't have the strength to make war. Anyway, we held a lot of discussions on what to do.   

**Q:**  How many lay and monk officials were there at the meeting?   

**A:**  There were about 25 kudraks at the meeting who were staying in Chamdo. All the kudrak, including myself—everyone had doubts about the Communists, and were apprehensive. At that time, there was a lot of talk. You professor, my friend who came from America—but at that time, there were rumors made by the imperialists and we listened to them many times. So no one had any thoughts of making relations with the Chinese. The only thought was to flee. At this time, Ngabö's thought was that making war was useless and it would be better to hold talks with the Chinese, but since he was the Doji, it was probably not convenient for him to say that. So he just said, "Then, then, then." [Laughter] Finally, everybody said we will flee [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Were there some people who had the thought of making war?   

**A:**  At first, there was the thought of making war because, at that time, there was the guard troops [Tib. ས་སྲུང་དམག་མི] and the Gadang Regiment, and the third (Shigatse) regiment which had 1,000 troops.   

**Q:**  Where was the Gadang Regiment from?   

**A:**  There were only 1,000 troops and two depön. Muja [Tib. མུ་བྱ] Depön was at Denma to stop the People's Liberation Army that was coming from there. The other depön, Karchungwa [Tib. དཀར་བྱུང་བ], was at Jomda. Each had 500 troops. But really, they had less than 500. Since they got the money substitute for some soldiers [not serving], it was okay even [if] the soldiers were not there—but they got the salary of 500 [soldiers]. The Tadang Regiment, the ninth regiment, was at Markham. The depön was Derge Sey [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་སྲས]. At this time, there were some powerful lamas, like Gongkar Lamatsang [Tib. གོང་དཀར་བླ་མ་ཚང] and [lay leaders like] Panda Tobgye [Tib. སྤོམ་མདའ་སྟོབས་རྒྱས]. They were very powerful families in the past. At this time, the Guomindang soldiers, though they were only a small number, would get very scared of Panda Tobgye who was staying at the Tshakhalo [Tib. ཚྭ་ཁ་ལྷོ] then. When I was there, all the people, including myself, called the Communists "gungtren" [Ch. gong chan]. And there was no talk about the Communist Party. At this time, Tshakhalo Monastery reported to the Doji that when Dartsedo was liberated by the People's Liberation Army, there were probably one to four regiments of the Guomindang which had fled upwards [toward Tibet]. They requested that the Doji give them guns and ammunition. So he (Lhalu) sent them 50 305 British Carbines and 20 or 30 boxes of ammunition. I don't remember the exact number. Then Derge Sey surrendered. The gadrung in Chamdo was Tsögo [Tib. མཚོ་སྒོ]. Now, from the PRC point of view, what Derge Sey did was just called a revolt [Ch. qi yi; Tib. འོས་ལངས]. So they didn't have time to fight. We received a petition after the Tadang Depön revolted about a desperate situation. The petition said, "Some well-alarmed Guomindang troops with their leaders were advancing towards Tog where the Tog Magpön [Tib. ཏོག་དམག་དཔོན] was. This is the place where there used to be a salt tax collector—and they are also going through Dzayul [Tib. རྡ་ཡུལ] and they are asking for permission to go through Dzayul to India. Or they are going to come to Tibet." I heard that they had gold biscuits strapped on their calves [under their] leggings. So at that time, Ngabö contacted Lhasa and reported what the Guomindang said above. The answer from here was to not let them go to Lhasa and that it would not be alright to send them through Dzayul indiscriminately. The wording was, "it is not alright," was just pleasant sounding words, but to not let them come up was the real talk. So those soldiers fled to India through Dzayul.   

**Q:**  How many soldiers were there?   

**Q:**  [Another person speaking] Wasn't that the troop of Can Zhingtai?   

**A:**  Oh! Yes, that's right. They had about 200 troops and they were probably tough, but since the People's Liberation Army outnumbered their troops, they had to flee. They also propagandized a lot as they fled, telling the Tibetans that there would be no happiness under the Communists. [That] they would probably eliminate all of the chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་པོ], the religion and also old people. I didn't see them, but I knew that the report arrived.   

**Q:**  While Lhalu was the doji, I heard Nangchen Gyalpo [Tib. ནང་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་པོ] and Lhalu sent letters to each other and they discussed both of their armies joining together and fighting the People's Liberation Army. Is this true?   

**A:**  Yes. It is true. At that time, the chief of Nangchen told Lhalu, "Now, the Communists are not familiar with the places of Tibet. So if we can have solidarity and start a war, this would be much better [than acting independently later]. If we cannot do this, we won't have any method [to act] in the future." This is a true fact, whether we said it or Lhalu said it. Even in the history book written by Shakabpa, he wrote about this. Now, we shouldn't tell lies to the Communists.   

**Q:**  Was Nangchen Gyalpo alone or were there other chiefs with him?   

**A:**  Nangchen Gyalpo, himself, probably didn't say that. There were several chiefs [Tib. དཔོན་ཁག] and it was said by one of the chiefs.   

**Q:**  When was that? Was it in 1950?   

**A:**  It was around the 12th Tibetan month of 1949. At this time, Ngabö hadn't arrived in Chamdo. Lhalu sent a report to the government and there was an answer to this. According to the old society's custom, they did the senriy (divine lottery), which said it would be good. So the Kashag sent an answer saying, "If you can attack and hold [on to] the territory, it will be good [Tib. ཕར་རྒོལ་བྱས་ནས་ས་སྲུང་ཐུབ་པ་དང། དེ་འདྲའི་གནས་ཚུལ་ཡིན་ན་ཡག་པོ་འདུག]." At this time, the Chadang Regiment was sent from Lhasa with cannons and mules to haul them and the artillery troops to fire them, and they arrived in Chamdo. But then when it was confirmed that the new doji was Ngabö, Lhalu heard about this. So he thought that if he were to attack [the Chinese], then it would cause trouble [Tib. སྐྱོ་མོ་གཡོས] when Ngabö came and he handed over the doji [to him]. And [so] he stopped doing that and didn't attack. This is exactly what happened. Then Ngabö arrived during the third Tibetan month. Lhalu stayed for about 20 or so days and then left. At this time, the regent was Taktra and the Dalai Lama didn't have power [over government affairs], and the Kalöns were Surkhang, Ramba Kalön Lama, Ngabö, and Ragashag. At that time, the Kashag's order for Lhalu was to stay with Ngabö since it was an emergency, but Lhalu left saying that since the new doji came, he was going to ask for leave.   

**Q:**  TT: He didn't adhere to the order, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he might have used some methods around here. When Lhalu left, the government learned of it and told him to stay in Lharigo and to not come up (to Lhasa) right away.   

**Q:**  I heard in India that as soon as Ngabö arrived—Ngabö and Lhalu had different thoughts because Ngabö was thinking it would be useless to fight and Lhalu was a little bit enthusiastic to make war. Is that true?   

**A:**  This is likely [Tib. འདྲ་པོ་རེད] [true] because they were the old and new Doji Kalön, but their mental strategies were different. Ngabö was thinking that it was useless to make war and thought of holding peaceful negotiations. As for Lhalu, for example, he had talks with Nangchen, as I mentioned above.   

**Q:**  I heard this from some people, but I am not clear [about this]. Do you know about Panda Tobgye [Tib. སྟོབས་རྒྱས] and or Raga [Tib. རབ་དགའ] coming to Chamdo to negotiate?   

**A:**  It was Raga.   

**Q:**  I heard that outwardly, Panda was sent by the Chinese and came to hold peace talks, but internally, they told the Tibetan government that the Khambas would help the Tibetan government to oppose the Chinese and that in the future, the government should give the Khambas some authority. Was that true?   

**A:**  I will explain this [to you]. I was there and I know about this. At this time, the CCP hadn't [yet] crossed the Yangtse River in Derge, but at Denma, the fighting had started, and we received petitions saying that the Communists were coming and that the war had started at Denma and the other side of the Yangtse River had almost been taken [by the Chinese]. Ngabö had no idea of fighting and wanted peaceful negotiations. Before the People's Liberation Army arrived in Chamdo, Panda Raga was in Chamdo. I didn't know what other work he was doing. He was doing a little bit of trade with guns and satin. Since he was famous, Ngabö sent Raga and the fifth rank tsidrung, Riwoche Lanyrer [Tib. བླ་གཉེར] Yeshe Targye [Tib. ཡེ་ཤེས་དར་རྒྱས] to Markham to meet the Chinese because at that time , the 52nd Division of the People's Liberation Army had arrived there with Political Commissioner [Ch. zheng wei] Zhang Xiaomin. I forget the name of the regimental commander who used to work in the Civil Administration Bureau. [Another person talking] He was called Cai something. They were sent by Ngabö and the local government did not tell them to go. They were sent to tell the Chinese, "Please, hold the soldiers there and do not come over [to Tibetan territory]. We are going to negotiate." The fifth rank tsidrung in Chamdo who was called Phagpa Lengden [Tib. 'pags pa legs ldan] was sent to Denma to tell the People's Liberation Army not to come over. "We are going to hold peace talks." When those people were sent, the Chinese kept on attacking. Abo Raga could get in touch with the 52nd Division, but Phagpa Lengden didn't get the chance to get in touch with the Chinese in Denma because the Chinese kept on making war. The reason why they sent Yeshe Targye was because he knew the Chinese language well [from] when he stayed in China with his gegen, Yingon [Tib. དབྱིངས་མགོན] Dzasa. We all fled early in the morning of the 18th. On the 19th, the People's Liberation Army arrived in Chamdo. We all left on horseback. On the way to Lhasa, there is a high mountain pass called Namtsola [Tib. གནམ་མཚོ་ལ]. The pass is all dense forest where you cannot see a person if they go a little further [ahead]. It takes two days to get there by horseback from Chamdo. We all left together but when we reached the pass, we weren't all together since some horses were better than others and reached there faster, and people went in different groups. At that time, we didn't think of any of our wealth and we were just trying to save our lives. I was riding with Maya Tsewang [Tib. རྨ་བྱ་ཚེ་དབང], who is now in India. We were very close friends. He was much more clever than me and I was more stupid.   

**Q:**  I don't think so.   

**A:**  It was really like this, and British Ford was with us. I was friendly with him. We both had no wives, so on Saturdays, we would drink chang. And I would go with him on horseback hunting rabbits, though it was not allowed, and we also went bathing [together], et cetera. Ford knew about world affairs, and he might have heard a lot of things, but we didn't hear about those things. Ford was telling me, "Now, you should be careful." He had a movie camera. He said, "When the Communists come, I will shoot a movie and leave. You and Tsewang should also come with me to England and live with me." He said that he had a mother or a father.   

**Q:**  He meant that you should flee with him, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I thought it was about the two paths. One was to go to one's own homeland, Lhasa, and the other was to go to England with Ford because he didn't have the thought to stay in Lhasa. So I was wondering what to do. Didn't I tell you that Maya was more clever than me? Maya then said, "We shouldn't do this. The governor of Chamdo, the Doji is Ngabö. Nowadays, through all the broadcasts, they are talking about the British imperialists. So if we go with them, it will be a great mistake [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་ཀྱི་རེད] because one is the wireless operator of the British imperialists and the other is the Doji. There is a no other choice but to surrender." He was right. This was the talk at the critical point. So according to the Khamba custom, we swore like this [probably hooking their fingers] not to join either of these two and [decided to] go back [to Chamdo]. But Ford was with us and he was not going ahead. I had a nyerpa (steward) then who used to be the servant of Yadong Geshe Rimpoche. At that time, the two of us pretended to urinate and I told my nyerpa to take Ford and go ahead, and then I gave my nyerpa a secret eye signal to return back after taking Ford, and then I swear by the Three Jewels that the two of us returned to Chamdo to surrender. But, we didn't go directly to Chamdo. There was a very big agro-pastoral household called Sagong who was the Drönyerchemmo of Chamdo Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ]. So on the first night of the 19th, we came back and stayed in their nomads' place, which was at a high altitude on the mountain. And it was also snowing. The next morning, at dawn, about 5-6 a.m., somebody was knocking on the door a lot. I told my servant to have a look and we saw that seven People's Liberation Army troops had arrived. [Laughter] The translator was a Muslim in Chamdo called Chabgya [Tib. ཆབ་རྒྱ] [which means Chamdo in Chinese]. He was the grandson of one of the Chinese troops called Lujun who came to Lhasa in 1910. At that time, it was a little bit scary. The miser probably told them and they said, "We heard that the two of you had come here, but you don't need to be scared. Chamdo has been militarily liberated. If you have guns or horses, turn them over to us. Whether you have them or not, if you have gold or silver, you can ask whoever you want to keep them. We don't want them." The military officer was a Regimental Commander [Ch. tuan zhang]. I forget his name. At that time, the People's Liberation Army regiment was near the bridge called Kuru Samba [Tib. གུ་རུ་ཟམ་པ], and the People's Liberation Army had a very hard time. They didn't have much food to eat. They would buy some barley from the miser and boil it in their mugs and eat it. They had abundant firewood. When they boiled the barley, the barley was mixed with reddish earth. They just boiled it and it was like this. Then they called us and took us downhill [on the] road. They were taking good care of us and shone a torch on the way. But I thought, "Now they are just duping us. Anyway, they will definitely kill us." [Laughter] Even when he jumped some small trenches, the People's Liberation Army was holding our hands like this, but we had no belief in the People's Liberation Army at all. To tell you the truth, I didn't trust them. When we reached Kuru Samba, we saw that the place was filled with the regiment, and we were taken to the Tuanzhang and he gave us some Chinese tea. We had already turned over our horses and guns. I was a 5th rank [official] and Maya was an ordinary official [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ], and he was sitting at the end of the row. The Tuanzhang said, "You don't have to be afraid." And he told us the CCP's policies. Then he said, "Tonight, let's sleep together." And we slept in the middle and the soldiers slept around us. The soldiers probably got cold and they made a bonfire with straw and were sitting by the fire. At this time, the Tibetan government had recruited militia from Shotalhosum (Shopando [Tib. ཤོ་པ་མདོ], Pembar [Tib. དཔལ་འབར] and Lhodzong [Tib. ལྷོ་རྫོང]), and lay and monk officials were appointed as the depöns.   

**Q:**  Who appointed the depön? Was it Lhalu or Ngabö? Ngabö appointed them, but he had to report to the local government. At that time, the government gave permission to recruit the militias. In the Denma area, many of the militia had already been arrested [laughter]. In the morning, we saw that many militia men had been arrested and that they were staying there together, and the People's Liberation Army was about to take them to Chamdo. So they told Maya to go to Chamdo with the soldiers who were going to take the militia, and they told me, "You should stay with us. We will give you food and beverages, and there will be no danger to your life." At that time, Ngabö, and kudrak like the Depön and Ford, had run away to Drugu [Tib. གྲུ་གུ་དགོན] Monastery. As I mentioned above, I had been the official in charge of the horse and pack animals' corvée. The Chinese might had heard this from the miser. Then the Chinese told me, "You should stay here. The People's Liberation Army has problems with [getting] food. So you should help us buy some barley, goats, and meat." Since I was in charge of the miser, I knew the people [local officials} like the gembo and the dingpön. So I went to the misers and I told them that the Chinese wanted them to sell some tsamba and a few of their goats. At that time, to tell you the truth, in Chamdo, the livelihood of the masses was poor. The miser said, "We really don't have tsamba, but since you, the tsendrön in charge of the horse corvée [Tib. རྟ་སྤྱི་རྩེ་མགྲོན] asked us, tonight we will sell you whatever amount of goats you want." So that night, I told the Chinese, that it was difficult to get tsamba but that they said they would support whatever amount of goats they needed. They said okay and I bought the goats and paid in dayan. Although the people as a whole might have had that [compassion], the majority didn't have that. If you are not capable, there is nobody to beg or to give you something. The Tibetan people have a characteristic sense of compassion. So in Tibet, if you don't feel ashamed and if you say, "please", you will never be left hungry. This is probably the character of the nationality. So they sold the goats to the People's Liberation Army out of this. Then Ngabö and Khenche Dawala [Tib. ཁན་ཆེ་ཟླ་བ་ལགས], the fourth rank official, Ford, and the rest, were returned to Chamdo. The troops who received the surrender of Ngabö and the officials were the cavalry from Qinghai led by Fan Ming's troops. They had come from the north through Riwoche. They came from Riwoche through Lagong Ngamda and reached Drugu Monastery here. The ones who took the whole area of Chamdo were the 18th Corps troops [from Sichuan]. So they had a little bit [of an] argument.   

**Q:**  What was the argument about?   

**A:**  The 18th Corps said they liberated Chamdo and Fan Ming's Cavalry said they captured the Doji. This argument went on for half a day, although all the soldiers wouldn't do anything reckless, the heads were talking to each other. Later, I heard that they petitioned the Central Committee about this. I was not there when they petitioned [answer not finished] .   

**Q:**  Tashi T: Who was the leader of the 18th Corps?   

**A:**  Wang Qimei was the one who came first, and the Corps Commander [Ch. jun zhang] was Zhang Guohua.   

**Q:**  I heard from Ford when I met him in England—and he is healthy—he said Muja Depön didn't dismantle his soldiers and they were kind of together when he went with Ngabö. When they reached the pass, they thought that the People's Liberation Army had reached Lagong Ngamda and Muja told Ford, "There is no problem because there are probably not that many people [Chinese]. So if we make a little bit of war on the pass, we can get through it." Then Muja asked Ngabö but Ngabö didn't give the order. Is that true?   

**A:**  There is a little contradiction in this talk. When Ngabö fled, he only had a few Trapchi soldiers with him, not Muja Depön's Gadang Regiment. Normally, the Trapchi Regiment was in Lhasa and it was up to the choice of the Doji whichever regiment he wanted to take. So he took 100 Trapchi soldiers. Then Ngabö came to Chamdo on the 21st or 22nd with Fan Ming's cavalry. Ngabö stayed in Chamdo and the cavalry returned to Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ་མདོ] after a day in Chamdo . They probably left because the soldiers that had taken Chamdo were the 18th Corps.   

**Q:**  Was Fan Ming the leader of the cavalry then?   

**A:**  Fan Ming came later, but I heard that the cavalry belonged to his army in Qinghai. At the time, when they brought Ngabö and when we surrendered, the People's Liberation Army was following the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points of Attention [Tib. སྒྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ་དང་དོ་སྣང་བྱེད་དགོས་པ་བརྒྱད] laid [out] by Chairman Mao, and so the soldiers were not allowed to go to the misers' houses. I have a photo of Chairman Mao and I have great love, respect, and loyalty towards him. The soldiers were not allowed to beat and scold people. Now I have a great belief that these rules are great and glorious because the Chinese revolution was done by Chairman Mao. When we arrived in Chamdo, Ngabö and most of the kudrak were kept together. If you look at it all of a sudden, it was called kind of [something like a] prison? But, how they introduced me to it was [they said], "This is not a prison. It is a study session [Tib. སློབ་སྦྱོང]." All of the others who ran away were arrested, but they didn't arrest me because I had surrendered at Kuru Samba. Later, an interpreter came with Director Liu Zhuren who used to be one of the officials of the Rear Service [Ch. hou qing] of the Tibetan military headquarters. [He] had come to Chamdo as the official in the Front Line Headquarters [Ch. qian xian zhi hui bu]. I surrendered to him, and the misers might have told him about me being the in-charge of the misers for the horse and pack animals corvée tax, so I was not among the detainees. At that time, the kudrak led by Ngabö were detained in the rooms in groups of 8-10, but they were not kept strictly. At that time, there was the Division Commander, Wu Shizhang. I went to see him carrying a khata according to Tibetan custom, and my bedding, and [I] told him through the translator, "Ngabö and all of the government kudrak and the depön are detained there. Please, may I stay with them?" Wu Shizhang burst into laughter. [Laughter] One of the interpreters was Kesang Yanga [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དབྱང་དགའ]. Another interpreter was also called Kesang; he became the Chairman of the Political Consultative Conference. He used to be the servant of Phünkhang Jedrungla [Tib. ཕུན་ཁང་རྗེ་དྲུང་ལ]. Later, he went to China and became the highest interpreter to Wu Shizhang. Wu Shizhang said, "It is a study session, not a detaining place. If you want to go there, you can go and stay with them. You can also come here," and [he] gave me a letter. At this time, we bought barley from Phagpalha [Tib. འཕགས་པ་ལྷ] Labrang and Shiwala [Tib. ཞི་བ་ལྷ] Labrang, and I was told to work on the horse corvée, pack animal [corvée] and grinding tsamba for the People's Liberation Army. At that time, it was kind of scary, so I said yes. The People's Liberation Army was paying dayan for the barley, and the Chinese Section Leader, Dai Kezhang, who later worked in the firewood office [Ch. ran liao gong si], was assigned as my partner. He paid the money, and I was to mill it into tsamba. Although the miser were paid, at that time, they didn't have the mental understanding. So they didn't come no matter how many times they were called [laughter]. So the People's Liberation Army told me to take charge of the tsamba milling and hiring the pack animals, and I said yes. Then they told me to do the things as I did them in the old society. So I sent a written order to the miser like I did in the past, and the wording was as follows: "Listen! Yesterday, the Communists told you to send the pack animals and that they will pay for them, but you didn't show up. Now, if you don't send the pack animals to Chamdo when the sun shines on the Bengo mountain, it will be too late and we will have to punish you. This order is from the Tsendrön in charge of the horse corvée [Tib. tho don/ kha sa gung pran gyis khe ma gtong rogs/ dngul sprod kyi yin zer yang btang mi 'dug pa da cha sang nyin sbe 'go rir nyi ma rste shar la khe ma rnams ma 'byor na bkod pa shod dgos byung na phyis pa red/ rta spyi rtse mgron nas]." I put my seal on it. On the next day, it was after sunrise, but the animals arrived there at noon. There were so many pack animals [that] arrived in Chamdo [laughter]. At that time, I milled the tsamba in that way and now we can say that I served the people. But, at that time, I didn't have the idea of serving the people. It was kind of not alright if I didn't do what I was told to do. Now I think that what I did at that time was right. Then after about 7-8 days, Ngabö and the advanced troops of the 18th Corps led by Political Commissioner [Tib. ཆབ་སྲིད; Ch. wei yuan] Wang Qimei had a discussion saying that it was best to have talks for the peaceful liberation, and Ngabö agreed. At this time, the first People's Liberation Army troops had reached Lhodzong. Ngabö said, "For the time being, the troops should stay there and not come up. I will send up a report." So Wang Qimei said, "That's a good idea, and you should send the report to the Kashag and the Dalai Lama, and you should think about sending the report through a person who will go up and come back." About eight days later I got a message to come see Ngabö. He said, "You and Samling [Tib. བསམ་གླིང] Gandrön should go tomorrow or the day after. Chamdo is liberated, but the People's Liberation Army will remain in Lhodzong and won't go to Lhasa. So the two of you should go deliver the report. Can you do this?" I said, "Certainly!" Then he asked me what difficulties I had. "As for my difficulties, I can't walk. And normally, we would have the travel document, the lamyig, and we could say that we wanted the horses and the pack animals. But now, in case we can't get that, what shall we do?" I had a little bit of money. I didn't have much money since I was a monk and I didn't do any trading. Ngabö and Wang Qimei gave us some money for the road, and Wang Qimei gave me a pistol for security. At that time, Wang Qimei had an interpreter who was from Ba and who later died when his gun went off accidentally. Wang told him to give his pistol to me. At that time, we had to be careful both inside and outside. Most of the places sent us the horse corvée because we had the lamyig document. Some wouldn't send anything [though]. When we left Shopando and reached the place called Ogyen Tamda, there they didn't send the horse corvée so we had to carry the saddles on our backs and carry the rifles we had, and cross the pass on foot. And [then we] arrived at the Ngödrukha. There the miser also didn't send any horse corvées. When we asked them why, they said, "Now we have been liberated, so we won't dare send the horse corvée." So we bought three to four horses since we had the hundred sang notes of Tibetan currency. The horses were cheap, like 100-125 sang. I came seven days and nights on horseback and I felt so sleepy that I fell down from the horse's back, but we were kind of scared because [we] had the report to be delivered to the Dalai Lama. Two horses died on the way. When we came up, Lhalu was at Lharigo, and we also had a report to [give to] Lhalu. He asked how things were in Chamdo, so I told him what I knew. In Lharigo, there was a severe internal contradiction. Lhalu had his own bodyguards were there and there was also the Drongdrag Magar there, which had once been set up during the 13th Dalai Lama's time, but had been the dismantled. Then for attacking Chamdo, the Drongdrag Regiment was newly set up and the depön was Kharna [Tib. མཁར་སྣ], and there were also some monk soldiers [Tib. སེར་དམག] from the Three Great Monasteries [which] consisted of the chandzö and dobdo. I stayed [for] two hours at Lhalu's. From Lharigo, Lhalu sent a telegraph to Lhasa saying that we had come from Chamdo to deliver the report.   

**Q:**  Did you see the content of the report you were carrying?   

**A:**  At that time, we didn't have time to talk about that much. Before that, during the Taktra [recency], they broadcasted many times that we were going to make war even if the men were exhausted and only women [were] left. So it was written in the letter, "Chamdo is liberated and there is no way to have an armed battle. So you should think about this carefully. If we hold peace talks, it would be beneficial for the Tibetan people not to have to suffer. I am at Chamdo, the Chinese captured me. The local government should try to hold the talks and if you have hope to hold the talks, please send a delegation." When the two of us were coming from Tsomora riding our horses, we met an adrung messenger coming from Lhasa riding a horse with bells hung on it. He dismounted at once and took off his hat and said, "Kungö, congratulations [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་བདེ་ལེགས]!" When I asked him where he was going, he said that he was told to go receive us. Then he gave us a written notice saying, "We know that you have come to deliver the report. So don't go to your homes and come directly to the Kashag. You don't have to change your clothes." So we dismounted our horses at the dharma teaching area called the Sungjörawa [at the Tsuglakhang], and immediately went to the Kashag, which was meeting in the Jokhang. When we dismounted our horses, there were a lot of people there waiting to see us. Some said, "Poor things! They came from such a long distance." Some scolded us saying, "You are the losers [Tib. བསྐྱལ་མགོ་རིལ]."   

**A:**  What did they mean by the loser?   

**A:**  They meant that we lost Chamdo. This was a struggle between the two viewpoints. So I didn't get angry when they said that, and it was also useless to be angry because this was the struggle between inside and outside. So we went to meet the Kashag. There was Ramba, Surkhang, and Thubden Ramyang [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རབ་དབྱངས]. Usually, you couldn't just go in indiscriminately.   

**Q:**  TT: Especially the ordinary lay and monk officials couldn't go in.   

**A:**  Yes, usually, there would be a cushion down there or we [would] have to bend our body, but this time they [just] told us to come in. It was really like a guest and the host [laughter]. We gave them the report and told the [Kashag] about the matter. Then they had tea prepared and served us tea. Surkhang was very tactful and said, "Oh! You can have the tea in my cup." Then we drank the tea. We were not allowed to go to the Dalai Lama without going through the Kashag. We gave the report and explained the entire situation and events of Chamdo. The Kashag said, "You have gone through severe difficulties and it is great that you have arrived." In the Kashag, there were two types of people. Those who were stubborn and those who were not that stubborn. Ramba said, "Oh my, how did we come to this state? [It's] like the other side is like iron and we are like bag [Tib. སྤགས] (kneaded dough). We didn't get any time to do anything, right?" [Laughter] . We didn't answer him but just said, "Yes, yes." Surkhang was tactful and said, "Oh! You have had a hard time, it's not your fault. It's good that Ngabö and his staff are all alright. For the time being, we don't have anything to do. We should think about what to do in the future. You two take it easy and rest up for a few days." The two gadrung were Dumra [Tib. ལྡུམ་ར] and Malamba [Tib. རྨར་ལམ་པ]. They brought us tea leaves and butter from the Kashag and we stayed at home. We arrived in 1950 on the 11th month, the 6th day.   

**Q:**  TT: This was in 1951, right?   

**A:**  No. It was in 1950. At that time, there were a lot of meetings in the Potala. The Dalai Lama was almost 18.   

**Q:**  TT: At that time, he hadn't taken [over] the political and religious power, right?   

**A:**  Taktra had resigned and according to tradition, he should be 18 years old [to take over]. But when he was almost 18, he had to take the political and religious power. So a tsondu hragdu gyepa was called where the representatives of the government officials, the abbots of the Three Great Monasteries, and the depöns attended. I heard that they held a discussion on the Chamdo situation. Some said, "We are determined." In short, they were saying that they were still going to fight. They said, "There is nothing to surrender to the Communists and it is useless to talk." But, the majority said, "Ngabö has reported to the Kashag and the Dalai Lama, and the meeting was told to discuss this. In accordance with this, we should proceed with the negotiations. So we should send people and hold talks for the peaceful liberation." At that time, the minority had to yield to the majority, and it was confirmed to hold the talks. On the 7th, they appointed Lukhangwa and Lobsang Tashi as Sitsab. The Dalai Lama was probably about to leave, but we didn't know that. And on the 11th, early [in the] morning, Samling came to my house. He said, "Old man! Aren't you going to get up?" I said, "Why should I get up? I have no work." He said, "It is finished [Tib. དཔེ་བསགས་བཞག]!" "What happened?" I asked, and he said, "This morning, the Dalai Lama left the Potala." I asked, "Where did he go?" He said, "I don't know where." So he left on the 11th of the 11th month and [he] knew how he left. He said that the Dalai Lama was dressed in a chupa and rode a horse, and he left from the back of the Potala. On the 11th, I got a message saying that I and Samling should come to the Kashag at 4 p.m. At this time, there was Shasur and Thubden Ramyang.   

**Q:**  TT: They were the gatsab, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there were only two of them and they told us, "For the time being, the Dalai Lama has gone to Yadong to avoid danger and now the Sitsab are in charge of the political power, and two of us were handed the responsibility of the Kashag. It has been decided to hold a talk for peaceful negotiations in Tibet. From Lhasa, we will send Khenjung Thubden Lengmön and Sambo Tenzin Thondrub [Tib. བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ]. And via India, we are sending Kheme [Tib. ཁེ་སྨད] Dzasa and Trunyichemmo Thubden Tendar [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་བསྟན་དར]. You have had a hard time, but it is for the sake of the religion. You should not refrain from the hardship and please go with the two delegates to Chamdo." ,,, Usually, it takes 36 days to [get to] Chamdo on horseback. They asked us what I needed. My family was pretty well off. My gegen wasn't there at that time. My gegen, Trunyichemmo Chömpel Thubden, was old and he knew something about the world. Before the Dalai Lama went to Yadong, he and Surkhang Dzasa were sent to appeal to the U.N. But, the situation then was suh that they could appeal right away. They stayed there for a day and the day after, and this country said that it was good and the other side said there was no hope [laughter]. So we went to Chamdo. It took us 26 days. At this time, the main army of the People's Liberation Army was at Lhodzong. At Pembar, there were 11 soldiers who were the liaisons [Ch. lian luo], and the head was Gao Buzhang. The People's Liberation Army accommodated us well at Pembar and Lhodzong. Then we reached Chamdo. Then two delegates gave Ngabö the edict from the Kashag. Ngabö and Wang Qimei were both very happy. On the way, we met some of the depön, kudrak and the soldiers returning to Lhasa. They said the People's Liberation Army had given them some dayan and sent them home. On the next day, Ngabö called me and he said, "You are a monk with no wife and kids, so you should come with me to Beijing." I said, "Please, I am not going at all. I could barely survive in the war not being killed." At that time, I was apprehensive. Gadrung Tsögo was also there. Then Ngabö's wife, who came later, also told me, "Don't say that. It's better if you go. Ngabö also told you to go." I was not that familiar with Ngabö, except he kept me after I came to Chamdo. So we were going to leave in five days.   

**Q:**  What was in the letter that the Kashag sent to Ngabö? I heard that it was a meaningless letter and that Ngabö said that this was useless.   

**A:**  In the letter, it was written, "The suggestion of Wang Qimei and Ngabö to hold talks was very good, and we have also reported to the Dalai Lama and the tsondu hragdu has also decided. So you go to Beijing. There are delegates going via India and we are also sending two from here. You should take charge of the delegates who have the main power. Whatever detailed information comes up, we will contact the Dalai Lama in Yadong. For the time being, just start the talks." There was also an internal verbal instruction through the two of them, but since I was just an external staff [member], I couldn't know all of the instructions except for a few. So I went with Ngabö. There was no motorable road, so we went on a horse down to Ganzi. They were making the road from Ganzi to Dartsedo. Then we went in army trucks used for carrying the shovels and the hoes. In Ganzi, the main 18th Corps was there, and there was the Chief of Staff, Li Canmou, and all of them were there. And Phünwang accompanied us from Chamdo. From Ganzi, Alo Buzhang was also with us.   

**Q:**  Was he Tibetan?   

**A:**  No, he was Chinese. He was probably a military officer in the 18th Corps and he was an expert in propaganda.   

**Q:**  How did he know Tibetan?   

**A:**  No, he didn't know Tibetan. Phünwang was the translator. From Dartsedo, there was an airport at Shinji, and from there we went to Chongqing by plane. We were welcomed by Deng Xiaoping and Li Bochen. At that time, the Southeast Military Headquarters [Ch. xi nan jun qu] was in Chongqing, and we knew that the two of them were the leader and also the military officer. Deng Xiaoping gave the main welcome speech, "It is very good for you to come for the friendship between the Tibetans and Chinese. You don't have to be afraid." He long was also there at the welcome.   

**Q:**  Did you wear Tibetan clothes?   

**A:**  Yes, we all did. Li Bochen also gave a speech and they had made a stage on the way. Then there was a thin and elderly person who gave a speech. He was probably a Vice Director [Ch. fu zhu ren] of the Southeast Military and Administration Committee [Tib. ལྷོ་ནུབ་དམག་སྲིད]. Later, I came to know he was Liu Wanhui of Sichuan. He welcomed us and visited us. At that time, I had some doubts, so I carefully listened when Deng Xiaoping gave a speech, but it was kind of generic. I had heard that Li Wanhui used to be a landlord and warlord, but later, under the arrangement of the CCP, he also gave a speech. Since Chamdo and Sichuan were near, I had heard he was a Guomindang general and a landlord. At that time, I was apprehensive, but since he was like us, and when he gave the speech, I felt a bit relieved and thought that there would be no problems for us and that the CCP was probably not easy [hard] to cope with. This was the first time I had faith towards the CCP. Otherwise, in many rumors it was said that the religion, landlords, the kudrak and the elderly were going to be destroyed. There were really these rumors spread by the imperialists. Then we arrived in Beijing and the respectful Zhou Enlai came to receive us, he said, "It's good that you have come. In the past, we have had contradictions [disagreements]. Now let's forget about these things that have happened the past. And in the future, whatever comments you have, you can tell the Central Committee, but not me. You don't need to be afraid. The Central Committee will tell you whatever they know and they will ask you the things that they don't know, and you should ask the Central Committee about whatever you don't know. We should both speak based on equality." He said that to Ngabö and I was [part of] Ngabö's staff. The two staffs members who came from India were Sandu Rinchen [Tib. ས་འདུ་རིན་ཆེན] and the brother-in-law of the Dalai Lama, Phüntso Tashi [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས་བཀྲ་ཤིས]. When we met there, the delegates were talking to each other. In the 17-Point Agreement, there were some disagreements on a few points (2-3). They sent a secret telegram with Tibetan numbers to the Dalai Lama in Yadong about the points of disagreement. We then got a telegram from the Dalai Lama saying that he didn't have any objection to accepting the Panchen Lama since this was also the Central Committee's idea. "Go ahead and accept it." The second point was that many Chinese troops should not come to Tibet. "If the representative of the Central Committee and the cadres are to come, it is okay, but tell them not to send many. And if they send a representative of the Central Committee, he should be someone who has faith in religion." [Laughter] This was the suggestion.   

**Q:**  Did this telegram come from Yadong?   

**A:**  Yes, this was the response telegram from Yadong. The delegates would discuss this and we would go near to them and listen. Ngabö would speak frankly in both the old and new society. So Ngabö had to tell about the telegram to the Central Committee, but they wouldn't accept it. So Ngabö told the five delegates, "It won't make any difference whether we report this telegram to the Central Committee or not. On the nationality policy and the religious policy, the CCP policy is to have freedom of religious faith. How can there be a representative who has faith in the religion since the main CCP doesn't have any religion? How can there be a person who has faith in the religion?" This was an internal talk and these talks are still alive [still occurring today]. This was not like-it probably was like this. Finally, the 17-Point Agreement was signed. At this time, Sandu Rinchen and I could see them signing the Agreement in the hall in the Zhongnanhai [Tib. ཞོང་ནན་ཧཻ]. A People's Liberation Army military officer with a shaved head wearing a serge uniform came to us and he said to me and Sandu Rinchen in Chinese, "How is everything? Is the [your] livelihood okay?" Sandu Rinchen was a little better at Chinese and he also knew English. I asked Sandu Rinchen, "Isn't this Commander-in-Chief Zhu de [Ch. zhu zong si lung]?" Sandu Rinchen said, "This is nonsense! How can he come to visit us?" Later, [we found out] he was indeed Zhu de. On the day of the signing, on May 23rd, Zhu de came. So that's how we knew. The next day, Chairman Mao himself hosted a personal dinner. At this dinner, all of Mao's staff and all of the representatives were there. At the first table, Chairman Mao, Zhou Enlai, Ngabö and the Panchen Lama sat side by side. And we were on the third table. Chairman Mao gave a speech and he said, "Today, we can sign the 17-Point Agreement of Tibet. After Tibet is liberated, we should put into practice the CCP's policy and work lines exactly as they are. In the past-it has been hundreds of years since the Tibetans and the Chinese have had a friendship. And Tibetans internally, and also between the nationalities, didn't have a friendship. This was caused by the Manchu and the Chiang Kaishek government. So we should have a close friendship and we should developed the culture, education and the economy of Tibet. And we should also practice the nationality policy that all the nationalities are equal, and the period where one nationality suppresses another nationality is over. Since the PRC has just been founded, and we don't have many conditions and the Agreement is signed, you should arrange how you are going back to Tibet. In the future, anything you need to make the contact, just tell Zhang Jingwu." At that time, I didn't know he was coming to Tibet, but he was to come to Tibet. He was probably the Director of the General Office [Tib. བན་གོང་ཤི་ཞུ་རེན] of Chairman Mao, and also a military officer at the military headquarters in Beijing. Later, Kheme, Sandu Rinchen, and Sambo, went back through India, and Ngabö, his wife, Thubden Lengmön, the leaders of the 18th Corps Tan Guansan and Zhang Guohua, and I came together by land until Chamdo. After we arrived in Chamdo, Wang Qimei was in charge of the advanced troops of the People's Liberation Army, and the Regimental Commander was the one who was the principal of the Xianyang National Institute.   

**Q:**  I heard from Sambo that as soon as they received the telegram, the delegates held a meeting and Ngabö said, "We should, in any case, sign the Agreement. Otherwise, Tibet will have to suffer a great loss. It is impossible to send telegrams on each point of the Agreement because they will talk about the priest-patron relationship and the Manchu Amban, and they will make a lot of trouble and we won't come to a decision. If there is to be no decision, the People's Liberation Army will make war. So we should make a decision and not ask Yadong. In the future, if it were to be wrong, then they can say that they don't want to accept it. If it were to be good, then they can say that it was well done." The delegates came to this decision and they didn't send a telegram in the time between. This was what Sambo told me. Ngabö was enthusiastic to sign the Agreement and he thought there would be trouble if he asked Yadong. So he thought of doing their best with making the decision. In the future, the Dalai Lama could say that he wouldn't accept it. Did this happen at that time?   

**A:**  There was no talk about this in Beijing when they held the talks in Beijing. After we signed the Agreement and we came to Lhasa, and when some delegates came through India, Zhang Jingwu was there. Ngabö and we arrived in Lhasa and the 17-Point Agreement was implemented. At this time, in Yadong, there was a big contradiction [disagreement] over whether [or not] the Dalai Lama should return to Lhasa or go abroad. The situation was really very tense. Zhang Jingwu was there and there were many officials who said that they were going to invite the Dalai Lama to Tibet. My gegen was there and he said that "We won't bring the Dalai Lama abroad. He has to return." On the other side, there was Surkhang, Namseling, and probably Kündeling [who] said they were going to take him out. "We are not going to hand over the Dalai Lama to the CCP." At this time, there was a letter from Chairman Mao which said, "It was well done [It is very good that] the 17-Point Agreement was signed. There will be no changes to the Dalai Lama's rights, his body, and his activities." Then Zhang Jingwu explained and discussed taking the Dalai Lama in or out, and he returned. Ngabö arrived in Lhasa and explained [the Agreement] to the Kashag. The Kashag didn't say clearly either way whether they would implement the 17-points or not. So the five who went to Beijing discussed [things] and they said, "We held the talks frankly and did this. If we were wrong, tell us so and punish us. If we did well, tell us so. We are going to report this to the Dalai Lama and the tsondu gyendzom" (The Full Assembly). There were a lot of arguments.   

**Q:**  Did they say that in the Kashag or in the tsondu?   

**A:**  This was said at the tsondu.   

**Q:**  TT: Was that the tsondu hragdu?   

**A:**  Yes, all the main delegates were there and later they reported to the Dalai Lama and he said, "You delegates went there and did much work, and worked hard for the sake of Buddhism and the people." And he sent a telegram to Chairman Mao saying, "The local government of Tibet and the lay and monk people of Tibet will, under the unity of the Central Committee, adhere to it [the Agreement]," and at the end he wrote, "Sent by the local government of Tibet and the Dalai lama." There is a historical document about this.   

**Q:**  I have that. But it took about a month after the meeting was held until the telegram was sent. In Alo Buzhang's article it explains that after the tsondu made the decision, the Tibetan government didn't send the telegram because they were not sure about what the Military Administration Committee would be. At that time, the government and Zhang Jingwu sent letters to each other and there was the trouble with recruiting soldiers and so on. Tell me about this.   

**A:**  It wasn't a month. It was about 12-13 days [from] when there was the trouble [to] when we held the talks there. It was between the Tibetan government and Labrang, about the area beyond the Gampala Pass. After most of the points were settled, there were a few points that the five delegates of the local government didn't accept. Although Tibet is a part of the PRC, internally, between the Tibetan government and Labrang, there were a lot of talks regarding the areas above and below Gampala. From this side [local government], didn't accept it, and from the Central Committee side, they put forward a suggestion saying that Tibet is the only one which is a part of the PRC. On the matter of [how] the Central Committee representatives should have religious faith and the trouble regarding Gampala, during the 12-13 days, the meeting was not held in Beijing because of the disagreement on the points. Li Weihan was the main one, and there was another Li who talked back and forth and asked what kind of new thoughts and methods [ideas/plans] we had. Then, finally, Li said, "We will implement [the Agreement] according to the situation at the time of when the 13th Dalai Lama and the 9th Panchen Lama were friendly. How would it be if we did that?" Ngabö said that was fine. Then the trouble was solved. I don't know whether [or not] they had some internal trouble, but what I know are these two points. There were many telegrams between Yadong and Beijing about this issue, and it took some time.   

**Q:**  Did they send many telegrams to Yadong?   

**A:**  Yes, and we had to wait for them. The outside Tibetans said that when they heard the news about signing the Agreement from the radio, they wired you immediately and told the five delegates to stay in Beijing. We have some [questions and] comments [about this]. Did you receive this telegram?   

**A:**  No, this is not true, the dispute over accepting the Panchen Lama.   

**Q:**  Regarding the Panchen Lama, it was at the beginning of the talk, right?   

**A:**  It was in 1951. The delegates insisted they didn't have power to do this matter and we didn't accept it. So they sent the telegram to the Dalai Lama and it was settled by the Dalai Lama.   

**Q:**  Regarding the Military Administration Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང], we heard there was a dispute between Chinese and Tibetans in Beijing, is this true?   

**A:**  There was no disagreement over this in Beijing. According to the comment from the Central Committee's military headquarters [Ch. zhong yang jun wei], they were to set up the Military Administration Committee and they were to appoint two Vice Commander-in-Chiefs [Ch. fu siling] from among the famous Tibetan dignitaries who had political power. According to the Central Committee's will, Ngabö was confirmed to be one of the two, and the local government also agreed to it. At that time, there were the two sitsab. On the name list of the Vice Commander-in-Chief, it was written Ngabö and Lhalu were to be in the Military Administration Committee, but Lukhangwa didn't accept Lhalu at all, saying that the suitable person was Ragashag. So Ragashag was appointed. According to the Military Administration Committee down there, it was Ngabö and Lhalu, but when Zhang Jingwu and those talked about this, Lukhangwa didn't agree. This was the matter, but the Military Administration Committee was to be set up and Tibetan Army was to be gradually converted into the People's Liberation Army through the Military Administration Committee. They couldn't convert them all, but the first ones to be converted would be the Kadang, Khadang, Gadang, and Ngadang regiments. These four had started converting in principle with the uniforms, though it was not completed. Their uniform was the People's Liberation Army uniform. The others were to be converted gradually.   

**Q:**  Was this written in a side document, suryig [Tib. ཟུར་ཡིག], of the Agreement?   

**A:**  Yes, this was in the suryig. There were 10 points in the suryig. In Beijing-I didn't know there were suryigs. I learned only later. Only the Dalai Lama, the Sitsab, the kalön and the trungtsi knew about these. The other officials didn't know about them [laughter].   

**Q:**  In the Agreement, it was said that the Military Administration Committee should be set up, but the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama's power would also be there as before. According to your understanding, what were the differences between the responsibilities of the government and the Military Administration Committee?   

**A:**  Regarding the Dalai Lama, [he] would have had his power in Tibet as before. At that time, the Tibet Autonomous Region was not set up, which was the political power. Before the political power was set up, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up. The meaning of [this was that] the Dalai Lama would have his power as before, that he would be the main head of the Tibet Autonomous Region which-he actually became the Director of the Tibet Autonomous Region. It was confirmed that there would not be two governments. Later, the Tibet Autonomous Region was set up and this is the government's political power [where the power is focused].   

**Q:**  TT: You mean the political power should be transferred from one to the other, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we knew that it was impossible to have the Tibetan government and another one there.   

**Q:**  TT: Did you know that from that time?   

**A:**  Yes, I had this understanding of the political power, title, and the livelihood, and I had the understanding that there would be only one Tibetan government and that it was also impossible to have two governments.   

**Q:**  TT: What was the duty of the Military Administration Committee?   

**A:**  It was to gradually convert the Tibetan soldiers into People's Liberation Army [soldiers], and their united duty was to protect the national borders and the internal security of Tibet. This duty should be taken together. Therefore, the two Tibetan Vice Commander-in-Chiefs were appointed to work jointly. There wasn't any talk about all the power.   

**Q:**  After you came to Lhasa, what jobs did you do?   

**A:**  I understood a little of the CCP's policy. So in 1952, I was asked to be a gegen in the school set up by Tibetan military headquarters, where the People's Liberation Army [soldiers] were taught Tibetan.   

**Q:**  TT: Wasn't that called the Tibetan Cadre's School [Ch. zang gan xiao]?   

**A:**  Yes, in addition to me, there was Tangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད], Mrs Künsangtse (Lhajam), and Tsering Lhajam, who is now in India. In 1953, the visiting group [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ] going to inland [mainland China] was started. I was probably 27-28 years old when the Youth League [Tib. གཞོན་ནུ་མཉམས་འབྲེལ་ཚོགས་པ] was started. In this, the director [Ch. zhu ren] was the Dalai Lama's brother, Lobsang Samden, and Shölkang Thubden Nyima [Tib. ཞོལ་ཁང་ཐུབ་བསྟན་ཉི་མ]. I was a committee member [Ch. wei yuan]. In 1956, I was the dzongpön of Tölung Dechen Dzong. At that time, I was a fifth rank [official], letsenpa. Because I got married, my uniform was a Mongolian dress [Tib. སོག་ཆས]. At that time, the County Administration Department [Ch. ban shi chu] was established for making political propaganda and for [managing] livelihood. While I was the dzongpön, the local government gave me a job to work as the liaison [Ch. lian luo] between the Kashag and the Tibetan Work Committee. It was a dredü [liaison] office [Tib. འབྲེལ་གཏུགས]. I would bring the Kashag's information to the Work Committee, mainly it was to the United Front Bureau [Ch. tong zhang bu], and bring their opinion back to the Kashag. So I had three responsibilities; (1) the dzongpön, (2) the liaison office, and (3) the Section Leader [Ch. ke zhang] of the Tibetan Work Committee, the Reception Section [Ch. gong wei jiao ji qu zhao dai ke]. My salary for the dzongpön was a little more than 400 khe of barley and some money. The salary was increased after the government managed the dzong so the personal income of the dzongpön became less. [There was] no salary for [the] liaison [job]. I got Chinese salary for the Reception Office. In the Agreement, it says, "According to the political standards of the Tibetan people, reforms will be done." But some of the higher up kudrak and the Three Great Monasteries didn't agree. They held many meetings in the Jokhang and the Potala.   

**Q:**  When was this? Was it in 1956?   

**A:**  Yes, it was in 1956. At this time, in Tölung Dechen Dzong, there were three kinds of misers. The misers of the monastery, misers of the gerpa and the eight shungyuba miser households. From among the shungyuba, I talked with Sedrong Yume, who was the older brother of Wangyal. When we were chit-chatting, [I said], "Now there is no one who can do the reforms, so it would be good if someone could set up a trial (model)." I just said that [while] chit-chatting. Otherwise, I could not tell them to do the reforms because I was the dzong. Then he said, "I will do the reforms."   

**Q:**  TT: Wangyal's brother might have been very smart and clever, right?   

**A:**  Yes-and there were the trenyog, the moyang, the tenants, the servants and also the nangsen who were made to work, and they also had a little bit [of] land. He did the reforms on about 30 households. The others didn't have the right to do them. He divided the land and the dzo and lent them seed, and he collected a little bit annually. And the government also needed the patriotic grain donation [Tib. རྒྱལ་གཅེས་གཞུང་འབྲུ].   

**Q:**  TT: He was very famous then, right?   

**A:**  Yes, he was almost in danger of being killed. If we had stayed in Tölung, most probably, it would have been difficult...   

