# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0015.02  
##  : with Amdo Samdrup [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་བསམ་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** February 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Amdo Samdrup [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་བསམ་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 58  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1936  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Amdo Samdrup [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་བསམ་གྲུབ] was a monk from Kumbum Monastery who came to Lhasa when he was 21 and entered Drepung's Gomang College. After a few years, he spent most of his time in Lhasa. In this interview, he discusses Ngawang Senge (Lobsang Yeshe) and several other monk officials who wanted to go to China to learn about the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).   

---  
### Tape 2  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0015_02/H_0015_02.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  Around 1952 there were 2 or 3 monk officials who said they wanted to go to China, right?   

**A:**  There may have been 3 or 4. I'm not sure.   

**Q:**  What was their reason for them going down?   

**A:**  Yes. Yes. If we start from here, it's good. They said that they wanted to go to China and examine the aims of the CCP. They were monk officials, right? They said that even if they could not become monks and would have to be with Chinese women [they would go]. They informed the Dalai Lama and then they went to China. They went and within a year or so there was dissension among themselves. They didn't get along.   

**Q:**  Now the reason why they went was that they went to study [at the Minorities Institute] and examine Chinese policy, right?   

**A:**  Yes. They said that they were not going to become communists. There was also Manang's son who was called Manang Bu. He is now in Switzerland.   

**Q:**  Yes, Manang Abo's son is in Switzerland.   

**A:**  Yes. They say he [Manang Abo] was a tough and capable [Tib. གྱོང་པོ] person, but after he came to India, nothing came of him . Then when they [the monk officials] were in China, they didn't get along and they burned their papers. Their plans fell apart. Then in 1956 he [Lobsang Yeshe, also known as Ngawang Senge] came back and then he went to Kalimpong where there were a few government officials like the staff of the Trade Mission, Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and many others. He thought it would work out well so he came to Kalimpong but when he went to make connections with the government officials, they had suspicions and nobody trusted him. When he showed them an easygoing attitude [Tib. ལྷུག་ལྷུག], they suspected him. So he was in a desperate situation. At that time, Jayan Dawa, who a member of the Water-Dragon People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས་ཚོགས་པ], had come to Kalimpong. He told Kungö to forget about it and not to make relations if they are suspicious of him. This is what Jayan Dawa told me. Then he made relations with Gyalo Thondup and he was told to stay and work, but he said that it was not easy since expenses had to be met. He [Losang Yeshe] said, "Gyalo Thondup is a man you want to do something with until his skull would fall on the earth, but our government officials are no good. It's very difficult to make connections with them. If one does something, they say he did this and that, and one can't work." When Gyalo Thondup told me to work, I told him, "This is good, I should work. However, first I want to return to Lhasa and make whatever connections [are needed] and then return." Then Gyalo Thondup told me, "Oh, if you return, you might not be able to come back." Anyway, he returned and made whatever connections he had to. I don't know whether he and Manang Abo knew each other earlier, but at one time they used to stay at my home. During the day, they would leave and at night they would return. When the 4th Tibetan-month was beginning, he wanted to flee through Bhutan to India. He heard that Andru Jinda and the Volunteer Army to Defend Religion were going to begin in Lhoka. He thought that this was good and that he should go there. He then asked <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a> to go into a trance and asked for a prophecy, and the oracle said that it's not time yet. So he did not go. The same thing happened a month or so later. So in this way a few months passed. He himself said to me, "If I stay around here and if it's helpful for religion and politics, then I don't care for my life." He was a peaceful person and went everywhere no matter whether someone was communist or not, and he would say whatever he wanted to the other government officials. He would tell me that if he could wear a talisman, he would feel at ease. At that time, I thought that it was no use being in a situation where one was neither here nor there and may die one day. So, suddenly we left for Lhoka on the 15th of the 12th Tibetan month [24 January 1958].   

**Q:**  This was in 1958? Had Andru Jinda and everyone already left for Shang?   

**A:**  Yes, 1958. Andru had left for Shang already and couldn't return to Lhoka. When we left for Lhoka we stayed at the Gongkar [Tib. གོང་དཀར] Regiment. My relative Phurbu Tsering [Tib. ཕུར་བུ་ཚེ་རིང] was staying with us at my shag. We had to defend the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a> ferry site. There were also 21 or so Gyantse Regiment soldiers there. It was as if we had planned to meet there. They said that they were going to Lhoka. I thought how good of our government troops [to do that]. Their Depön was Kungö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a>. I knew the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Wangdü. There were two shengo. The younger was him and there was another elder shengo. I didn't know the others. I have seen them when they were young. Kungö [Lobsang Yeshe] did not know them and so I introduced them saying that their Depön is Ragashag and we had connections with Ragashag so we decided to die together and live together. The three of us had horses, they didn't. They had two bren-guns and a 303 English Carbine. We took the guns on our horses. At Lhoka, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> people did not have a special separate group. The majority [of volunteers] were Khambas, then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a>s. Like a Khamtsen, we were with the Amdos and we stayed together. As far as money was concerned, we didn't have much. Around 100 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྡོ་ཚད] A currency unit in traditional Tibet that was equal to 50 ngüsang.">dotse</a> which we left with Namgyal Wangdü. When they blew the military bugle, I thought it was coincidentally auspicious [Tib. མ་འགྲིགས་རྟེན་འབྲེལ] because Kungö [Lobsang Yeshe] was a government official and they were the military and they met together. I was very happy. When we got to Gongkar, there must have been about 4 or 5 Amdowas, and some youngsters from Ütsang. They were so happy when we got there. The Magji were all Khambas. One has to tell the truth, don't they? It won't help to lie, right? We were all of the same mind, but probably the Magji said, "You guys are government soldiers and cannot stay with us. You have to stay separate." When they said that, Namgyal Wangdü immediately listened to them, although we had decided to die together and live together. Then the elder shengo said that he knew Amdo Lekshey who was at that time at Dowa Dzong and he did the same. He had also changed. They spoke like they were implying that even Kungö [Lobsang Yeshe] was to go away. I was the one who spoke about Kungö, since they did not know him. So there were some problems. There was Amdo Chöten [Tib. མཆོད་རྟེན] who was in Switzerland and returned here and then died about a year or two ago. He was young and quite brash. He fought with the military headquarters and I was so scared and thought it would be like the saying, "The talks will remain longer than the human life [Tib. མི་ཚེ་ལས་གཏམ་ཚེ་རིང]," if there would be a kind of internal strife without having accomplished anything. The main Commander was Changri Lhagye [Tib. བྱང་རི་ལྷ་རྒྱལ], who was from Chamdo. Later, we found out that this man was excellent.   

**Q:**  Was he called Chamdo Dotse [Tib. རྡོ་ཚེ]?   

**A:**  No. So the Gyantse soldiers and us stayed separate [from the Chushigandru force]. Changri Lhagye and Kungö then had excellent relations. Magji Kunga Samden [Tib. ཀུན་དགའ་བསམ་གཏན] and a younger one, what's his name -- Wangchuk Dorje [Tib. དབང་ཕྱུག་རྡོ་རྗེ]. They were working with Changri Lhagye.   

**Q:**  Some say that Jagö <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Dorje was there.   

**A:**  No. He was not. He was in the Kashag and it was at E Lhagyari where <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> Jimpa [Tib. སྦྱིན་པ] and others were. The main leader was Andru Jinda and Amdo Jimpa. These two made a pledge at Lhasa in the prayer room of Andru Jinda. Anyway, Kungö and Changri Lhagye got on very well and so for 2-3 months everything went on well for everyone because Kungö was always humble and didn't have any pride. The two were to do things secretly -- intelligence work. The main reason for Kungö being killed was because of Andru Jinda. It was not that Jinda did something bad to him, but he felt that he would be going to India empty-handed if he did not [first] meet Andru Jinda. So Changri Lhagye wrote a letter and sent his servant and three of our Amdowas to bring Andru. They met him some place in Kongpo and said that he [Andru] was very happy. There was Amdo Sonam Tsering, who was like our Gyagpön, and an older monk named Amdo Thubden [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན], who the main servant of Kungö. So they went down and after a few days, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ནོར་བུ་གླིང་ཁ] The summer palace of the Dalai Lama.">Norbulinga</a> trouble started. While the Gyantse soldiers were there, it was heard that they had good arms. Actually, all they had was two bren-guns and rifles. It seems that there were many letters telling them to come to Tsetang [Tib. རྩེད་ཐང]. So it seems the two [Gyantse regiment] <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞལ་ངོ] 1. A junior officer in the traditional Tibetan Army in charge of a unit (platoon) of 25 soldiers (same as dingpön). 2. The two head disciplinary officials for all of Drepung Monastery and for the Mönlam Prayer Festival.">Shengo</a> laid a wager as to who would go. The elder one had to go. So they divided the soldiers among themselves. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Wangdü and the others stayed. The ones who went to Tsetang all lost their lives. They said that the elder [shengo] was excellent. When it was said that the trouble at Norbulinga had started, Changri Lhagye and the others said that they now have to go to Norbulinga. However, the day before they were to leave, about 20 Amdos from Shigatse who were bodyguards of Panchen Lama, arrived with good arms. Probably, they had left on the 1st of the month. They had to leave the next day for <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རམ་མ་སྒང] A ferry site on the Lhasa River south of Lhasa City.">Ramagang</a>. It was famous that we had good arms and this probably was useful. Then along with Kungö, Kunga Samden and Wangchuk went to Ramagang taking the better horses and arms. I stayed and so did Changri Lhagye. I saw that he was a very good man. So he went there. Our Amdo soldiers were on this side of Ramagang and Kungö went on the other side. There was Amdo Chokpa [Tib. མཆོག་པ] and Dobdo Tenzin from Lhasa. They were Kungö's servants. There was also Laktey. Most were on the southern side of the river and they went to the other side. Arms were needed. It was said that our government officials were knowledgeable, but they were not immediately giving the arms which were urgently needed. Instead, they resorted to making a list and numbers . So they were able to send two bren-guns, along with 20 303 English Carbines with long barrels and 20 with the short barrels. It seems that the bren-guns were brand new. However, we had no experience with them, so they were useless [Generally, new arms were packed with grease]. Probably it should have been boiled, but we didn't know that. On the road, about 50 people had come with their yellow passes from Norbulinga. They told Changri Lhagye, and we were sent to perform our duty and they stayed with us. When the Dalai Lama left, Kungö was on this side of the river. The Dalai Lama has also mentioned in his biography that Lobsang Yeshe was here. If it was somebody else they would have just left with the Dalai Lama, right? But he thought, "Now it's good that we have taken the Dalai Lama out, but we need some arms." So he went back because of the arms [to get them from the armory]. Once he went back, then it was his karma. There is nothing one can do. So while he was staying there, the war broke out that night. At Jakyakarpo [Tib. བྱ་སྐྱག་དཀར་པོ], the [strategic] place shaped like a lump [Tib. རྡོག་རྡོག] was lost to the Chinese, and this was the place where many people lost their lives at Norbulinga. The Chinese used their machine guns. It was an easy place to shoot to the other side. There was a person called Lobsang Yeshe and another called Yeshe Trinley [Tib. འཕྲིན་ལས] who managed to get out. It was their karma. Amdo Chokpa and Rasa Tenzin and others were saying that he [Kungö Lobsang Yeshe] would have been alright if he stayed for a short time. But Kungö said "No, no," and he volunteered and loaded a few horses and mules with cannon shells and left. He said he had to go. There was a lot of shooting on the other side and they were waving a lot of hats. Kungö thought that those people were Amdowas. Actually, the Amdowas were on this side of the river and they said that they also waved a lot of hats, but he didn't see them. He was not to be blamed. The shooting came from that side and he went there no matter that people stopped him. He died there. So that's where Kungö was killed. There was a monk official named Gyentsen Tashi, who was a good person, who was killed very close to Kungö. Phurbu Tsering was also there. So that's it. He was killed. That day we were on the other side of the river and we had no guns . There were some Amdowas. At Nortölinga, close to Drepung, there was a Chinese military camp. Changri Lhagye thought a lot about attacking that, but all we had were some rifles, no pistols or grenades [bombs]. So nothing came of that. At around dusk, an Amdowa said that Norbulinga was lost and the Gusung soldiers had surrendered. As soon as that was heard, a feeling of great silence, shivering and shuddering [stopped in one's tracks] [Tib. ཚ་ལོང་ངེ], came over all of us. Then the urge to stay vanished and we left. [the rest of the interview is irrelevant as he was talking about the son of Manang Abo who came to Lhasa later]. Oh, I made a mistake. Kungö went to Lhasa, right? Jabo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ], a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གྲྭ་བཞི] 1. An area below Sera Monastery. 2. The location of the Tibetan Armory-Mint Office and the regimental headquarters of the Khadang Regiment, which was also called the Trapchi Regiment.">Trapchi</a> soldier and I had connections and he made good contact with the Trapchi Regiment with Gyagpön Kelsang Dramdrü [Tib. སྐལ་བཟང་དགྲ་འདུལ]. There were meetings at the Potala. In that organization there was Kungö Maya [Tib. རྨ་བྱ], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> and others. We had good contacts with the regiment. There were some Rupön-like people, like the Fourth Rupön. He's dead now.   

**Q:**  Was the organization in 1958? In '57-'58?   

**A:**  In 1958 itself. If one were to relate the resistance against the Chinese, the Water-Dragon People's Association was the first. Then in 1958, those who got along organized. There was Kungö Ying-gön Yeshe Dargye [Tib. དབྱིང་མགོན་ཡེ་ཤེ་དར་རྒྱས] [Tsarong Shape's brother's son] also. Then [tsidrung] Serila [Tib. སེར་རིལ་ལགས] and others like Gyentsen Tashi. If Kungö had left straight from Lhoka, then it would have been alright. He said to me, "One never knows, one might end up dead before anything has even begun." Although there are people who were eloquent and good at writing, it is really hard to find someone who put into action whatever he thought and Kungö [Lobsang Yeshe] was really like this. I also had good relations with <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རག་ཁ་ཤག] The family name of a well known aristocratic official who was a Kalön in the 1950s.">Ragashag</a> when he was the welfare officer in Darjeeling. He was a frank person and when he would come to Kalimpong, he would stay with me. [Talking about some irrelevant things like how the exile government didn't treat Ragashag well regarding appointments] So that's about it, the story of Kungö [Lobsang Yeshe]. The rest I don't remember now.   

