# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0015.01  
##  : with Amdo Samdrup [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་བསམ་གྲུབ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2005**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** , India  
**Date of Interview:** 2 February 1994  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Tsarong Paljor  
**Name:** Amdo Samdrup [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་བསམ་གྲུབ]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** circa 58  
**Date of Birth:** circa 1936  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Amdo Samdrup [Tib. ཨ་མདོ་བསམ་གྲུབ] was a monk from Kumbum Monastery who came to Lhasa when he was 21 and entered Drepung's Gomang College. After a few years, he spent most of his time in Lhasa. In this interview, he discusses some of the early fighting in Amdo and the Water-Dragon YEAR People's Association that arose in 1952.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0015_01/H_0015_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  What is your full name?   

**A:**  My name is Samdrup. People call me Amdo Samdrup.   

**Q:**  Where were you born?   

**A:**  I was born in Amdo.   

**Q:**  Where in Amdo?   

**A:**  My place [Tib. ལུང་པ] was in the countryside.   

**Q:**  What was the name of the place?   

**A:**  It was called the Thandug [Tib. ?]. Actually, that was the name of the monastery. The village was called Kokatshang.   

**Q:**  When did you come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  When I was 21 years old, I came to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  Before that, you were living in down there, right?   

**A:**  Yes, I was a monk in Kumbum [Tib. སྐུ་འབུམ] Monastery.   

**Q:**  At that time, Taktse [Tib. སྟག་འཚེར] Rimpoche was there, right?   

**A:**  We were the same generation and the same age also. He knows all about my homeland. I had a very good teacher. He was a Geshe. I am thinking it is useless to ask about my history because I didn't have any accomplishments.   

**Q:**  No, it is useful. When you were a monk, when the Chinese first came, were you down there?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  In the past, the Chinese came to Amdo, but they were unable to come to Tibet, right?   

**A:**  The Siling [Tib. ཟི་ལིང] Chairman Ma [Ch. ma zhu zhi] fought with the communists very much in the Siling area. We, the Amdo area were unable to stay united. When I was a kid, probably, the communists were making the war. I was about 12 years old and I was living at home. All of a sudden, the 3-4 soldiers of Siling were sent everywhere. We had very good horses in that area. The soldiers took the horses and practiced drills, and they fought a lot and probably, they had killed a lot of Chinese communists.   

**Q:**  Did they make war with the communists in those early times?   

**A:**  Yes. I was 12 years old, and they were making war before that. The Guomindang was there, but the communist had arrived at Ganzi, and they had also arrived at Amdo Jone [Tib. ཅོ་ནེ]. Most of the war was made in Siling in the area of the Lake Kokonor.   

**Q:**  When did you come to Lhasa?   

**A:**  When they were making war. They also taught us some military drills and all of us were gathered at the place called Gangdutang. Some people went to make war and some people didn't need to go. The war was lost and it was said that many soldiers of Siling were killed. The communists came there in 1949 and I was in Lhasa. I heard that it had been 12 years since Siling fought many battles and the communists had not been able to come up. After that, the Chinese came up and Baba Phünwang was also with them. I knew him in the past. He had several brothers. The elderly were saying that he was Guomindang. Actually, he was a spy of the communists. At that time, when Thangchen Rimpoche went to Kumbum to become the abbot, he rented his house to Phünwang. The house was called Namdeleg [Tib. གནམ་བདེ་ལེགས] and the Tibetan government had given the house to Thangchen Rimpoche. I was serving him and he went to China via sea through India. I knew Phünwang, but I didn't know that he was a spy of the communists. Thangchen Rimpoche stayed in Kumbum for about a year and by then many Amdo people had already been killed by the Chinese and he could no longer stay there as the abbot so he came back to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  In the 1950's where were you living in Lhasa?   

**A:**  I was living in Lhasa and also in the monastery. Mainly, I was living in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  You didn't need to stay in the monastery, right? What was the monastery?   

**A:**  It was Gomang [Tib. སྒོ་མང] Tratsang in Drepung.   

**Q:**  Were you a Chöndze at that time?   

**A:**  No. I was not a pechawa. I was just wandering around playing mahjong and dice. I was not a good monk.   

**Q:**  You didn't need to stay in the monks order in the monastery, right?   

**A:**  I stayed there for a couple of years and I had been the steward of the Khamtsen. After that, I spent most of my time in Lhasa.   

**Q:**  In the 1950's, everyone was hearing that the Chinese would liberate Tibet. Do you remember that?   

**A:**  From the early times when I was a kid, the elders were telling me that the communists were not good. So I had that kind of impression. Therefore, I was thinking that the communists didn't have any religion and I knew that communism was not good because I had heard that they were not good since I was a child. But I didn't have any idea in detail about that, because we didn't know about political work. Although I didn't like the ideology of the communists, it was not the case that I didn't like Chinese people.   

**Q:**  In 1950, the Dalai Lama took the temporal and the political responsibility. Before that, Chamdo was lost. Then the Dalai Lama went to Tromo [Yadong] and then they started talking about the 17-Point Agreement, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  After that, Zhang Jingwu came via India. He had two names, Zhang Jingwu and the Zhang Da biao [Representative Zhang], right?   

**A:**  There were two people, Zhang Jingwu and Alu Buzhang. The main leader was Zhang Jingwu and Alo Buzhang was the one next to him.   

**Q:**  Then the Dalai Lama came from Tromo to Lhasa. I think that the 17-Point Agreement had been signed. The government and the Kashag had a lot of things to do according to the terms of the Agreement, but the two sitsab didn't accept that and opposed the Chinese. After a few months, the Water-Dragon People's Association [Tib. ཆུ་འབྲུག་མི་དམངས] arose, right?   

**A:**  Yes, this was in 1952.   

**Q:**  How did you have the relation with this Water-Dragon People's Association?   

**A:**  There were several people who were the main figures, but we just agreed to join that organization spontaneously [Tib. ཁ་འཁྲོག]. The people who set up the association were as follows; Tsha Thamjö Sonam [Tib. ཚ་བ་དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], Gomang Drubtola [Tib. གྲུབ་ཐོབ] Rimpoche, and Trülku Jamyang Tragpa [Tib. འཇམ་དབྱངས་གྲགས་པ] from Loseling [Tib. བློ་གསལ་གླིང].   

**Q:**  How did you learn about the Water-Dragon People's Association in the beginning?   

**A:**  People were telling each other.   

**Q:**  Who told you about that?   

**A:**  There were people delivering messages. After the association was set up, we were called to Jaralinga [Tib. སྦྱར་རག་གླིང་ག], which is located near Kündeling [Tib. ཀུན་བདེ་གླིང]. The message was delivered by the Dobdo Lobsang Tendar [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསྟན་དར] who was from Gomang.   

**Q:**  Were you in Gomang?   

**A:**  Yes. I once met him in the Wongtö Shinga [Tib.འོང་སྟོད་ཞིང་ཁ] market place and he said that we should go to the meeting tomorrow. There was also Japo [Tib. སྦྱར་པོ་བ][See his interview at H.0028], and there was a monk in Gomang called Amdo. Actually, he was not from Amdo.   

**Q:**  Was Japo a monk?   

**A:**  He was a soldier in the Trapchi Regiment, and there was also a person called Wangdü [Tib. དབང་འདུས]. They delivered the messages to attend the meetings.   

**Q:**  Was Wangdü a monk?   

**A:**  Yes. He was a monk from Drepung Loseling. He died. When they delivered the message, I told them, "Do you know how many Chinese spies there are among you?" At that time, there was a person called Tsedor [Tib. ཚེ་རྡོར] who was a good humble person from Tsang. Later, we came to know that the Chinese had used him and he was a spy. I didn't like the Chinese and I attended the meeting in Jarag, but I wasn't capable of doing anything.   

**Q:**  What did you talk about when you went to the meeting and were they talking? Who was the main person talking on the meetings?   

**A:**  Thamjö Sonam was the main person and the main elderly person talking at the meeting. He was talking a lot, but I didn't understand clearly. The main point was about sacrificing one's life which I still remember. He said, "What is there to be shocked about? Our breath is [thin] like a [single hair of a] horse's tail. [So it is easy to die and one's life] might be lost between the moment when breathing in and out. Even if we are killed, we don't care [Tib. དབུགས་རྟ་རྔ་ཙམ་ཞིག་རེད། འདི་ཕར་བཏང་ཚུར་བཏང་ཅིག་རེད། བསད་ནས་བྱེད་ཡས་ཡོད་པ་མ་རེད]." At that time, I didn't know any political ideology. I just didn't like the Chinese. After that, they wrote some petitions and held meetings in Shide [Tib. སྡེ] [Reting's monastery]. After that, some of the members of the association were arrested, and the Chinese set up an office in the Shingra [Tib. ཤིང་ར] near Jokhang and interrogated the people in the association. Some of us then hid in the Jokhang and we just thought about taking them from the Chinese if they arrested them and brought them to that place. I don't know whether we would have been able to do that or not, but on that day, we didn't need to do that. There was a monk called Trehor [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར]. Trehor was the name of the Khamtsen and he used to be a monk in Drepung. After he lost his celibacy, he worked as a servant for Taktra Labrang [Tib. སྟག་བྲག་བླ་བྲང]. He was the main servant of Kungö [Lobsang Yeshe]. He was also in the Jokhang with us. But the Chinese didn't bring them to that place. The (order) to arrest Thamjö Sonam and Tsha Trunyi was given. On that night, Jayan Dawa went to the monastery though he didn't go there knowing the situation. So they [Chinese] told the Tshogchen Shengo to arrest him, and they didn't have any choice but to arrest him. However, they just went through the motions of shutting him up in the monastery, but actually, they didn't arrest him.   

**Q:**  Didn't the Shengo hand him over to the Chinese?   

**A:**  Probably, they didn't have to hand him over to the Chinese. Later, he was in Lhasa, probably, there was a guarantor for him. At that time, they had to disperse the association though internally it was still there. In 1956, we were planning to go to Lhoka. They didn't tell us to come to Lhoka and we were just playing mahjong, but Jayan Dawa agreed spontaneously with Alo Chöndze and decided to go to Lhoka, and they were preparing to go to India through a pilgrimage in Lhoka. Alo Chöndze was handed over to the Tibetan Police Station and he stayed there for a while.   

**Q:**  Previously, did you talk about Alo Chöndze?   

**A:**  I don't think I did. I talked about Alo Chöndze because of Jayan Dawa. Jayan Dawa told me that he told Alo Chöndze, "We should not go saying we are [the people's] representatives. Rather, we should pretend to be going for pilgrimage." Alo Chöndze and Jayan Dawa came to India but they said that they didn't have passports. So they said that they went to Lhoka for pilgrimage. Then we heard about the Buddha Jayanti so they went to India for the Buddha Jayanti.   

**Q:**  Did they come via Bhutan?   

**A:**  Yes. As soon as they arrived in Bhutan, Alo Chöndze acted as a representative so the two of them didn't get along well from that time. Though talking about the bad things is not good, this is what Jayan Dawa told me and he would not tell a lie.   

**Q:**  You can tell me whatever happened.   

**A:**  When they arrived at Siliguri, the people living in Kalimpong came to receive them. Jayan Dawa told me that they lived separately after they arrived at Kalimpong, and Alo Chöndze was thinking and talking about the gold and silver in Sikkim.   

**Q:**  Was it Phünkang Lhajam?   

**A:**  No, I am talking about Alo Chöndze. Jayan Dawa never told a lie. He was surprised by him [Alo Chöndze] from the beginning. After that, Alo Chöndze faced some hardships and it was the case that he didn't do anything. He was also left in the Security Office.   

**Q:**  What did you hear about when they came to Kalimpong? Phünkang Lhajam was there and there was the Jenkhentsisum, right?   

**A:**  Jayan Dawa was a very important person of Shakabpa   

**Q:**  I heard that the Jenkhentsisum didn't get along well. Alo Chöndze and Phünkang Lhajam, and probably Yuthok, were in a different group. What did you hear about that? Baba Lekshey was there, right?   

**A:**  No. He came later on. I didn't hear any other things. Jayan Dawa and Gyetong were there. I got along very well with Jayan Dawa.   

**Q:**  I heard that there was also a monk from Ganden, right?   

**A:**  Yes. That was the monk with the goiter. He was one of the members of the Water-Dragon People's Association. Jayan Dawa knew all about those things because he had a good memory and I was not that attentive. They were talking a lot about Alo Chöndze and Phünkang Lhajam, like they didn't get along well [Tib. མ་མཐུན་པ] with the Tibetan government.   

**Q:**  That was later on, right?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  I heard that Namseling [Tib. རྣམ་སྲས་གླིང], Tseja Gyentsen la [Tib. རྒྱལ་མཚན་ལགས], Tashi Bera [Tib. བཀྲ་ཤིས་དཔལ་རབ] la and some other people were doing something secret with Phala Drönyerchemmo, right?   

**A:**  I am not sure about Gyentsen la. Tashi Bera was there. Probably they might be in the inner circle because they needed somebody from whom to seek advice. At that time, Andru Jinda came out and established the Volunteer Army to Defend Religion. [Tib. བསྟན་སྲུང་དང་བླངས་དམག]. But those people were behind them.   

**Q:**  Did you have any relations with them? Did you have any political relations and relations regarding the monastery?   

**A:**  No, I didn't. But I was standing on their side, and in case the revolt took place, I was planning to charge forward as an ordinary soldier. Otherwise, we didn't talk about political affairs.   

**Q:**  After the Chinese came, they set up many schools and the Youth League, and the Women's Association, right?   

**A:**  Yes. they set up the Youth League called the Potala. In that group, there was Shölkang Jedrung [Tib. རྗེ་དྲུང] who was standing on the communist side from the beginning.   

**Q:**  Regarding this, what was your opinion?   

**A:**  At that time, Kungö Lobsang Samden [Tib. བློ་བཟང་བསམ་གཏན] and Shölkang Jedrung had a very friendly relationship.   

**Q:**  Did you have a friendly relationship with Lobsang Samden?   

**A:**  Yes. We had a very friendly relationship probably, a kind of karmic relation. Mainly, I had relations because of Taktse Rimpoche. We had relation from my homeland [Amdo]. I used to go to Norbulinga very often and I used to stay there.   

**Q:**  Didn't Lobsang Samden talk about politics?   

**A:**  Yes. He talked a little bit about politics. After he became the Acting Jigyab khembo he became less out-going [Tib. སྦུག་སུབ་དོག་པོ] because he had a lot of work to do. Before that, he didn't have much work. Sometimes, I used to go to see Lobsang Samden, and once I told him about the Water-Dragon People's Association and asked whether it would be good to join it or not. He said, "It would be better not to join it." I also knew Phala Drönyerchemmo very well when I was staying in Norbulinga, but there we had no political talk. At that time, Lobsang Samden and Drönyerchemmo were eating dinner alternately every night.   

**Q:**  At that time, did you know what kind of secret things they were doing?   

**A:**  No, I didn't.   

**Q:**  Did you know anything about Namseling?   

**A:**  No. Actually, they were all the same. As I told you before, after Kungö [Lobsang Yeshe] went to China he came back and went to India. After he came back from India, he stayed at my home almost all of the time. They were playing mahjong. All of them were Tibetan government officials. When there was a single bad person, they would keep quiet when they were playing mahjong. They came to play mahjong because of Kungö. They didn't come because of me. Actually, Kungö was from Damba Simkhang [Tib. དན་འབག་གཟིམ་འགག] but he stayed at my home. After they [Gombo Tashi] made war in the north, some of the Amdowas got scattered and they came to Lhasa. That was when Andru Jinda and those people got scattered.   

**Q:**  They fought at Drigung, right?   

**A:**  No, it was not Drigung.   

**Q:**  Wasn't Andru wounded at that place?   

**A:**  That was at the backside of Reting. It was in the north, the place before you reach Kongpo. The war started from Nyemo. When Andru Jinda went to Kongpo, he took the Chinese Lobsang Tashi with him. He was kept by the Trapchi Regiment after he escaped. Another Baba was also with Andru. They didn't trust him much and he ran away to Lhasa. [talks very generally about the Nyemo battles] [The B side is Tsarong Paljor interviewing his father about which Khamtsen their family belonged to and detail about how Tsarong performed regular rituals and from where they callrf the monks. etc. --not translated]   

