# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0018.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Laja Thubden Tempa [Tib. བླ་ཕྱག་ཐུབ་བསྟན་བསྟན་པ]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** May 1993  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Laja Thubden Tempa [Tib. བླ་ཕྱག་ཐུབ་བསྟན་བསྟན་པ]   
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 67  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1926  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Laja Thubden Tempa [Tib. བླ་ཕྱག་ཐུབ་བསྟན་བསྟན་པ] worked in the Tibetan mint at Trapchi with Tsarong Dzasa, and later became a Khenjung and one of the heads of the Laja Office. In this interview, he discusses some of the major Tibetan political figures of the 1950s, as well as government operations at that time. He briefly discusses the old society, tax exemptions and the system of corvée obligations. He also describes, in detail, the Dalai Lama's trip to Yadong in 1950, the appointment of the sitsab, and the signing of the 17-Point Agreement. Finally, he discusses being a part of the Dalai Lama's entourage on his trip to China in 1954.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0018_01/H_0018_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  The Chinese came in the year 1950, right? During this time, the Doji was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> [Minister] Lhalu and after that, Ngabö went [to Chamdo]. It seems that they had different views, is that correct?   

**A:**  Yes, that is said. Now, regarding this, I don't have anything to say [about it] in detail, but we have actually seen [experienced] it. Lhalu's term was up and Ngabö was appointed, and the Chinese danger was there. So because of this, they both did the handing over [transition]. When the Chinese danger was increasing, the government ordered Lhalu to stay for a while since he knew the area and [since] it would be good [for him] to stay and help Ngabö. At that time, the regent was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a> and I heard that this was what he said. When they started the hand over, it seemed that the two did not quite agree. For this reason, Lhalu came straight to Lhasa. In 1950, the Chinese came up to Tibet to control Tibet after their communist victory in China. When this happened, Ngabö telegrammed saying that this was what was happening. So the government must have told him to do what he could. In 1950, the Chinese attacked towards Chamdo, and the Doji could not stay. He retreated until Drugugön and the Chinese captured Chamdo. Before that, there were some of our government troops and militia there, but it seems that the Chinese outnumbered them and they lost. So the Chinese came up to where they were at Drugugön and arrested them. At Chamdo, it seems that the government had a large ammunition dump and that was set on fire. It must have been under the orders of Ngabö, and the dump was set on fire since it would have fallen into enemy hands. Then at Drugugön, they were arrested and put into prison at Chamdo. This is what I heard. Regarding this, the people who were the staff of the Doji, like Tsatrütsang Nyimala [Tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་ཚང་ཉི་མ་ལགས] who is in Nepal, I think he can talk [about this] in detail. I think he is still there. He was part of the staff. We only know what we heard. When they were arrested, the Chinese military leader was most probably Wang Qimei. He came and started being very diplomatic, saying that between us brothers it was too bad that this had to happen, and he started crying. The Chinese, as you know, are very deceitful [Tib. གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ཆེན་པོ]. Anyway, it seems that they were being very smooth since their militant action was already done. Then <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Gyentsen Phüntso and one lay official arrived at Lhasa. They reported that the Chinese said that they were not going to come beyond Chamdo. Another one of their sweet talks, which was full of lies. Anyway, they said that they were not coming beyond Chamdo and to please send people to negotiate. Anyway, it seems that they needed to start the 17-Point Agreement. It was sort of said that representatives should be sent to talk and that the Chinese were not going to come to Lhasa. At that time, I was the tsendrön and Gyentsen Phüntso was also a tsendrön. He is from Bumtang Shagtsang [household]. I asked him what happened. He said, "Oh, there is nothing to worry about, there is no problem at all." Anyway, they would only know the outside appearances and not the real internal matters. He said [something] to the effect that things were all right and that he was going to request that representatives be sent for discussions. So there was nothing else to talk [about] except it seems they needed the 17-Point Agreement. The situation was grave and Taktra was getting on in age, and he was not keeping very well. He had some leg problem. So he requested the Dalai Lama to take over the political and religious reigns of the government. The Kashag and the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དྲུང་ཡིག་ཆེན་མོ] The title of the four heads of the Yigtsang Office (Ecclesiastics Office).">drunyichemmo</a>, asked the oracles to go into trance in the Dalai Lama's room. They consulted the deities through the oracles. Gadong [Tib. དགའ་གདོང] mainly prostrated and reported that the time has come for the Dalai Lama to take over the reins of the government. The Dalai Lama did and Taktra resigned. This is in short what happened.   

**Q:**  When Ngabö and Lhalu were there, they had different opinions, is that correct? It seems that Ngabö had no intention of fighting.   

**A:**  It seems that that is so. During Lhalu's time, it seems he had made some preparations for making war and he had some idea of putting up a fight. So Ngabö went down [to Chamdo], and it would have been good if there was help during the crisis. However, it seems that they did not agree. So Ngabö took over and Lhalu came up. It was during this time that the Dalai Lama took over the reins of the government. And, bless the Dalai Lama, since he is an extraordinary person [Tib. བསམ་གྱིས་མི་གྱབ་པ], he released all the prisoners all over Tibet, including <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀ་ཤོད་པ] A famous Tibetan aristocrat who was involved in many important political intrigues.">Kapshöba</a>, Khardo [Tib. མཁར་རྡོ], Tsenya [Tib. རྩེ་ཉ] and the younger Reting Dzasa, who were sentenced to life imprisonment during the Reting crisis. Kapshöba was at Nedong [Tib. སྣེ་གདོང]. Then the Dalai Lama the Legjö [Legung], and I think that at that time the head was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་དབང] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. Sawang was also a term of address for a Kalön/Shape.">Sawang</a> Surkhang and the drungtsi. And there were other officials who were of the fourth rank and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མཁན་ཆུང] A rank/title for monk officials that was equal to 4th rank (tib. རིམ་བཞི) officials in the lay aristocratic side of the traditional government bureaucracy.">khenjung</a>, and from the 5th ranking lay and monk officials, and the abbots and representatives of the three great monasteries. The Legjö Legung was started. The Dalai Lama did the loan investigation on the system of charging interest on the interest [Tib. སྐྱེད་ལ་སྐྱེད་རྒྱག] and made a great amount of loan exemptions all over Tibet. Earlier, when the government officials went to the government's <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, there were taxes to be paid to the government and they had income to collect. Also the dzongpön were privately forcing the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> into buying things at a loss [Tib. འབམ་ཚོང]. This was done in different degrees according to the greediness of the individual dzongpön. The dzongpön were not able to deliver the income to the government that was written in the tradition books. In addition to [loans for] the farmers and the nomads, there were some tax exemptions granted because of crop failures and irrigation problems, and also exemptions for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> families who had become extinct. So the dzongpön were unable to deliver the income as stated earlier. They just delivered the amount that the previous ones did. In the end, the government did not get much income. Then it seems that some of the dzongpön had a salary and some did not. Therefore, later, all the dzong were managed by the government and all the dzongpön got a salary, and whatever income they got from the dzong was to be delivered to the government [Tib. གཞུང་འཛིན་བུམ་པ་སིབ་བླུག]. The Dalai Lama said that the incomes must be collected by the Legjö, so there were great plans and reforms.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for starting the Legjö at this time? What was the initial talk about this?   

**A:**  Whatever it was, it was said that some reforms needed to be made for the government. The Dalai Lama had taken over the reins of the government and we couldn't just continue the old ways [Tib. སྔར་ལམ]. In Tibet, there were the government, the aristocratic and the religious estates. There was also such a thing as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཞུང་རྒྱུགས་པ] A type of bound peasant/miser/serf whose lord was the government rather than an aristocrat or monastery/lama. They usually had sizable land holdings and were primarily responsible for providing the corvée transport and riding animal tax for the Tibetan government&#x27;s transportation system. Often translated as, &quot;Government taxpayer serfs.&quot;">shungyupa</a> <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> (government miser) who had to work for whatever taxes the government told them to work [for]. There was no way to say that that was too much and I couldn't do it. But the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[sger pa] 1. Aristocrats, aristocratic families. 2. Private students in the government&#x27;s Tse labdra monk official training school.">gerpa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཆོས་གཤིས] A &quot;religious&quot; estate held by a monastery or lama.">chöshi</a> had their land tenure documents [Tib. བཀའ་གཏན], and they would use that and would not easily perform the taxes. They would provide whatever taxes were stated in the tenure document. Among them, the Labrang and the three great monasteries, the lower and upper tantric schools [Tib. རྒྱུད་གྲྭ་སྟོད་སྨད], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྣམ་རྒྱལ] 1. A person&#x27;s name. 2. The name of the Dalai Lama&#x27;s monastery located in the Potala Palace [tib. rnam rgyal grwa tshamg].">Namgyal</a> Tratsang and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གནས་ཆུང] 1. One of the main protector deities of the Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama. 2. The monastery in which the medium of Nechung resides that is located just east of Drepung Monastery.">Nechung</a>, who were called the 7 great monasteries [Tib. ཆེ་བཙན་བདུན], were very stubborn. In their tenure documents, it was written that unless there would be important military affairs and severe flooding that the canal couldn't hold, their taxes would be exempted [Tib. དམག་དོན་གལ་པོ་ཆེ་དང་ཆུ་ཆེན་ཡུར་མ་གཤོང་མ་བྱུང་ན་ཁྲལ་རིགས་རྣམས་ཆག་ཡང་ཡིན]. Since they had many tenure documents, they wouldn’t work for the taxes. Therefore, the taxes were unequal, right? So for this reason, the economy of Tibet was dependant on agricultural and nomadic [activities]. One could say that manufacturing was practically non-existent. Even trade was just in name and there wasn't any large scale trading. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁམས་པ] A person from the Kham region, a Tibetan from the Khamba (Khampa) sub-cultural group.">Khamba</a> traders bought tea from Dartsedo. If there were 10 boxes, then the tax was one box. Except for this, there weren't many taxes. It seems the Dalai Lama was thinking along the lines that the earlier ways had to be changed. That the government and the subjects must both have a good condition. For this reason, the Legjö began. The miser profited a lot from the loan exemptions. In the past, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲལ་པ] The class of bound peasant/miser/serf households who held farmland and had to fulfill large corvée tax obligations to their manorial estates/lords. They are often called taxpayer households in English. While some of these were well off by local standards, many were poor due to a variety of factors such as heavy debts and a dearth of able-bodied workers in their households.">treba</a> (taxpayer serfs) had to wait to send the horse corvée and the pack animals on the main routes -- but not on the side ones. During the time of the 13th Dalai Lama, I think it was in the Iron Horse and Iron Sheep years, wages were fixed for the horse corvée, pack animals, and the people when they transported stuff for the government. After the death of the 13th Dalai Lama, it may have increased a little bit. Earlier, the rates were not high. After the 13th and when this Dalai Lama , I think it was increased a bit. Anyway this was the Legjö's task.   

**Q:**  During the period of the 13th and 14th, we had a lot of problems regarding the regents, like Reting and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྟག་བྲག] The regent of Tibet who replaced Reting in 1941 and served until 1950 when the 14th Dalai Lama assumed power.">Taktra</a>, right? Compared to the earlier period of the 13th, had the government system and other things deteriorated during the Reting and Taktra [regencies]?   

**A:**  Obviously it did. After the death of the 13th, Reting and the previous Dalai Lama's relative, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གླང་མདུན] The name of the family of the 13th Dalai Lama.">Langdün</a>, were in charge. They worked together for about 2 or 3 years. The previous regents probably worked alone. Reting implied that he also wanted to be the regent alone. Anyway, Langdün resigned and he was paid the salary of the prime minister (Tib. silön), as before.   

**Q:**  The reason I am asking you this is because I was thinking that during the time of the regents, things were done recklessly and now there was the wish to organize it well so they set up the Legjö.   

**A:**  No, that was not the reason. No, this was done as soon as the Dalai Lama took over the reins of the government. Generally, the salaries of the government workers from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་བློན] The Chief (or Prime) Minister in the traditional Tibetan government. This position was usually filled only when the Dalai Lama was out of Lhasa.">silön</a> to the messengers [Tib. བང་ཆེན] and the sweepers [Tib. གད་པ] were increased. In addition to that, the additional items given during New Years and other celebrations, like bonuses [Tib. བཟོས་གསོས], were now banned. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a> were managed by the government and likewise, all the government workers received a salary according to one's rank. The Legjö drew up the various plans and the plans were submitted to the Dalai Lama for his approval [Tib. ཕྱག་རྟགས་ཕུལ], and that was how it was decided. A lot of changes were made and they were really done.   

**Q:**  During 1951 [question not finished]   

**A:**  And so around 1951, the Chinese situation was getting grave and they were getting greedier and greedier. And the Tibetan people requested, along with the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> and everybody, that it would be dangerous for the Dalai Lama to stay and that it may be better to move to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> for a while, since there may be a danger that the Chinese might come all of a sudden. So the Dalai Lama went to Yadong and, as for the in charge of politics at Lhasa, Khenche Lobsang Tashi [Tib. མཁན་ཆེ་བློ་བཟང་བཀྲ་ཤིས] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> Tsewang Rabten [Tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ་ཚེ་དབང་རབ་བརྟན] were appointed as <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> [acting silön]. So the Dalai Lama went to Yadong and the main decisions were consulted with the Dalai Lama while the minor ones the two sitsab decided. Representatives had to be sent down for the 17-Point Agreement. From what the Chinese were saying, it seems that they only wanted Ngabö for [making] the Agreement. What they said was, "We need someone who has full power to sign the 17-Point Agreement [Tib. དབང་ཆ་ཙང་མ་ཡོད་པའི་དོན་ཚན་བཅུ་བདུན་འཇོག་མཁན་དགོས་ཀྱི་ཡོད]." Actually what they wanted were representatives, but with Ngabö as the main one. I can't tell you the specifics, but they must have said that. I was just a tsendrön, and primarily I didn't meddle in political affairs. Ngabö was a prisoner at Chamdo and he was to go to Beijing. Then there was Künsangtse Dzasa, Drunyichemmo Lhautara [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར], the ex-nendrön Thubden Lengmön [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་ལེགས་སྨོན] and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བསམ་ཕོ] The abbreviated name of one of the largest and most powerful aristocratic families (Samdru Phodrang).">Sambo</a> Sey [Tib. བསམ་ཕོ་སྲས]. I think it was the four of them and the interpreter was probably Taklha.   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  Actually, it was called the 17-Point Agreement and it was to be done as an agreement [Tib. གྲོས་མཐུན]. However, it seems that the Chinese had already written up the proposals [Tib. གྲོས་གཞི]. So it was said that in the 17-Point Agreement there were certain things that were not quite in agreement. It is said that Lhautara spoke up for that. It is mentioned in his story.   

**Q:**  It is said that at first there were 10 points, which later became 17.   

**A:**  Yes, it must be. But mainly, there was no scope for discussions. There was no agreement. The moment one spoke about that it should be agreeable, they said, "If that is the case, then all we have to do is give the order to the military and Lhasa will be taken in one fell swoop." So there was no agreement and Lhautara was severely scolded. So there was no agreement. Anyway, since the 17-Point Agreement was based on the communist system, the preliminary articles looked very pleasing with statements like the Tibetan political and religious system, the status and power of the Dalai Lama, and the private monasteries were to remain as before. Towards the end they said something about the "Common Program" [Ch. gong tong gang ling], which seems to have a lot of articles concerning communism. So it was said that it would be done according to this and that there would be reforms according to the wishes of the people. And that a Military Administration Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] would be instituted. This is what was said. Now, I was not in a politically responsible position. I was a tsendrön and did whatever the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མགྲོན་གཉེར་ཆེན་མོ] 1. The Dalai Lama&#x27;s Lord Chamberlain. He was one of the most important monk officials in the Tibetan government and was the head of the Tse ga, the Dalai Lama&#x27;s secretariat. 2. A high economic managerial position in some large monasteries.">drönyerchemmo</a> ordered. We didn't get to politically important situations, nor do I know about them. However, this is what I saw and heard.   

**Q:**  Well, sometimes you must also hear things.   

**A:**  Yes, like what I am mentioning to you now.   

**Q:**  What was this Common Program, Gongtong Gangling, that you mentioned? [It was the precursor to the constitution]  

**A:**  It seems to be a certain chapter dealing with communist reforms. Like democratic reforms and things like that. I think they were saying that what reforms the people wanted to do, that they had to be done. So even when we didn't know the facts of the Gongtong Gangling, they just put it in the Agreement. The whole thing was just suppression [Tib. བཙན་དབང]. Ngabö was a prisoner who went to make the Agreement. Since the others were under Ngabö, there wasn't anything to do except for Ngabö to sort of look into the matter.   

**Q:**  It seemed that they could send telegrams from Beijing to Yadong.   

**A:**  I don't know whether there was a telegram or not. The Chinese had one. At Chamdo, there was the telegraph man, Mr. Ford or something. He was imprisoned and I don't know whether he had any assistant or not. The Englishman was imprisoned and later he was released.   

**Q:**  During this time of the 17-Point Agreement and when the Dalai Lama was in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, where were you?   

**A:**  I was at Lhasa.   

**Q:**  So you were not at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>?   

**A:**  No, I was not. And that's what happened. The 17-Point Agreement was something done forcefully and there was no agreement or substance [Tib. ཁུངས་ལུང]. It was an agreement based on force. It was a ploy to get one's feet into Tibet, and the beginning of the document was to trick the Tibetan people with the end of the document resulting in the changing of the society to communism. There was nothing to do except to leave it as they had said. If one tried to talk, then they made stern replies. Forget about an Agreement, they were talking like they were going to make the war up here [in Lhasa]. So there was nothing to do except listen to what they said. Finally, the time came for seals and signatures. Now, according to our Tibetan custom, whether it was the treaty between Tibet and the British, or between Siling and Tibet, or treaties regarding Chinese invasions and the Tibetans expelling them, all of this depended on the seal and there were no signatures. Signatures were something [of a] foreign custom and there weren't any in the old days. Ngabö, since he was the Doji, he got a government official seal and it seems that he hid it in his sash. He said he did not have the seal. Since he was a prisoner, he thought that he may be punished for having the seal, or, he thought that since the terms were dictated, he did not want to put the seal [on it]. However, he did not use the [Doji's] seal. So they made new seals and those were used. So the seals are false. In our tradition, false seals are considered very bad and they are not accepted at all. So it seems that on the one hand, Ngabö did not use the seal because he had loyalty towards the country of Tibet and the people. On the other hand, if one looks at his conduct [Tib. བྱ་སྤྱོད], he put his faith in the Chinese. It is said that he was like a party member, but I have no proof of that. Though that is what is said about him. For this reason the Chinese still regarded him highly. So I am kind of unsure about this, but I think it was good that he didn't use the official seal. On the other side, since he was a prisoner, he must have been afraid and didn't use the seal. . Then the Chinese came up and they said that they were going to start the Military Administration Committee. In the beginning of the document, it looked very appealing and they also sort of said that they were not going to come up from Chamdo. Then they said that they were not going to make changes on monastic and individual estates. At the same time, it also said that if the people said that changes should be made, then changes would be made. Anyway, like rubber, it was made so that it could be pulled anyway one wanted. Like the saying, "The Chinese are [ruined] by suspicion and the Tibetans are [ruined] by hope [Tib. རྒྱ་དྭོགས་པ་བོད་རེ་བ]," I was thinking that maybe they might treat us quite well. Then from China, the representative Zhang Dai biao, a military officer and an <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> interpreter came to Tibet. Then he went to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and suggested that the Dalai Lama return to Tibet and that they were going ahead. They must have also said that there was no cause for alarm, as they were only interested in implementing what was in the Agreement. Anyway, from Yadong, the Dalai Lama returned to Lhasa.   

**Q:**  It seems from one perspective, since Ngabö from the start was not going to fight, there was nothing to do except talk. When the Dalai Lama was at <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, wasn't there any talk with Beijing?   

**A:**  Who?   

**Q:**  The Dalai Lama and our <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> were in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and Ngabö in Beijing?   

**A:**  Ngabö came up?   

**Q:**  No, while it was going on. Weren't some representatives sent from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> abroad?   

**A:**  Before the Dalai Lama came to <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, the Chinese were already invading. The government sent <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Thubden Gyalpo [Tib. ཐུབ་བསྟན་རྒྱལ་པོ] to talk at Beijing via India. The Chinese didn't pay any attention to them. What they wanted, it seems, was the 17-Point Agreement.   

**Q:**  <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and what was his name, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> what?   

**A:**  Thubden Gyalpo.   

**Q:**  What was the reason? Were they to go and discuss, or what?   

**A:**  They were to discuss that an army should not be sent. If you look in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a>'s book it is clear.   

**Q:**  So since Ngabö was already there, they wanted Ngabö?   

**A:**  They wanted Ngabö himself . Unless they talked with Ngabö, they would not allow talks from here.   

**Q:**  The representatives who were sent from here were to talk with foreign countries, and so the Chinese probably felt that [it was not appropriate] since they regarded Tibet as a part of China.   

**Q:**  Yes, what I was asking you earlier, <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞྭ་སྒབ་པ] The name of the family of an important lay official during the 1940s and 1950s.">Shakabpa</a> and others were to be sent to England or wherever, and petitions were sent to the United Nations. In reality, there was no one from the outside who was willing to help.   

**A:**  Therefore, they mainly sent the two, and then [they were to send them] to America, England, France, India - to about 4 to 5 countries. And they were to request help, saying that the Red Chinese had invaded our borders. So two people were [to be] sent to each [government], a monk and a lay official. They left Lhasa and they stayed at Gyantse and Yadong. From there they were to contact the various foreign governments, and when they sought permission to come, they did not pay any attention [to our representatives]. [They did not go]  

**Q:**  As I look at it, from one perspective, nobody was helping so it was difficult to fight. How many soldiers did we have in the eastern Tibetan area?   

**A:**  Oh, I can't tell you in numbers. There were quite a number of them, and then there was supposed to be a militia of some sorts. But there was no way to challenge them in terms of arms and all.   

**Q:**  Because of this, Ngabö, and likewise maybe others, thought, "Well, no one is helping from the outside and it's not possible to fight. So things may just turn out to be alright." Besides Ngabö, there must have been other officials who were thinking along these lines.   

**A:**  I guess. I don't know what others were thinking. But that's what happened and they tried whatever they could. At that time, Zhang Dai biao came to Lhasa, and the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were also there. When he came up, the two sitsab did not go to receive him. Later, I think he met them at the Lhasa Jokhang. He [Zhang] stayed at old <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s house which they rented, and a liaison officer [Tib. སྣེ་ཤན] was appointed. He was a very demanding person, saying that this and that were not alright. And we, of course, didn't have all the facilities of a foreign country, right? The Tibetan ways, it seems, he did not like. So right from the beginning, the Chinese were showing their power. During this time, the Chinese were making presentations to the sitsab and others.   

**Q:**  So during this time you were in Lhasa? What work were you doing?   

**A:**  I was a tsendrön.   

**Q:**  So you had to stay at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a> [secretariat] all the time?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Then in 1951, when there was all of this talk about the 17-Point Agreement, you might have heard something.   

**A:**  What?   

**Q:**  While you were at Lhasa.   

**A:**  Regarding the 17-Point Agreement, I don't have anything to say besides what I already said.   

**Q:**  But while at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a>, you tsendrön must have been together and discussed about this?   

**A:**  Yes, we did that and it would be announced [meaning unclear]. It was like that. And then the Dalai Lama came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> and they stayed in Lhasa, right?   

**Q:**  When Zhang Jingwu first came, did the government have to welcome them? Did the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> go?   

**A:**  Where?   

**Q:**  Zhang Jingwu came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, right?   

**A:**  From <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a>, a liaison officer was appointed for them. I think it was the Phari [Tib. ཕག་རི] Dzong [head] and a tsidrung. Two common ranking [Tib. དཀྱུས་མ] officials were appointed. He met the Dalai Lama and we don't know what was said or told, right? He arrived straight at Lhasa and the government received him at Kyangthang Naga [Tib. རྐྱང་ཐང་ན་ཁ]. And as I mentioned earlier, there was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཁྲི་སྨོན] The name of the aristocratic family of an important lay official .">Trimön</a>'s house where his stay was arranged. A liaison officer was appointed there. And then the talks started about [how] the number of Chinese was increasing and about [how] this and that were not all right . After some time, the liaison officers were not required and they [the Chinese] stayed there.   

**Q:**  After Zhang Jingwu arrived [side A of the tape ended]   

**A:**  [part missing] So minister, this is what happened.   

**Q:**  The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> had some problems with the Chinese leaders, right?   

**A:**  Yes. After the Dalai Lama took over the reins of the government, a lot of reforms were done. However, they did not pay any attention to this and insisted on the terms of the 17-Point Agreement. [In other words, he seems to be saying that they wanted reforms according to the 17-Point Agreement and did not like or agree, or did not care about the Tibetan reforms]. The two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> and Zhang Jingwu, when they met, by this time, the Chinese had already lied about not coming beyond Chamdo and quite a lot of soldiers had already arrived. Then food and other commodities became scarce. The 2 sitsab said that Tibet was a small country and they didn't want so many soldiers, and the price of food was even increasing, so the army should withdraw. They were not at all listening to this. Aside from this, they said that the facilities in Tibet were meager and that they had come to develop Tibet. That roads had to be built and an airport. The latter was made in the north. When asked what they were going to do with the airport, they said that it was for the development of Tibet since Tibet was poor. When they insisted, the two sitsab were being very tough [Tib. མཁྲེགས་པོ]. Aside from this, because of religion, we couldn't have our national flag on the Potala, and so we had ours on the Tibetan Military Headquarters [Tib. མགཇིགང] which was located just below the Potala. The Chinese wanted that to be taken down, but the two sitsab absolutely refused.   

**Q:**  Were they saying that they wanted to hoist the Chinese flag or were they saying that they wanted to take the Tibetan flag down?   

**A:**  They were not saying that they wanted to hoist the Chinese flag. They were saying that they wanted to take the Tibetan flag down. But as soon as you take that down, they will say they want to hoist their flag, right?   

**Q:**    

**A:**  The Chinese would not think it was superstitious to hoist flags on their roof tops because it was the Chinese flag. There were such disagreements with the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, who were being very tough. Our two sitsab met with Zhang Jingwu and Zhang Guohua, and it seems our shape were there. It is said that among them, there was not one who was able to speak up. So the two sitsab spoke up, and it seems that there was never any agreement, only disagreements. Then they said that the two sitsab must resign, and [they] approached the Dalai Lama regarding this. So they had to resign, and for the time being, there were no sitsab, only the Kashag.   

**Q:**  During this time, there was also the People's Association, right?   

**A:**  During the time of the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, the People's Association arose. In the 17-Point Agreement, there was [a clause] which said that democratic reforms would be done if the people agreed. It was sort of left up to the people. So from the various <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྫོང] A district in the traditional Tibetan governmental structure. This large administrative unit was headed by one or two district heads (tib. dzongpön [རྫོང་དཔོན]) appointed by the Tibetan government. Typically there was one lay official and one monk official who were jointly sent from Lhasa for three year terms. They were responsible for collecting taxes and adjudicating disputes in their district. These dzong were equivalent to counties (ch. 县) in the current Chinese system of administration.">dzong</a>, the people said that they did not want to change and wanted to stay as before, and many petitions were received. Secondly, from Lhasa, the People's Association rose up, like Bumtang Trunyila [a servant of the lay official Bumtang], Lhabju [Tib. ལྷབ་ཕྱུག] from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a>, a <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> of Shügüpa [Tib. ཤུད་ཁུད་པ] and Alo Chöndze. I don't remember the rest. They were the representatives of the People's Association at Lhasa. The petitions from the various dzong have that the people from the dzong said that they didn't want any changes. They said that there were too many soldiers, the food situation was no good and it was also difficult to work on the roads. I don't remember the various articles of the complaint, but there were many. The Chinese said that the People's Association was a false one and gave orders that they must be arrested. When they said that they were false, Alo Chöndze - what was he?   

**Q:**  A Litangba. Now there was an earlier People's Association.   

**A:**  Yes, there was one earlier, but I cannot tell you clearly [about this].   

**Q:**  With <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a>, Chandzö Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས], then Tsha Trunyila [Tib. ཚ་དྲུང་ཡིག་ལགས].   

**A:**  Yes, Sera Tsha Trunyila. Then Jambey Dawa [Tib. འཇམ་དཔལ་ཟླ་བ], then Kamekang [Tib. དཀར་མེ་ཁང] Chöndze. It is said that they did something, but I don't know the full story. But they were not put in prison. I don't know whether they were there or not [connected with the first People's Association]. They were imprisoned in the Lhasa police barracks. I think it was for a few months.   

**Q:**  You are talking about Alo Chöndze and all?   

**A:**  Yes. Lhabju died in the prison. They [Chinese] said that they were the false People's Association. How could that be? Alo Chöndze was from Litang and either born in Lhasa, or he came when he was very young and became a monk in Sera, and he was a servant of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གདོང་པོར] The name of an aristocratic family. The family was also known as Tashi Lingpa [tib. བཀྲིས་གླིང་པ].">Dombor</a>, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དགེ་རྒན] 1. Teacher in a school. 2. In monastic settings it also refers to an adult monk who acted as a guardian to a younger monk. In such cases, the younger monk typically lived in the gegen&#x27;s apartment (shag). In monasteries, however, it could also mean a real teacher, or the monk who served as the guarantor for a new monk.">gegen</a> of Ngawang Rigdrol [Tib. ངག་དབང་རིགས་གྲོལ]. He was a trader. Bumtang Trunyi was a servant of the aristocrat Bumtang. Lhabju, I think was Shügüpa's miser. They were all real Tibetans. If Tibetans who worked for the Tibetans were called false, this was baseless and it was all done by force. So how can this be false? Who else of the People's Association [was] supposed to come forth? If non-Tibetans did it, then they were not Tibetans. One could say that they were from another country, so we should not pay attention to them. But it was not like that.   

**Q:**  I think the Chinese may have been thinking in the western sense of a democracy. They were probably thinking that the majority did not rise up, but only a few. They must have talked from that angle.   

**A:**  The people from Lhasa and nearby districts discussed and they appointed representatives. The three of them couldn't do it by themselves, right? So they said that this was false. So what should one say?   

**Q:**  When the Dalai Lama returned, you were at the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. འགག] 1. Abbreviation of Tsega, the Secretariat Office of the Dalai Lama.">gaa</a> .   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  When you were there, didn't the Chinese come?   

**A:**  According to the traditional custom in the earlier days, the Chinese could only talk with the Foreign Office. Even an audience with the Dalai Lama was not easy. They had to ask through the Foreign Office and the Kashag. But the Chinese came directly. There was nothing but bullying. It was like that.   

**Q:**  Now, you mentioned something about Lhautara's writing. It is said that after the Dalai Lama came from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[ch. 亚东] The Chinese name for the Tibetan town called Tromo that is located on the Sikkim border.">Yadong</a> to Lhasa, then Ngabö came, right? So there had to be some talk about the 17-Point Agreement. The Kashag discussed and a Assembly meeting was called, and [they] talked for many hours [about] how the 17-Point Agreement was signed.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  He [Ngabö] spoke for many hours about what transpired during the talks. Then he said that they could give him any punishment. Then the Assembly said that there wasn't anything else that they could have done.   

**A:**  I see. Ngabö said?   

**Q:**  Yes, that he could not do more than that, implying, I guess, that he did well. Later, the Assembly suggested that it may be a good idea to accept the 17-Point Agreement. Then the Dalai Lama sent a telegram saying that he was happy and that he accepted the 17-Point Agreement. Regarding the telegram, the Chinese have published all of that. Now, during this time, you were in Lhasa, right? Have you heard anything like that?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa. No, I have never heard anything like that. I have never heard that until today.   

**Q:**  About the meeting?   

**A:**  The Assembly did meet. That I saw. And they did mention this at the meeting. At the meeting, they talked about the 17-Point Agreement and the Military Administration Committee. They were asked what the Military Administration Committee was going to do. They were thinking that this wouldn't interfere in our affairs. There was this representative from Ganden who said, "What is this Military Administration Committee? What is it going to do? I can't figure out all of this. It's all blackish, like being enveloped by mist. I don't understand." He was not to be blamed. He did not understand, right? No one interpreted anything to him. There were those who knew, however. So they said that the Military Administration Committee was going to start, and step by step, the Chinese will get more and more greedy. Then, I think it was towards the end of 1953 that it was said that there was to be a National People's Congress [Ch. da hui; Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མེ་ཚོགས་ཆེན] meeting in China in 1954, and that the Dalai Lama must attend it.   

**Q:**  I see, this was the National People's Congress or something.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. Da hui means big meeting. The Tibetan people did not at all like the Dalai Lama going to China. Some said that it was good to go and that if he did not go [something would happen]. There was talk back and forth. It was said that if the Dalai Lama did not go, then the Panchen Lama would get the power, as if at the meeting that was going to take place the Panchen would be given a big title. It was sort of said that the Dalai Lama's power would be lost to the Panchen. There were a lot of talk like that. Later, the Dalai Lama was also kind of in a dilemma, and the divine lottery (Tib. senriy) was done and it was decided to go, and the Dalai Lama went to China. That year, there was a lot of rain, and in Powo [Tib. སྤོ་བོ] and Kongpo, it was not possible to join the motorable road. The Dalai Lama and a small entourage travelled by car for a day or two, and then they rode. Around the Kongpo area, there was so much rain that the roads were terrible and the bridges got washed out. It rained continuously, so diversions had to be taken here and there. Then there were landslides and roads got blocked. We were there as part of the entourage. Even when we got to Kongpo Giamda, the rains had not stopped. The roads were getting worse from there on, and they were saying that we really couldn't risk taking the Dalai Lama on this route. So we asked that the Dalai Lama be taken via the northern route. This Chinese leader, Zhang Dai biao, was also with the party. We asked that the Dalai Lama be taken by the mid-northern route [Tib. བྱང་ལམ་བརྨ]. He replied, "Oh, this is not possible. We are going to take the Dalai Lama and you all can go whichever way you want. You can go this way or via the northern route, any route you want!" The entourage said, "The Tibetan people have put the Dalai Lama in our hands and given us the responsibility, so it is not possible for the Dalai Lama to go one way and we another." So we had some disagreements. But finally, the Dalai Lama went by the worse route, as insisted upon by the Chinese. The Dalai Lama and the Kalöns had to wear rubber boots and wade through the mud, which almost reached up to his knees. Then they had to watch out for falling rocks and as things cleared, planks were put on the mud so that they could walk. Below was water with high waves, so he had a difficult journey. After passing through Po, we got to a lousy motorable road. Even the accommodation arrangement was rather "mediocre" [Tib. ཐབས་ཆག]. Once we got to China, since we were under Chinese power, there was no choice but to go ahead. After Po, we did reach the motorable road. We got to Tsha Pagshö [Tib. ཚ་བ་དཔའ་ཤོད], Traya [Tib. བྲག་གཡབ], and Chamdo. At Chamdo, [we] stayed for a day or two, and then [we] went to Derge Jomda [Tib. སྡེ་དགེ་འཇོ་མདའ], and then to the ferry site at Gamtog Drukha [Tib. སྐམ་ཐོད་གྲུ་ཁ] and into Tiu [Tib. ཏྲེ་ཧོར]. Then to Tiu Nyamdogön [Tib. ?], and then to Minyag and Dartsedo. Then [we] crossed the high pass of Arlangshan and then to Yangan. Then there were brief stops because there wasn't time since the occasion for the meetings was fast approaching. The Tibetan people were saying that the Dalai Lama should not fly since they considered it dangerous. Then the party got to Chengdu and a few of us members of the entourage flew. It was a Chinese military plane that shook a lot. The rest of the large retinue went in vehicles to Xian. At Xian, the Panchen Lama had arrived via the northern route and they met there.   

**Q:**  I see. The Panchen Lama was not together [with them]?   

**A:**  From Lhasa they were not together. The Panchen Lama was brought via the northern route with Commander-in-Chief Fan Siling.   

**Q:**  What was the reason for travelling in two separate groups.   

**A:**  Maybe because there would be too many people. The road via <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང] One of the major sub-areas of Tibet that is located in southwest Tibet. Its main city is Shigatse.">Tsang</a> was less dangerous and better. We went through deep valleys [Tib. རོང]. The other was via the northern route and it was less dangerous.   

**Q:**  Then why didn't the Dalai Lama go via the northern route?   

**A:**  No, he didn't go. The Chinese had made motorable roads down there [eastern side] and so this fact was sort of accepted. It seems that the Chinese wanted to show this achievement, that the roads had been made and were ready. When the roads were being constructed, there were landslides and vehicles fell down the hill and the road construction [workers] were all Chinese prisoners, poor fellows. Lives were sacrificed without regret. They had sent all prisoners, and when they came up to the Tibetan territories, then the Tibetans also went to do road work. They gave them <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> coins and fooled them.   

**Q:**  Before going down to China, around 50-51, the Chinese were being very diplomatic saying that they had come to help Tibet and that then they were going to go down.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  As I look at it, from one perspective, the 17-Point Agreement was already in existence and there were various articles in it. There was one section which said that it may not be too bad, and we were working along the lines of the articles. Then there was another section, like Phala Drönyerchemmo and the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, who since early on, were against all of this. How did this come about? Was there a policy for the Kashag to work with the Chinese and the sitsab to be [were] against it?   

**A:**  How was that?   

**Q:**  The Kashag had to talk with the Chinese and work now that the 17-Point Agreement was there. Then the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, and later there was Phala Drönyerchemmo and his group, like <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་ཕྱག] 1. The Treasury Office that was located in the Potala and supplied items for the Dalai Lama. 2. The name/title of the officials who headed the Tseja Office.">Tseja</a> Gyentsenla, they were much earlier with working against the Chinese.   

**A:**  Yes, they did not like the Chinese and they were against the Chinese from the early times. There were many who did not like the Chinese. Now, as far as one or two people are concerned, we can forget about them. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> didn't dare to openly say [this], but they thought in the same manner. There were not that many who could say [that] openly. And since the Shape had to deal with the Chinese face to face, they also thought that the Chinese might criticize and expose [Tib. ཐེར་འདོན] [them] right away. When we look from outside, it seems that it was only Phala and the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, but it was not at all like that. Everyone was behind it. Of course there were one or two that were [pro-Chinese]. Ngabö was quite openly [pro-Chinese]. Other than that, there were very few who liked the Chinese.   

**Q:**  Later, people like Phala Drönyerchemmo and his group were doing some work secretly. Later, it is said that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཅེན་མཁན་རྩིས་གསུམ] Abbr.: The titles of the three heads of the major anti-Chinese émigré group in India during the 1954-59 period: &quot;Jen&quot; refers to the &quot;older brother&quot; (the older brother of the Dalai Lama, Gyalo Thondup), &quot;khen&quot; refers to the monk official of the khenjung rank (Lobsang Gyentsen), and &quot;tsi&quot; refers to the lay official of the tsipön rank (Shakabpa). &quot;Sum&quot; means the three (of them).">Jenkhentsisum</a> used to consult Phala.   

**A:**  I see.   

**Q:**  It is also said that he had relations with Chushigandru.   

**A:**  Yes, yes.   

**Q:**  Did the Kashag know about the work of Phala and did they pretend like they didn't know.   

**A:**  Some would know and others may not have known. This is just an approximation and I cannot tell you clearly. Phala was a very brave person, and when we went down as part of the entourage, he was the person who made all of the arguments against the Chinese, about whether the ceremony was correct or not. Otherwise, the Kashag was not able to speak up [or they did not have the courage to]. The Kashag was there, but they could not say anything. They sort of pretended like they did not hear and did not see, even if they did. They just stayed stoically [Tib. སྤམ་པོ]. Mainly it was Phala. So it's difficult to clearly say that they knew or not. Some must have known. I can't say they all knew nor that none of them knew.   

**Q:**  As I mentioned earlier, the Chinese were being very diplomatic, and it's even said that even if you hit them, they wouldn't react.   

**A:**  After the airport was made and the road constructed, his [the Chinese] speech got more and more defiant [Tib. སྐད་ཆ་སྦོམ་པོ]. A great number of soldiers were also brought in. That's what happened. So they invited the Dalai Lama down and at Beijing, regarding the appointment of representatives for the meeting, that we would not know. However, when the Dalai Lama was there, there were talks like the earlier problems between the government and Labrang. Labrang also sort of instigated the matter, telling the Chinese that this was a good opportunity to decide them. There were such talks. We were not at the talks. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཞབས་པད] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Shape or Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The ministers made decisions collectively and had no fixed term of office.">Shape</a> and more important officials were there. So I can't give you any details, however, such talks did take place and they pestered [us] greatly. <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> said that they wanted Shigatse Dzong and that they had to have this in any case.   

**Q:**  Where did this meeting take place?   

**A:**  In Beijing. It was said that Shigatse Dzong was the main estate where Ganden Phodrang [Tib. དགའ་ལྡན་ཕོ་བྲང] [the origin of the Tibetan government] was started, and the place from where the political power was taken over from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. གཙང་པ] 1. A person from Tsang. 2. A khamtsen in Loseling College.">Tsangpa</a> Depa [Tib. སྡེ་པ]. This could not be given. This is what was said at the meeting, and I also said this. Ngabö himself said that this was what they [<a href "#" data-tooltip "[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a>] wanted. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཚོགས་འདུ] 1. The general name for the various types of Tibetan government assemblies. 2. Any assembly, e.g., the assembly (meeting) of monks in a college.">tsondu</a> was opinionated and they gave the same answer, and I too said the same thing. It was said that since it [Shigatse Dzong] was the center from which power was taken, it could not be given to Tashilhunpo. From our side, Ngabö was the main speaker, and from Tashilhunpo, it was Dzasa Che Jigme who talked with the Chinese. At the meeting, Ngabö said that this was what Che Jigme was saying. After a few days, it was said that Che Jigme said that he did not say this. Ngabö said, "I did not lie about that and Che Jigme most certainly said that. But now he [Che Jigme] is saying that he did not say it." There was nothing to this and the issue disappeared. [laughter] There were a lot of talks like that. Zhou Enlai was there and he said that if two people went on one bridge, it was not good. One should cross and then the other. If both start rushing about, both would end up in the water. What he meant was that one had to think when discussing. The Dalai Lama and Trijang [Tib. ཁྲི་བྱང] Rimpoche were there. Sakya [Lama], <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨིན་གྲོལ་གླིང] A famous Nyingma Monastery.">Mindröling</a> Jung [Tib. གཅུང] and representatives of the 3 great monasteries were there. Among the women there were the Dalai Lama's older sister Tsering Dromala [Tib. ཚེ་རིང་སྒྲོལ་མ་ལགས] and the Dalai Lama's mother, but she did not go to the meeting. There were about 13 representatives or something. They were to go to the meetings and not the entire entourage.   

**Q:**  You just now mentioned Tsering Dromala. Taktse Rimpoche had written a book, and around 1951, he had gone to the states. When he was in Calcutta, he said that he met Kungö Depön who had just come from China after the 17-Point Agreement. When he told Depön that he was going abroad, Depön insisted that he should return to Tibet. He told Rimpoche that he must meet Zhang Jingwu and he said that he did meet him at the Chinese consulate where they were all staying. He said that Depön insisted that he return to Tibet. Later, sometime in 1955, Rimpoche came to India from the States and Tsering Dromala came, cried, and insisted that he return to Tibet. It is said that she guaranteed to the Chinese that she would bring the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཡབ་གཞིས] 1. The title given to a family of a Dalai Lama. 2. When used by itself, e.g., Yabshi&#x27;s house, it refers to the family of the current Dalai Lama.">Yabshi</a> back. So when Rimpoche says that, then in the early 50s, what should I say? Some believe in the Chinese on the part of many, or it seems that there were many who thought that maybe things were not so bad.   

**A:**  Yes. Yes, there were.   

**Q:**  Therefore, did the younger ones like the new ways? Many went to China and studied, and during this period, what were they thinking? Were they thinking of working with the Chinese or that things would be alright ?   

**A:**  They were saying that they wanted to "run under the Chinese [Tib. རྒྱ་མིའི་འོག་ལ་རྒྱུག་འགྲོ་གོ་ཡིན]." [I'm] almost sure they did not think about one's country and race. If they spoke Chinese, and played and showed off with the foreign students, [then they were happy]. They did not have any deep thoughts about losing one's country and nationality. Some went down for school in China and while in school, they turned against the Chinese. And even after their return they continued to oppose [them]. Then there was Ngawang Thöndrub and Ngawang Senge who was killed in the uprising. If one looked at the way they behaved, then it seems like they were something [like] activists. These guys were young and they went to the Chinese schools, and everyone was suspicious of them. People thought they went over to the Chinese and each one was suspicious of the other. Finally [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  It seems many thought, "Well, that's all we can achieve, so maybe it may not be so bad ([Tib. ཨའུ་ཙེ་མིན་འགྲོ] mendro)." For example, what was the Dalai Lama thinking? The 17-Point Agreement was already signed, right? And there were so many articles, and it did happen that the idea was to work together, right?   

**A:**  Yes, yes. Generally, the Dalai Lama was thinking that in this world a lot of changes were taking place. That, for example, in the early days, it was the rule of the kings and this situation was getting less and less. He was thinking that Tibet could not remain like this and must reform. And even the system seemed to be such that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> had estates and [were] sort of happy with most of the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> suffering hardships. A wide difference between the rich and poor. If we examine what the Dalai Lama's thinking was, he was trying not to be taken in by [Tib. དབུ་མ་འཁོར་བ] the Chinese, but was very diplomatic. The ways of the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> were such that there was a danger of conflict. If that happened, then there was nothing but loss. So the Dalai Lama definitely had the thought of non-violence from the early times.   

**Q:**  During this time, were some saying that the policy of the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a> was not with the times? That they were too hard headed?   

**A:**  Some must have been saying that. Those with the Chinese were saying that. But actually, they [sitsab] were only speaking the truth and did not say anything like disregarding [Tib. ལྟོས་མེད] the Chinese. But the Chinese were not liking it.   

**Q:**  No, I was thinking that from our perspective we may have been saying that if we did like the two <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྲིད་ཚབ] An acting Silön (Chief/Prime Minister). Two silön were appointed in 1950 when the Dalai Lama left Lhasa for the safety of Yadong on the Sikkim/Indian border.">sitsab</a>, then we may have gotten into trouble, so we had better do things diplomatically.   

**A:**  Yes, yes. To do things diplomatically because if we become militant, then they would be militant, and if they did that, then there was nothing [we could do] but to lose. In that fashion, one lived the days as they came. There wasn't any thought of going abroad and doing something. And also, it seems [like it was] our fault that Chamdo was lost too soon, and that we could not bring ourselves to fight. Even at Lhasa, the Chinese gave a lot of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> coins, and economically duped [Tib. མགོ་སྐོར] and won over the people. Even from the point of strength, there was no match except to go under their power. And even many of the higher aristocrats [Tib. སྡེ་དཔོན་ཆེ་ཁག] sold their houses in Lhasa. The result was that in 1959 [the time of the uprising], the Chinese had all of these places.   

**Q:**  How?   

**A:**  Many houses were sold right? So the Chinese were in those houses and everywhere there were Chinese. So even if one wanted to fight, it was difficult to do so.   

**Q:**  Yes, in one sense, after the Chinese came, there was more money, right?   

**A:**  Yes, there was more <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>, but commodities became scarce.   

**Q:**  During this time, compared to earlier times, were the traders getting more trade and money?   

**A:**  The traders, yes. The ones who took <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a>, their trade would increase, right? The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྐུ་དྲག] 1. A member of the lay aristocracy. 2. Title for government lay and monk officials. 3. A name occasionally used for the top leaders/officials in a monastery.">kudrak</a> also sold their houses and got a lot of dayan.   

**Q:**  When there is a lot of money, then people don't think too much of politics, right?   

**A:**  Yes, isn't it? Thinking sort of, "This thing is good."   

**Q:**  So some were preoccupied with that?   

**A:**  Yes, the majority, the poor. It's said that, "The Chinese Communists are parents and <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ད་ཡང; ch. 大洋] A Chinese silver dollar that had the image of Yuan Shikai on its face. It was used by the Chinese government in Tibet in the 1950s because Tibetans did not accept Chinese paper currency.">dayan</a> fell like rain [Tib. གུང་ཕྲན་ཏང་ཕ་མ་རེད།དཡན་ཆརཔ་བབ་བབ་རེད]." It seems this a song from the Kham side. It was like that.   

**Q:**  That's about all for today.   

**A:**  Okay.   

