# Political History Collection  
# Interview H.0021.01 : Tape 1  
##  : with Lhautara Tsendrön [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར་རྩེ་མགྲོན]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** India  
**Date of Interview:** 1992  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Paljor Tsarong  
**Name:** Lhautara Tsendrön [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར་རྩེ་མགྲོན]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** ca. 62  
**Date of Birth:** ca. 1930  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Lhautara Tsendrön [Tib. ལྷའུ་རྟ་ར་རྩེ་མགྲོན] was a monk official in the Tibetan government. In this interview, he discusses his work as the head of Namru Dzong in 1950-1952 and also explains a very interesting dispute he and the local people had about transporting supplies to the Chinese Payroll Office in Nagchu, and how the Chinese had to back down. He discusses working in the Tibetan Foreign Office and going on a tour of China in 1953 before being appointed as a tsendrön in a new joint Tibet-Chinese Foreign Office. He also discusses going to the McMahon Line with Chinese staff from the Foreign Office to investigate the border demarcation, and the beginnings of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region in place of the Military Administration Committee. And he talks about the growing resentment of Tibetans against the Chinese. He also describes the Seshin Primary School and the People's Association. Finally, he discusses the Chamdo war in 1950 and the 17-Point Agreement and the reasons behind the 1959 uprisings.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/H_0021_01/H_0021_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**Q:**  As I mentioned to you already, I would like to ask you where you were and what you were doing from 1950-59.   

**A:**  I'll narrate my personal story, okay?   

**Q:**  Yes.   

**A:**  In 1950 I was the head of Namru district [Tib. གནམ་རུ] when the Chinese invaded Chamdo. I was [actually living] in Lhasa at that time, but the government said that all of the district heads in the north must go to their posts [in person rather than send someone on their behalf]. So I went. At that time the Governor General of the North [Tib. བྱང་རིགས་སྤྱི་འདོམས] was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Dokar [Tib. མདོ་མཁར]. I met him at Dam [Tib. འདམ] and he said that we two (Lheding [Tib. ལྷ་ལྡིང] and myself) are the heads of Namru district ... So what Dokar told us was that the Chinese have invaded Chamdo and there are Chinese who are coming from the Siling side [Qinghai] so you have to go to your posts and protect against that. So I went to Namru District. Lheding had left earlier than me, so he was already there. Namru District, from ancient times, had 200 cavalry to guard the Northern areas. So we got these together and told them to go and check up on any Chinese infiltration, and if there was any, to report back to us so that we can request orders from Lhasa. So this was our work in 1950. I was not in Lhasa and I was not in Chamdo, so I cannot tell you much about those. Then in 1951 the 17-Point Agreement was implemented and towards the end of the year, the Chinese started a Payroll Office at Nagchu. Since it was said in the 17-Point Agreement that when the People's Liberation Army came to Tibet the local areas must help, therefore, the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱང་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet in the traditional era.">changji</a> was helping the Nagchu Payroll Office with all its supplies. The [two] changji at that time were Rasagyagen [Tib. ར་ས་རྒྱ་རྒན] and Tsador [Tib. ཚ་རྡོར]. They sent an order [to me] stating that from the Namru area, you have to help the Chinese Payroll Office by providing them 10,000 sheep, 10,000 <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྒྱ་མ] A unit of weight equal to one jin [ch. 斤] (1.1 lbs).">gyama</a> of butter, 3,000 gyama of cow dung [for fuel] and, I'm pretty sure, 100 yaks. These have to arrive at Nagchu on so and so month and day. So we had a discussion and said that if things have to be transported from Namru to Nagchu, there will be a lot of difficulties for the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> (the people). It was 10 days journey and one had to take dung, and animals had to be herded, and the butter packed, and even if we sent the right number from Namru, by the time the animals got to Nagchu there will be deaths among the animals and a lot problems. Besides, there was no talk in the 17-Point Agreement about transporting items. Only help from the local areas. Moreover the Chinese said that their policy has no such thing such as taxes. Therefore, we doubted that the Chinese would impose taxes, but we as the district heads couldn't decide this, so [we said], "You miser discuss among yourself and see what you want to do." So this is what we told the miser. They replied that since you are the district head, you must lead us and we must go to Nagchu and arrange so that we do not have to supply these goods. So this is what they said. They insisted that the district heads come with them. So I went with the miser from Namru's 13 Tsoba [the 13 groups of Namru]. There were 13 headman At Nagchu, the Chinese had started the Payroll Office. Its head was Wang Zuzhang. However there was no need for us to go to the Chinese since the head of the district was our changji who was appointed by our government. So we went to the changji saying that we have received such an order, but because there are these hardships, should we obey the order? If the miser have to supply these to Nagchu, then it becomes a tax, and if it is a tax, then it becomes an extra tax [on the miser] and the Chinese are saying they don't have taxes, so we request that we do not have to pay this. So as changji, please speak with the Chinese. The changji said that this will not do. The Chinese have started a Payroll Office and from all the areas [Tib. སྡེ་ཤོག] of the north [under the changji] everyone is helping and only you from Namru cannot be exempted. So I said that if we have to transport these all the way to Nagchu then it will not do, and the miser also said that they will have to bear a lot of difficulties [if they had to do this]. The changji replied, "Well, in that case, then you go talk to the Chinese." So we talked to the Chinese because the changji told us to talk to the Chinese, and we had to obey him. When we talked to the Chinese, they said, "This is not at all a tax, it is only assistance [Tib. རོགས་རམ], and we will pay you for it." So I said, "Yes, you say that you will pay for it and that it is only assistance, and this would be correct if you had asked us to sell it and if you bought it [directly] at the local place itself. However, since we have to transport these from one place to another, then this is not assistance." For example, our miser's have said that they are paying taxes to the government because the government gave them female yaks and land, and from the income [Tib. འབབ] from this they have to give things to the government. This is called taxes. So without first giving something [to the miser], there can be no taxes. The farmers have been given a basis for taxes in land, and the nomads have been given animals from which they get butter. Since we don't give to the local area but to the government, we say this is "giving taxes." So this is the custom. So when I told the miser [about the order to provide animals], they said that the Chinese Communists do not have taxes and that as the intermediary, I must have just made up the story. So they did not believe me. Since they are right here, so please tell them yourself. So the miser said, "If the Chinese Communists do not have taxes then we don't have to transport these. If there are taxes, then what you say about not having taxes is a lie." So finally the Chinese agreed that the items do not have to be transported. This was a time when they were saying good things to the people. They said that we have to listen to whatever the people say, and that we have came on behalf on the people. So during this time, one could say such things and they would listen. However, as time went on, things got worse, and in 1953, the Dam Airfield was built. By that time, I had already left the job as the district head and the Chinese had gotten more powerful and Namru had to was transport all the taxes to Dam. So this is my story about the time I first met the Chinese and the dealings I had with them. After I finished as the head of Namru district, I returned [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  You were at Namru District in 1950, right?   

**A:**  Yes, 1950, '51, until 1952.   

**Q:**  So after the Chinese came to Namru District what was the situation like, compared to the traditional times?   

**A:**  The Chinese had established a Payroll Office and they said they want items as if these were some form of taxes, right? Except for this, the Chinese never came to Namru district headquarters. In 1951 after we went down then about 7 or 8 Chinese came up saying that they had come to survey the area. In the old days, borax was extracted from the Namru area. This may have been around 1938 or 1939. Traders took it to China. They [the Chinese] asked where this place was and they went to examine it. Other than that no Chinese came.   

**Q:**  How many did you say came to look at it?   

**A:**  You know the Nagchu Payroll Office, they said they were part of it. About 7 people. So we showed them where it was and they went. They examined the area and then left. They did not say that from Namru you have to do extracting, etc. They stayed for about two weeks or so and then returned.   

**Q:**  What was the work of the Payroll Office?   

**A:**  It was part of the army, part of which was coming from the Siling side and another part coming from Jyekundo [Tib. སྐྱེ་རྒུ]. The purpose of the Payroll Office was to procure supplies for them.   

**Q:**  Were they buying all their supplies from the local areas?   

**A:**  They said that they were buying from the local area, we have no choice but to supply them as much as they wanted. At that time they were paying for things. It was also mentioned in the 17-Point Agreement that when the People's Liberation Army came to the various areas of Tibet, help must be given. So they we're paying.   

**Q:**  So if they were paying, then whether it is "private" landowners, monasteries or whoever, then were they selling things to the specific office? How did it work? Did the Chinese go and get it?   

**A:**  Therefore, the reason why we were saying that [what they wanted from us] was a tax is the following. The Chinese who were at Nagchu requested the things from the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བྱང་སྤྱི] The governor-general of Northern Tibet in the traditional era.">changji</a>, who send out orders for the items to the various areas who had to bring them to Nagchu. At Nagchu they were given to the Chinese who paid a price for them. However, we in Namru said we will not bring these things because it is a tax. So we asked whether or not there were taxes. They said that the Chinese Communists have no taxes so we are paying for it the things. We said we have payments also in the Tibetan government system, to which they said if that is the case then you don't have to transport those things.   

**Q:**  Now the other places had to pay, right?   

**A:**  They said some did and that most places in Nagchu did the transport.   

**Q:**  So when those areas did the transporting, it was some kind of extra tax, right?   

**A:**  The Chinese were paying, but the fact of the matter was that this was extra.   

**Q:**  What about the transportation?   

**A:**  If there were animals, they pay for them, but whatever the Chinese wanted it had to be done. So when one looks from the outside, if things were bought, the price was paid. And even if taxes were imposed for transporting things, that also was payed for. So in the minds of the people, they thought that there were no taxes since they got pay for it. This is what they [the Chinese] wanted to impress upon us. The Payroll Office collected grains and food supplies, however, they also showed the people movies and plays depicting how they are serving the people and doing good things for them. Then they also went to poorer households and helped them. So this was the time when they were trying to lure the people. So they were diplomatic and were behaving well. So the people felt that one could say things [discuss/argue] to the Chinese, that items that were sold were paid for, and that unlike the traditional taxes of Tibet, even transportation was paid for per the distance traveled. Likewise, whatever one needed one could ask the Chinese who also never bothered the people by telling them to bring this or that. They were very clever/diplomatic and they were really fooling [Tib. མགོ་སྒོར་བཏང] the people. So this was the case for 1 or 2 years. From here on, the Chinese wants became endless. With our Tibetan taxes, you paid once a year and that's it. With the Chinese, they buy today, then in a day or two later if they run out then they want some more, and on any given day it has to be sold. In the beginning, one was getting some money, but then it got to the point where one didn't have enough things [to sell], and it became like a tax because they said we have to sell it. So when one looks at this, during this period while there were no [new] taxes on the people, through a very smooth policy [Tib. འཇམ་པོའི་ཐོག་ནས] they created an endless issue.   

**Q:**  Okay, you were working there in 1951 and 1952, so how long did you stay there?   

**A:**  I stayed until the end of 1952. So in 1953, I completed my job at Namru Dzong and returned to this side [Lhasa] and started working for the Foreign Office (Tib. ཆིནདྲེལ་ལེགུང [ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་ལས་ཁུངས]).   

**Q:**  What do you mean by the Chindrel Legung?   

**A:**  The one that deals with foreign issues and work. Our Tibetan [government's] Chindrel Legung.   

**Q:**  Oh, I see, the Chigyel Legung.   

**A:**  Yes, the Chigyel Legung [Tib. ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཁུངས]. This office was started before the Chinese came.   

**Q:**  When you finished the district job and came to Lhasa, how did you land up in the Chigyel Legung.   

**A:**  The district work was completed, right? So then we had to be appointed somewhere else, isn't it? So I was appointed to the Chindrel [office]. The way it worked was that after the district, one can come back and also get no position, but I was appointed. At that time, Tibet and China did not have a joint Chindrel office. Tibet's Chindrel office was separate when I joined. In 1953 when I arrived there and officially newly joined [Tib. གསར་མཇལ] the Chindrel Legung, at that time is was the Tibetan Foreign Office. However, that year the second Tour of China [Tib. ལྟ་སྐོར་ཚོགས་པ] began and I was sent to China as part of it. This was in 1953. We were taken to many places in China. The <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀའ་བློན] One of the heads of the Kashag [bka&#x27; shag] or Council of Ministers. There were usually 4 Kalön, although in the 1950s the number increased at various times to 6 or 7. The Kalön ministers made decisions collectively, and had no fixed term of office.">Kalön</a> Dokhar was the tour leader and there were also 2 drungtsi. In 1954, I returned and at the place called Laya, I was appointed as a tsendrön, having received the appointment letter while still on the road. The Dalai Lama was going down to China.   

**Q:**  So you went down before that.   

**A:**  Yes, I went down in 1953 and spent almost a year touring. At that time our government officials on the tour numbered about 100 from <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and also from Dome. All together there were 200, almost 300. Mainly it was a tour, but also on October 1st [Ch. shi yi] we were taken to see and celebrate [PRC independence day]. We went to many places, to the Dongbei, Mongolia , Yenpen [Ch. yian bian] Korea, and most places in China. Then when we returned. the Dalai Lama was going down [to visit Neiong/inland China]. When I arrived here (Lhasa) it was the 5th month, and in the 9th or 10th month, China and Tibet joined together their separate Foreign Offices and so after that we began the China-Tibet Foreign Office [Tib. ཀྲུང་བོད་ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་ལས་ཁུངས] at Somphü [Tib. ཟོམ་ཕུད] where we worked together with the Chinese. In this office the Tibetan head was Kungö Liushar. Under him was Taklha Depön and 2 tsendrön, myself and Drakpa Yargyela [Tib. གྲགས་པ་ཡར་རྒྱས་ལགས]. Then then was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ས་འདུལ] Abbr. A Khamba trading family that became Tibetan government officials.">Sandu</a> Rinchenla [Tib. ས་འདུ་རིན་ཆེན་ལགས], Taradopa [Tib. རྟ་ར་མདོ་པ] and Nyanorlingpa [Tib. གཉའ་ནོར་གླིང་པ]. The Chinese leader was Yang Kongshu and there many others. So we would meet and the salary was given by the Chinese. So we had to work together in the Chinese office since they said it is Tibet and China together [Tib. ཟུང་འབྲེལ].   

**Q:**  Now how did the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region begin?   

**A:**  That was begun in 1956 right? So in 1953, the Foreign Office was the first a Tibetan government Office and the Chinese were brought together. The Tibet Foreign office was amalgamated with the Chinese. It was the first [joint] office. So this was not supposed to come under the Tibet Autonomous Region, but it was directly under China. Then in 1954, the Dalai Lama went down to China. He attended the National People's Congress [Tib. རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་མི་དམངས་འཐུས་མི་ཚོགས་ཆེན] and toured China and returned in 1955. In 1954, the Dalai Lama went down and earlier under the 17-Point Agreement there was talk of starting a Military Administrative Committee [Tib. དམག་སྲིད་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང]. So instead of that [in Beijing], it was decided that Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region would begin. So in 1955 the Dalai Lama came back and in 1956 the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region (<a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོང་གྲ་སྒྲིགས་ཨུ་ཡོན་ལྷན་ཁང] The Preparatory Committee for [the implementation of] the Tibet Autonomous Region.">PCTAR</a>)was begun. So in the PCTAR, there were 14 Offices. Until then, our government offices like the Kashag, the Tsikhang etc., were on their own. And with the exception of the Youth and Women's Associations, there were not many Tibetan government officials working in the Chinese offices. Our Foreign Office was the first to be joined with the Chinese. Then in 1956, the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region began with 14 Offices such as the Civil Administration Department [Tib. དམངས་སྲིད Ch. qu], the Security Department [Ch. si fa qu], the Personnel Department [Ch. zu zhi qu] and so many others. In these offices there were the Chinese, our Tibetan government officials and officials from , <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. བཀྲ་སིས་ལྷུན་པོ] The famous Gelugpa Monastery of the Panchen Lama located in Shigatse.">Tashilhunpo</a> and Chamdo which the Chinese had separated. So that's how most of our government officials came to work in Chinese offices. Then at the end of 1956, the Dalai Lama went to China [sic. India]. At that time, I was a tsendrön, however, I was not in India. Kungö Tempala [Tib. བསྟན་པ་ལགས] was there. The Dalai Lama went on a pilgrimage and then returned in 1957.   

**Q:**  So during this period you were tsendrön as well as in the Foreign Office?.   

**A:**  Yes, in the morning I would go to the Drungja tea ceremony as a tsendrön. So there was no specific work for the tsendrön after Drungja. Then I went to work at the Foreign office.   

**Q:**  So in 1957 you were still there.   

**A:**  Yes and along with that work I was send to check the McMahon Line at the border to see how it was drawn up. So along with the Chinese, 3 of us were chosen and sent. I was sent in the middle team to Bomla, the place were the Dalai Lama came through.   

**Q:**  You mean Bomdila?   

**A:**  Yes, from Bomdila area to Chayü [Tib. བྱ་ཡུལ]. Towards the Tö [Far Western Tibet] area <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. རྩེ་མགྲོན] The monk officials working as aides in the Tse ga, the Secretariat of the Dalai Lama.">Tsendrön</a> Drakpa Yargyela and some Chinese went. And towards the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སྨད] The Mey College of Sera Monastery.">Mey</a> or lower area like Dzayul [Tib. རྫ་ཡུལ] Taradopa and they were sent. So that's where we were sent in 1957. There was the line on the map but it was not clear what areas were along the sides of the line. So since it was not clear, we had to go. By then the Indians had taken the places up to the red line [Tib. ས་ཐིག་དམར་པོ]. They would not permit us to meet the Indians and said we have to go there secretly. So we went and couldn't figure out much since we had to traverse over uninhabited areas [Tib. ས་སྟོང] ("empty land"). So I did that work, and it come to 1958, and then '59. So, after the Chinese [arrived], if I told you about how it first came about, then it is as I have related. The Chinese were being very nice [Tib. འདྲ་ཆགས་པོ] in paying for items and transportation, saying that there are no taxes. They said they have come to serve the people and the People's Liberation Army soldiers all they did was help and they would not say they wanted this or that. Then ,through stage plays and movies [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Who acted in the plays, the Chinese?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  So they had brought them along?   

**A:**  Yes. It was all about how the people suffered and how they are to be served, etc. It is said that during a military campaign it is the custom that, if there are 1,000 soldiers, there are 1,000 others to make roads, do transporting, etc., and still another 1,000 for propaganda, drama, medical personnel to enable them to say that they are serving the people, etc. So they say that if there are a 1,000 soldiers then there are 3,000.   

**Q:**  So when they came there were a lot and the ones who acted were also army personnel, right?   

**A:**  Yes, from the military. So the soldiers capture the land, the others category make the roads and do all the transportation. So to say what great work the People's Liberation Army are doing and how they have come to serve the people, these are acted out by the drama people while the sick were attended to by the medical staff. So that how they were organized and came. So the people, when they first saw the Chinese, saw something quite agreeable. No soldiers bothered the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a>, and they bought the items rather than taking them away. No one told the miser that they had to work or made them work on roads. They had their workers and procured their own items. So they said that People's Liberation Army is helping the Tibetan people; and they would help harvest the crops and help everybody. They would help fetch water and work as if they were like servants.   

**Q:**  Is that right?   

**A:**  They would! Then they would act all this out in the dramas. They had a military policy of: Three Main Rules of Disciplines [Tib. གྲིག་ཁྲིམས་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ] and Eight Points for Attentions [Tib. དོ་སྣང་བྱེད་དགོས་པ་རྒྱད]. The former three were the main types of disciplines. The Eight Attentions were: will not take a needle or thread from the people, we must serve the people, must be agreeable with the people, must back the people, help the people, etc. So they said this is what they stood for and this is what they are doing. Therefore, the people, poor things [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ], thought probably that indeed it was good. So they were not saying anything sort of bad. So after a year or two or three had passed, then it didn't remain like it did previously and started to get worse and worse and that's why we ended up rebelling from the Kham side.   

**Q:**  So in 1951, 1952 they were being nice and so when did it start going worse?   

**A:**  Yearly it got worse.   

**Q:**  So why did it get worse?   

**A:**  Their numbers started increasing every year, so their needs too got more, and they also got more and more powerful [Tib. དབང་ཤེད].   

**Q:**  It was insufficient to give what they needed?   

**A:**  There were too many of them and so it was not enough. And when it wasn't enough, they insisted that the <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. མི་སེར] A term that can mean serf/bound subject as well as citizen, depending on context. For example, the miser of a lord would connote the bound subjects of that lord, whereas the miser of Tibet would connote citizens of Tibet.">miser</a> sell to them. Previously, if you sold to them it was okay and if you didn't that was okay too. Then when their numbers increased they said that we have come to your land so you must sell us since we are paying. So the people had to transport things just like taxes. And when these difficulties arose, then they were against the Chinese. That's one reason. Secondly, various lands were occupied.   

**Q:**  For example, in Nagchu what places were occupied?   

**A:**  In the nomadic areas, the people were going all over and collecting food. And also what Sitsab <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཀླུ་ཁང་བ] The family name of a famous aristocratic lay official who was one of the two Sitsab in 1950-52.">Lukhangwa</a> said in the Dalai Lama's book, "My Land and My People," that the Chinese said they came to Tibet to help us and instead of helping they have created a famine. That is true, really. So even in Lhasa it was true. When the Chinese first came there were not many and the government had to provide houses and places for them to stay. They had no choice in that. And the Chinese lived on in Lhasa going about their way, buying, borrowing, whatever. Then when the Chinese numbers increased and there was less and less space and famine was occurring then they began to realize. Then the people began to say that the Chinese must return since our country is about to have a famine. Even small children learned this... fighting. Their numbers increased and was providing them one year's Payroll enough? No, it was not. It had to be done year after year. The numbers kept increasing. this resulting in inflation. Then people began saying that with the coming of the Chinese we had problems. Then the Chinese also became more and more powerful and they lost their earlier charm [Tib. ཡིན་མདོག་ཁ་པོ] and benevolence [Tib. སྙིང་རྗེ]. And then we didn't listen. They said that will not do and then the question of force arose. So that's the reason why there was a clash with the people. Especially after 1959, and even in 1959, they didn't hesitate to use bullying tactics [Tib. དབང་ཡོད]. At least at that time they were working with the Local Tibetan government and in the 17-Point Agreement they said they came to serve the Tibetan people and when the lives of the people have improved they will return. So this was the talk that they came with. Therefore, at that time there was the Local Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama was there and so they had to at least consult [with them]. Even our Tibetan people felt that there was some backing/basis [Tib. རྒྱབ] since the government, the Kashag and the whole thing were there. So with that, from time to time, they could afford to lift their necks up a bit [to voice concerns, resist, etc]. So the way it came about was that their numbers increased, so there was less to eat, and the Chinese occupied the bigger and the best lands and grew vegetables. So from their mouths they were saying they came to improve Tibet, but instead they were occupying lands, etc., and so the people then realized that they were really producing famine, occupying lands and really bullying us. They just then began to realize this that the Chinese had done that. So that's how their reputation got worse.   

**Q:**  So you came from Namru to Lhasa in 1952, right? At that time how was the situation in Lhasa?   

**A:**  Yes. Generally....at that time... [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  Had people by then already started complaining, or?   

**A:**  Yes, they had already started complaining a little. For example, the Seshin [Tib. ཟས་ཞིམ] Primary School was starting and there were two points of view. One was saying yes, they [children] should be sent to school. Even the parents were invited on special occasions and the students got gifts and clothing was made for them. Another side was saying that the school should not have begun because it is a "brainwashing" [Tib. ལྟ་བ་སྒྱུར་ཡ] school. So by then there was already an internal split.   

**Q:**  So the people were saying this about the school?   

**A:**  Yes, some people had their children in school, and they were giving things to the kids and also teaching them. Another side said that they were "Dolye Labdra" [Tib. ལྟོགས་སླའི་སློབ་གྲྭ] or the "Greedy Students," that is, students who went out of greed. So at this time the people were beginning to say the Chinese should leave Tibet and that we should hold our own land, and that the Chinese suppression [Tib. བཙན་གནོན] will not be tolerated and posters were put up.   

**Q:**  In 1952?   

**A:**  1951, '52 and '53 on. It was either in 1952 or 1953 that the first People's Association began.   

**Q:**  In the first People's Association, who were in it?   

**A:**  There was <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. སེ་ར་སྨད] The Mey (Me) College of Sera Monastery.">Sera Mey</a> Thamjö Sonam [Tib. དམ་ཆོས་བསོད་ནམས]. And then, who was there?   

**Q:**  Was Bisula [Tib. སྤེལ་ཟུར་ལགས] there?   

**A:**  Bisu and others I think were not there at that time.   

**Q:**  They were later?   

**A:**  Later. There were 2 organizations.   

**Q:**  Later with Alo Chöndze.   

**A:**  Yes with Alo Chöndze, I think it was that group. The previous one was Thamjö Sonam and... what's the name [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  I asked my father previously and he mentioned that there was a Tsarong maid servant's son or something.   

**A:**  Below here [were they wee talking], Lhatsun [Tib. ལྷ་བཙུན] Labrang Chandzö is there and he has something to say. Previously he told me about the first organization. So they acted as the leaders and said the Chinese cannot do this. It was in the Water-Dragon year [1952]. It was, I think, called the Water-Dragon Year People's Association. So there was talk of a 6 point memorandum that they gave to the Chinese which included statements such as that the Chinese should leave Tibet, that Tibetan life and trade is becoming problematic, etc. So the organization had by then already arisen.   

**Q:**  So during this time, while the people were agitating, what was the situation with the monasteries. What were they thinking? Were they quiet or were they agitating?   

**A:**  The monasteries did not actually agitate openly. However they did show that they were very unsatisfied. The reason being that even the students who were enrolled in the primary school, the monks used to antagonize them by calling them students of greed. Likewise, when the Women's Association began, Lady [Tib. ལྕམ] Tangme [Tib. ཐང་སྨད] who was a member was seized and they said that they were going to beat her with switches or something like that. Those who were sort of siding with the Chinese, the monks showed their dislike for, but they did not actually take action. They used to bully [Tib. སྙད་རྐོ] them since it was said that the monks are usually rowdier. So to those who went with the Chinese they would say that it's not good, and you are something or if you do that, then we'll kill you. They incited fear. A lot of that stuff went on. The students, youth, women's groups and some of our officials who did things with the other side were the monk's targets. This much happened, however there were no specific open demonstrations. The reason why there were no open agitation [by the monks] was that the Tibetan government and the Chinese were working together.   

**Q:**  In 1959, before the Dalai Lama left, where were you?   

**A:**  I was in Lhasa itself. In 1959, March 1st, was the first. I was in Norbulinga. What the real [overt] reason was for this was the public understood that the Dalai Lama would be going to see the Chinese theatrical show. The internal reason is unknown, however, by 1959 they were fully prepared to suppress trouble by force [Tib. དྲག་གནོན]. So that (the show) just happened to be the reason, but the Chinese were all set for the use of force. If you ask where the Chinese were putting the blame, they were saying that the Khambas have revolted in the Tibetan border areas and that's why they are militarily ready. The actual reason [immediate reason/the spark that lit the fire] was the 1959 invitation to the theater to which the people said it would not do for the Dalai Lama to go and they demonstrated. Now how it came about, from 1956 on... Even in the 17-Point Agreement, it was stated regarding democratic reforms, it will be done through the consultation between Zhongyang [China] and the Tibet's high ranking people with the agreement of the Tibetan people. However, in the Eastern Tibetan areas of <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. ཨ་མདོ] One of the three main Tibetan sub-ethnic areas. It is located in the northeast of the Tibetan Plateau mostly in today&#x27;s Qinghai Province. A person from Amdo is called an Amdowa.">Amdo</a> and Kham they began reforms in 1955. With the implementation of forceful reforms, and the accompanying resentment and killing of people, they [Khambas] came up to "Tibet" [Tib. བོད]. The ones who fled to Lhasa, could not remain. The Chinese put pressure on them and surveyed and kept a record of them and so they went to Lhoka and Drigu where the Chinese destroyed them. So the real cause was created by them. However, what were they saying? They were saying the Khambas revolted and so they had to be ready militarily, and had to bring reinforcements to Lhasa and entrench themselves. The cause of the Lhasa uprising; there has to be a cause, was the Dalai Lama's invitation where the people flocked to beg [Tib. ཕྱག་འཚལ་རྒྱབ]=literally, to prostrate] the Dalai Lama not to go in 1959.   

**Q:**  Why were the reforms begun earlier in Kham?   

**A:**  Tibet was to be peacefully reformed, this was in the 17-Point Agreement. However, China was liberated, Siling was forcefully liberated and as they came up to Eastern Tibet, their power increased. To leave it as it was traditionally, this was not possible. If the Tibetans said that they would reform, then it was okay. But they didn't say that. So they were forcefully "liberated." So to say it conclusively, as they came up they had to do reforms.   

**Q:**  In the minds of the Chinese did they make a distinction and have different policies between liberated and non-liberated areas?   

**A:**  No.   

**Q:**  [Did they say] the liberated areas could be reformed and the rest... now the 17-Point Agreement were those areas included or not?   

**A:**  Those areas should be in the 17-Point Agreement. However, they separated and up to Chamdo [answer not finished]   

**Q:**  So were those areas included in the 17-Point Agreement or not?   

**A:**  Actually speaking it should be included since the 17-Point Agreement was made for Tibet and it did not say this area of Tibet is included and that is not. The Agreement was between China and Tibet and it did not say Dotö and Dome are excluded [Amdo and Kham].   

**Q:**  So, in their minds did they think about the Yangtze River border?   

**A:**  What you mean?   

**Q:**  Traditionally, I don't know what year but wasn't the Yangtze River the border?   

**A:**  Yes. It was said this and that side of the border. Therefore, on account of that, they said that up to Chamdo is forcefully liberated. Though they would like to forcefully liberate, this side [west] of Chamdo was in the 17-Point Agreement and like a fire it was spreading upwards. The reason why they say that all of China is liberated and Tibet too has to be liberated is that in the socialist system, democratic reforms means that all classes are equalized, right? So Tibet was not equalized and finally it had to be liberated. In China, this was all done in 1949. In Tibet, they said it was to be liberated peacefully and the economic reforms had not begun. Democratic reforms are done through the economy. Wealth is taken away from those that have and given to those that don't have to distribute things equally. And so in the Tibetan areas of the east, this had not been done. Therefore, they came to accomplish this. So it was definite that this was going to take place in <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a> [Central Tibet]. So this was the matter we were against.   

**Q:**  What I was thinking was that maybe the Chinese were thinking in a different fashion. They came up to Chamdo and then began the 17-Point Agreement and the peaceful liberation. So the 17-Point Agreement was valid for Chamdo upwards, but probably not downwards. Therefore, the many articles in the 17-Point Agreement did not pertain to areas from Chamdo down [east]; only up [west to Lhasa], isn't it?   

**A:**  Actually speaking, it's not really up or anything like that. The 17-Point Agreement was implemented after Chamdo. They ate [Tib. ཟས] up to Chamdo and then stopped. The reason, and I cannot say conclusively, but my personal opinion is the following. They ate up to Chamdo. So Chamdo was taken, which meant that they seized the head of the Tibet's Dome area, the Doji. They didn't require <a href="#" data-tooltip="[tib. དབུས་གཙང] The two major sections of Central Tibet: Ü and Tsang. Lhasa was in Ü and Shigatse and Gyantse were in Tsang.">Ütsang</a>, since the Kashag was there. So when they came to Chamdo at that time, there was a lot of news/attention in the world about this. They could have very easily eaten Tibet and they were really not thinking otherwise. However, if at that time, with all the world's attention, if they had invaded, then it would be taken for a blatant invasion [Tib. བཙན་འཛུལ་ངོ་བོ]. So, for the time being, even if they could eat it all, they didn't. The fact of the matter is that they put a veil on the world and internally made the 17-Point Agreement. So they came and then rested for a while. At that time it was also a period when we could appeal to the UN. Second, at that time there was no unanimous and definite consensus among countries that Tibet was a part of China. Earlier in the Wood-Tiger Year there were questions of treaties made [by Tibet]. So they felt that if they invaded then maybe America or other countries could show some support like the proverb, "The enemy cannot guess the enemy." [Tib. དགྲ་ཚོད་དགྲས་ཚོད་དགྲས་མི་ལོན], China herself at that time was not settled [Tib. ཞི་ལྷིང], peaceful and calm). In addition to that, the roads, etc, had not been made. Therefore, if we did have some outside support we would resist. The Communists had just won their liberation of the mainland and if there were a strongly supported resistance by the Tibetans, then from the terrain advantage, without any roads, it would have been difficult [for the Chinese]. The country had not become "consolidated" [Tib. སྲ་ཚུགས་ཐུབ་མེད་པ] yet. So for these various reasons, they thought it might become an international concern and so therefore they came up to Chamdo and then started the peaceful process. So these are my thoughts and my personal opinion. Whether this is actually the case or not, I cannot say. If I look at the way they did it, I think that's what happened. At first, the way the war came to Tibet from China, in Sichuan the 18th Army Corps [Ch. shi ba jun] was headed by Zhang Guohua. When he received the orders that he was to invade Tibet. The way he did it, the number of soldiers, how they were divided, etc. -- so what the Chinese said is written in some books. I have seen them [the accounts], and this is what they said, therefore I think that's how it happened. They wrote about the building of military camps in Chamdo and many others. Likewise they have sent the army from Tö and from Jyekundo. Since this was what they wrote, it is probably the basis of how things took place. So that's how I think the various things took place and the way the forceful liberation was undertaken.   

