# Common Folk Oral History Collection  
# Interview OR.0040.01  
##  : with Phüntso [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས]  
  
**Melvyn Goldstein, Editor**  

**Center for Research on Tibet**  
**Department of Anthropology**  

**Case Western Reserve University**  
**Cleveland, Ohio**  

**©2004**  

---  
**Location of Interview:** Chushul, Tibet Autonomous Region, China  
**Date of Interview:** 2000  
**Language of Interview:** The interview was conducted and recorded in Tibetan and translated into English.  
**Interview by:** Gyatso  
**Name:** Phüntso [Tib. ཕུན་ཚོགས]  
**Gender:** Male  
**Age:** 68  
**Date of Birth:** 1932  
  
---  
## Abstract  

 Phüntso was born into a treba family whose lord was Phorongkha, the famous lama from Sera Monastery. His mother passed away when he was three and he travelled everywhere with his father who was in the army. In this interview, he describes how after his father died when he was 13 years old, he had a very hard time working to pay the taxes. He talks about being a cadre in the xiang after the uprising and how he was falsely accused of killing a relative. He also discusses how at one time he was classified as being a rich farmer and how as a result, he was interrogated for a long time. Finally, he talks about the reforms and how they affected his way of life.   

---  
### Tape 1  

<audio controls>
<source src="https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/asian/asiantoha/OR_0040_01/OR_0040_01.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>  

---

**A:**  My late mother belonged to the Drepung Ngagpa Tratsang. My lord [tib. དཔོན་པོ] was the Sera Phorongkha [tib. སེ་ར་ཕ་བོང་ཁ]. My father belonged to the same lord. I had five brothers. Four of them went to Lhoka. They had to pay mibo to the lord. When I was small, I had an eye sickness so my parents left me here. Furthermore, my father passed away when I was thirteen years old, which was an inauspicious year and I had a very hard time. In the old society, there were bad things and also good things. My father was from a treba household. When my father died, we didn't have anything. Nowadays, three people have to go for the sky burial. Two people who would cut the corpse and an assistant carrying some tsamba. I was thirteen years old. I had to carry my father's corpse with another person. We had to work for the taxes, and at that time, we didn't have enough tsamba to eat. My father had suffered a lot in the old society. We had to work as a corvée laborer everyday, except for one day's rest every three days. That was called the sumchag [tib. གསུམ་ཆག]. From the age of fifteen, I became a treba and the person in charge of our family.   

**Q:**  Your family was a treba, right?   

**A:**  Yes, we were a big treba, because we had to spend most of the time working as a corvée tax as I mentioned above. In one month, we had to work as a tax for twenty days and we could rest for ten days. We would go to Drepung to sell cow dung once every three days. And we would buy some Torma offerings from the monastery.   

**Q:**  Did you collect the dung from this area?   

**A:**  I had to collect it from the mountains for three days and on the fourth day we would load the ox with the dung and carry the hay for feeding the ox on our backs. We would stay overnight in the monastery and come back the next day.   

**Q:**  Did you live here all the time when you were small?   

**A:**  Yes. I was always working as a corvée tax. I stayed here and didn't move anywhere. After 1959, when I was just staying like this, a few people in power in the Party were wrongfully accused and when the "Three Great Education" [tib. སློབ་གསོ་ཆེན་པོ་གསུམ] campaign was held in this place in 1962, one of my relatives was living in Radö [tib. ར་སྟོད]. He was very poor so he wanted to keep me to tend his sheep. He used to choke from his inner goiter. When he went to work at the airport in Lhoka, he was almost suffocated with his goiter when he went to watch a show. Therefore, the tsugdrang sent him back home after three days. There was a cadre named Phüntso Norbu [tib. ཕུ་ཚོགས་ནོར་བུ] who was from Tsang [tib. གཙང]. His mother was called Trakhog [tib. ཁྲ་ཁོག]. This cadre was saying that I strangled him [my relative] to death. When my late mother heard this she fainted. Later, she said that he [my relative] came to see her in the water mill and she gave him cold water in her apron. She was saying that Phüntso, would never kill that person. This was evidence in my favor. That cadre probably wanted to make a great accomplishment. He interrogated me and made me stand on the Arka floor for one month and six days, so my leg became like this. And the whole household was given to the child [?]. In the end, after one month and six days, when I was tending a horse, the cadre came to see me. He was carrying a gun. I was desperate so I opened my chest and told him to shoot me at once. At that point, the only thought I had was to die. Therefore, I took over his gun and told him, "If you don't shoot me, I will shoot you." When I was going to shoot him, the pistol didn't open. So the two of us couldn't shoot each other and fought for a while. Like that, I suffered both in the old society and the new society. On the other hand, the people in that area had made rumors about me. It was because I had been a cadre in the xiang for a while. My family members had been a little bit aggressive in the village using my power of being a cadre. Therefore, they made a false accusations to the cadres, saying that I had killed my relative. After my property was destroyed [tib. ཏག་ཏག་བཟོ], they were saying that I didn't kill that person. After that, I was left alone for three years without being admitted into the rukhag. I was categorized as a rich farmer. After that, a movement called the Society Movement [tib. སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ལས་འགུལ] was held. A cadre said that the so-called rich farmers were only found in China. That was because in China they had the farming machines. As for the Phüntso, he had exploited the people and he had also suffered exploitation. He was a middle farmer. I think, that cadre was probably was promoted and his salary was raised up. But I had to suffer like that. That was caused by one cadre and it was not because the policy was bad. At the time of the reforms, the policy stipulating that whoever cultivated the field could keep the yield [tib. སུས་བཏབ་དེས་བསྡུ] was implemented. The lands that belonged to the shiga were distributed to the corvée laborers. After that, the Mutual Aid Team was set up. I supposed that when people were working on my field I had to provide them food and when I would work on their field they would provide food for me. Like that people were helping each other. After that, people were saying that was not good, and set up two teams [ch. zu] in this area. The lands were divided between each team. After that, people were saying that when we worked in the [Mutual Aid] Team, people's livelihood was becoming differentiated. And they established two Cooperative Teams [tib. མཉམ་ལས; ch. zu]. The two teams were doing quite well. At the end, people were saying that the team was not good and the rukhag was set up. They collected all the animals together, and all the people worked together. It was good. After that, gentsang was made. That was for the purpose of balancing the forward and the backward, and making the livelihood of the people get better together. To tell you the truth, after gentsang, the people's livelihood did get better. During the rukhag, people were not putting much energy into their work, including me. All people were like that. Therefore, at the end, the people were ruined and became very poor. In the old society, there were many festivals. Some of the festivals were based on strong superstitions. Some of the festivals were just for the people to enjoy themselves. There was a festival called Nyephu Chöngug [tib. སྙེ་ཕུ་ཆོས་འགུག] and Nyephu Shichen [tib. སྙེ་མོ་གཞིས་ཆེན]. Dzamling Jisang [tib. འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་བསངས], the universal incense offering in Lhasa, occurred on the fourth of the sixth month [tib. དྲུག་པ་ཚེས་བཞི] was held in Mojog [tib. རྨོ་ལྕོགས]. On the fifteenth day of the fifth month, people would go up there to enjoy the Dzamling Jisang.   

**Q:**  At that time, the people in Lhasa would go to the Gemphel Utse [tib. དགེ་འཕེལ་དབུ་རྩེ] mountaintop behind Drepung, right?   

**A:**  Yes. When they were holding the Nyemo Chongug, people would stay in the estate for three days. On the fourth day, people would go around the fields carrying scriptures. It was called Chögor which was the same as the Wonkor in other places. Until the last year, people were doing the Wonkor cooperatively and they were carrying the scriptures, but this year they didn't let the people carry scriptures around the field. Last time, Radö told the masses, "At the beginning, they [superiors] were saying that carrying scriptures was not allowed. Therefore, I told the masses that it was not allowed. Later, the masses had bought a ceremonial arrow wrapped with colored khata from Lhasa, and they were saying that the people in Lhasa were carrying scriptures around the fields. They implied that if I stopped them, they would make false accusations against me." After that, there was an old cadre with white hair. He explained that the superiors didn't say that people should stop carrying scriptures at once. Did the county make the mistake or did the xiang make the mistake? Actually, Radö was not allowed to make announcements on his own. He was told from the xiang and he made announcements to the masses. The people who went to Lhasa bought the ceremonial arrow wrapped with colored khata and said that they were carrying scriptures in Lhasa, so Radö was not to be blamed.   

**Q:**  Carrying the scriptures around the field was actually a kind of custom of the area, right?   

**A:**  Yes, actually, it didn't have any political problems because in the old society when it was not raining, people would carry the scripture around the field to make it rain [tib. ཆར་འབེབས]. That was like the people in Lhasa splashing water on each other when it had not rained for a long time. People were carrying scriptures, beating drums, and going around the field. They were not doing any kind of rituals or asking for prophecies from the oracle. It was supposed to bring back good fortune [tib. གཡང་འགུགས] for the green crops. The estate belonged to the Drepung Ngagpa Tratsang. During the Nyephu Chöngug, the estate would give the masses food, tea and chang. For lunch, they would give a potato and a radish dish. They would give a lot of chang for three days. On the fourth day, the tea and the chang would be served by turns, and people had to bring their own food.   

**Q:**  What would you do for the three days? Would you dance and sing?   

**A:**  Yes, people would dance and sing songs. On the threshing ground of the estate they would put a big tent in which the masses would enjoy themselves. On the first day two youngsters were selected. They were called the hero and the heroine [tib. དཔའ་བོ་དཔའ་མོ]. They would collect samples of water from many sources and pour them into the head of the irrigation canal. They would say, "Please receive the offering from all kinds of springs. May there be no frost and hail, famine and sickness. Bring back the rain under the white woolen material. May our wish get fulfilled." The costumes of the hero and the heroine would be borrowed from the Drepung Ngagpa tratsang. They would wear a kind of hat with five parts that people used to put on deities [tib. རིགས་ལྔ]. They would also hold a ceremonial arrow wrapped with a colored khata. After that, the masses would gather and the hero and heroine would stay up there. The masses would say some auspicious words loudly to them such as, "You, the children of rich families, please bring back the rain under the white woolen material (clouds). May there be no frost and hail, famine and sickness [tib. སྣམ་བུ་དཀར་པོའི་འོག་ནས། སྦྱང་ཆར་སིལ་མ་བསྣམས་ནས་ལོག་ཕེབས་ཤོག། སད་དང་སེར་བ་མ་ཐོངས]." After calling this three times they would come back and would serve tea, chang and droma dresi to the hero and the heroine. When they collected water samples from seven sources, they would make seven lumps of bag mixed with butter and take it with them. In the old society, they had to steal the water samples and they would put the bottle of water samples at the front of the door. Before the person whose turn it was went to go collect the water samples, he had to swear at the front of the Thanka of the Deity Yamantaka [tib. རྡོ་རྗེ་འཇིགས་བྱེད] saying, "I will definitely get the water samples from the right places. If I can't get them, I will die." And he would eat the bag. In the past, once a person didn't collect the water samples from the right places. He just put some rainwater in a bottle. So he broke his word.   

**Q:**  Were the hero and heroine acted by your own people?   

**A:**  Yes. They were selected on the 15th of the 5th month when people would gather in the park. That was also selected by turns. People would serve tea and chang, and put a khata on them.   

**Q:**  Would they select people with a specific kind of animal year in which they were born?   

**A:**  They wouldn't care about the animal year. There was an age limit. The hero would act for two years because it was a little bit hard to wear the clothes. And the heroine would act for three years because it was a little bit easier to wear the clothes. There was nothing to lose for being the hero and the heroine because they would serve the food and thirty-eight households would give thirty-eight khata.   

**Q:**  From what year did they stop doing that custom?   

**A:**  The custom of hero and heroine is going on even now. To tell you the truth, we were given the freedom of religious faith if we do not make rumors and do destructive things. Therefore, if somebody would accuse us, we would explain to them we have done that (old custom) all the time, so the whole area was filled with fields and the water irrigation was very good. Having the religious freedom is really beneficial. In the old society we had to steal the water, but now it is free for irrigation. The irrigation is really amazing in this place, our fields are attached to the mountain. It was because we were doing those things (old customs). Furthermore, in the Fourth Tibetan Month, the elderly would recite the O mani prayer for five days. The elderly would bring their own food and recite the O mani mantra for five days in the winter and five days in the fourth month. We are not doing anything which would violate the constitution of the Party, so we are not afraid of cadres coming to our place.   

**Q:**  In the old society, how much land was there in this place?   

**A:**  There were about 360 khe of land. Most of the land belonged to Drepung's Ngagpa College. The remaining land was owned by the treba, according to the amount of tax that people had to do work for. The miser had to roast the barley and grind tsamba for the shiga and we had to transport the tsamba to Drepung where they would distribute it to the monks. We had to help when they were passing out the tsamba to the monks, by measuring the tsamba in a Bo [tib. འབོ] container. The monastery would give us tea and porridge. We also had to cut white thorns and deliver them to the Ngagpa College.   

**Q:**  What did they do with the thorns?   

**A:**  The thorns were used to make fried cookies for the monks.   

**Q:**  Were the cookies fried at the time of the New Year?   

**A:**  They were fried during Ganden Ngamjö. The cookies were called Dromchö Ekor [tib. སྒྲོམ་མཆོད་ཨས་ཀོར] because the cookie was as big as the women's Ekor earring. The monks were given the fried cookies and droma dresi. The Drepung Jiso would also distribute to the monks the fried cookie called Mugthung [tib. སྨུག་ཐུང] and another kind of square cookie.   

**Q:**  When you transported the tsamba and thorns, did they pay you wages?   

**A:**  They didn't pay us wages because it was done for taxes, but the Drepung Ngagpa would give us good food. After the work was done they would also give us one daso of tsamba and one daso of Torma offerings. The tea and the porridge that were given out were the same as what the monks received.   

**Q:**  How many times did you have to carry the thorns?   

**A:**  The transportation of tsamba, thorns and dung was done only once a year.   

**Q:**  When you transported the thorns, did you load it on animals and lead them?   

**A:**  Sometimes we would load it on animals, and sometimes we would carry it on our backs. When we went to the monastery, we would carry four loads of thorns on our backs.   

**Q:**  Would you arrive at the monastery just before sunset? Would you leave for the mountain very early in the morning?   

**A:**  We would not go very early. At that time, women and the donkeys were not allowed to stay overnight in the monastery. The women and donkeys would stay where the Big Applique Thanka [tib. གོས་སྐུ] was displayed. People were not allowed to keep donkeys in the monastery because in the past a donkey brayed in the monastery. The monks thought that they were beating the gong for calling the prayer assembly and went to the assembly hall.   

**Q:**  Did you have to stay overnight in the monastery?   

**A:**  Yes.   

**Q:**  Did you have bedding there?   

**A:**  We would borrow bedding from some of the monks who were from this place and others that were not. We would also cover ourselves with the goat skin that was used for carrying the thorns, and we would sleep where the oxen were kept. The people who didn't have animals would ask for lodging with some of the monk households and others would just sleep near the rocks. The next day, we would go back home very quickly. I never felt tired because I was young. On the way back, we would lift stones as a sport. The travelers would watch us while we were playing with the stones. Now, we have a stone to be lifted which was brought from the place called Nyetang Ngönpo Dong [tib. སྔོན་པོ་གདོང]. We let the young girls carry the stones on their backs. On the fourth day of the New Year we lift the stones.   

**Q:**  How many people did you have in your household?   

**A:**  I was staying with the main family. There were seven of us. After I got together with my wife, we got separated. That was in the year 1965.   

**Q:**  In 1959, at the time of the reforms, did they ever confiscate your land or did they distribute lands to you?   

**A:**  In the year 1966, two khe and ten dre of my land were confiscated by that cadres who were from Tsang. They were then given to the person I supposedly killed. At the time of the reforms, the lands that belonged to Drepung Ngagpa were divided amongst the treba according to the number of people there were. In this area, there were no households who had lands to be distributed to people other than that of the Drepung Ngagpa. All of us were treba. There were no people who had joined the revolt and had their properties confiscated and distributed. There was a shidö of the Nyipo Shiga who had a few belongings that were divided to those who did corvée labor.   

**Q:**  Did you ever become a monk?   

**A:**  No. There were five children at home. Four sons had to go to Lhoka. My parents told them that one of my eyes was blind, so I was kept at home. I was kept at home because our lord was Sera's Phorongkha and we had to pay mibo to our lord. When the miser got the permission to be a monk they would be exempt from paying the mibo.   

**Q:**  Did your brothers have any place to go in Lhoka?   

**A:**  In the beginning they became monks in Drepung's Ngagpa College. When the shidö of the Phodrang [tib. ཕོ་བྲང] went to Lhoka, my brothers were taken to Lhoka as his servants. That shiga of Drepung Ngagpa was located in Lhoka. Later, my brothers lost their celibacy and stayed in Lhoka. They belonged to Drepung Ngagpa, so my brothers didn't have to pay any mibo. My late mother also didn't have to pay the mibo fee. In those early times, they were not called Sera Phorongkha, but were called Tshatru Labrang [tib. ཚ་སྤྲུལ་བླ་བྲང]. Nowadays, they are called Phorongkha. In the past, they were called by the name of the lama of the labrang.   

**Q:**  How much mibo did you have to pay?   

**A:**  I heard that it was three trangga per year. Money was very valuable. Nowadays that much money is worth much less. We didn't have to pay the mibo because my brothers became monks. My parents also told them that one of my eyes was blind so we didn't have to pay the mibo. The lord wanted me to become his servant, but they told him that I was blind. Therefore, I didn't have to go.   

**Q:**  You stayed at home, right?   

**A:**  I took care of the taxes from the age of fifteen.   

**Q:**  How many households were there?   

**A:**  At the time of the reforms, there were twelve households. Now we have thirty-eight households.   

**Q:**  The manner of farming is still the same, right?   

**A:**  It is exactly the same. The only difference is that the miser had to irrigate the fields at night because the big reservoir had not yet been built. After the reforms, the big reservoir was built so we didn't have to irrigate the fields at night. In those early days, the amount of water available for irrigation was divided according to the number of fields a person had. Most of the water was used for the land that belonged to Drepung Ngagpa.   

**Q:**  How was the crop yield before the reservoir was built?   

**A:**  The crop yield was more or less the same as at the present time, except before we didn't have any of the winter wheat. The yield of the winter wheat is much higher than the crops planted in the spring. If we count the winter wheat, the yield is much better now.   

**Q:**  The yield of the barley is more or less the same, right?   

**A:**  Yes. Now people have to use chemical fertilizer. It has become a habit. The package of the chemical fertilizer has become smaller, but the price has gone up and the quality has become worse. There is no choice but to use it though. At the beginning of the gentsang the package was bigger and the price was lower. The chemical fertilizer makes the crops grow to be tall with longer ears of grain. It is very good for the winter wheat.   

**Q:**  How much does the fertilizer cost?   

**A:**  The fertilizer to be used for deep planting [tib. གཏིང་ལུད] is 100 yuan for a package. The top dressing [tib. ཁ་ལུད] is 54 yuan. No matter whether it is expensive or not, we don't have any choice but to use the fertilizer.   

**Q:**  During the time of the rukhag, you merged your land into the rukhag. How much land did you merge?   

**A:**  I merged eight khe and ten dre of land. Also two yaks, two donkeys, eighteen goats and some sheep were merged. Only the cow was left for the owner. I was left alone after that. A plowing dzo would cost 80 yuan.   

**Q:**  Did the people remain alone from their own will?   

**A:**  As I mentioned above. I was falsely accused of killing my relative and was left alone [out of the rukhag] for three years. My class rank was the made into that of a rich farmer. Later, the cadres said, "In Tibet the people who had a gang of land for serving as a soldier, the people who managed a dzong and the people who joined the revolt, are the rich farmers. Phüntso is a middle farmer."   

**Q:**  When you were left alone, you had to work for yourself right?   

**A:**  The cadres told people not to talk to me, therefore nobody was talking with me. Before that, the ngadag were left alone like that. I was a rich farmer, but people held hatred and were biased towards me [tib. དགའ་མིན་དགའ་དྭོགས].   

**Q:**  When you were left alone wasn't that good, like the gentsang now, in the sense of getting to work for yourself?   

**A:**  Yes, I would do my work and then take a rest. The people who were in the rukhag had to work every day so the cadres leaving me alone and people not talking to me was not that bad. The worst thing that happened was that they let me stand on the Arka floor for one month and six days and made my leg like this. They interrogated me, but I didn't have anything to say. So, I was bowing over standing on the floor all the time. I told the cadre, if I would tell you that I killed him, even if I didn't, I know the policy would be lenient on me, but if I say that I killed him, you would ask me "How did you kill him?" How can I tell you the way that I killed a person, if I didn't kill him? You would also ask me, "What crime did you commit for killing that person?" and I would say, I didn't commit a crime. The worst thing is, my leg has become useless. The superiors told us that we can do whatever business that we are able to but I could not do much. I could have managed my livelihood well, but how can I go out with this leg? If I had really killed people, and if I would have been executed immediately, I would not have had any regrets. After suffering all of this loss, they said I didn't kill the person they said I had.   

**Q:**  How much land did you get at the time of the gentsang?   

**A:**  I got eleven mu, one fen and nine li. The land was distributed according to the number of people there were. Even if a baby was born on the eve of the day that they were going to distribute the land, that baby would get his share of land. The children born after that didn't get any land.   

**Q:**  Did they also distribute plowing animals?   

**A:**  They did not return the animals that were merged initially into the rukhag, but they distributed the plowing animals, sheep, and goats according the number of people and the number of the animals that they had at that point of time.   

**Q:**  How many animals did you get?   

**A:**  I got one-and-a-half plowing animals. When two households were given one plowing animal, they would plow their fields in turn or one party could pay half the price of the animal to the other party and take possession of the animal.   

**Q:**  Did they distribute sheep and goats?   

**A:**  Yes, those were also distributed according to the number of people. I got five sheep and three-and-a-half goats. At that time, my wife and I had three children.   

**Q:**  How many family members do you have now?   

**A:**  I have a bride for my son and a grandson. Altogether we have seven people.   

**Q:**  In this village, what is your economic condition?   

**A:**  I am in the middle economic condition. There are rich and poor people in this village. I am not rich, but I am self-reliant and I don't need to ask for relief.   

**Q:**  How are the relationships amongst people in this area? Have they become better or worst compared with the previous time?   

**A:**  In the past, the relations between people were very good. But nowadays the relationships are not as close.   

**Q:**  Do the people hold any hatred or jealousy [tib. ཞེ་སྡང] towards each other?   

**A:**  Yes. Now the relationships have become a bit worse. Probably it has changed for the worse because most of the people around are youngsters. People will be friendly with a person for a month or so, and then they are friendly with someone else just after that.   

**Q:**  People are not that steadfast, right?   

**A:**  Yes. But generally speaking, the relationships between people in this area are not that bad. In other parts of the rukhag, there were people fighting and the matter had to be reported to the xiang. In this village people never fought with each other, even though there are many young guys.   

**Q:**  Is there any policy about birth control in this area?   

**A:**  Yes, it has been three years since people have practiced birth control. They practiced birth control partially to abide the order from above and partially because they were afraid of having too many children.   

**Q:**  Was birth control done voluntarily?   

**A:**  Yes. Most people were doing that voluntarily. They didn't do everything exactly according to the order. But, they were doing it because some families were having too many children. Some people said that one child would be enough for us, so they did the birth control voluntarily.   

**Q:**  Were there any punishments for birth control?   

**A:**  In the beginning when they were announcing it, they said it in a strict manner, but later on they didn't punish anyone.   

**Q:**  How is religion flourishing in this area compared with the past?   

**A:**  Compared with the beginning period of the gentsang, although people are doing some religious practices together, such as reciting the o mani mantra, they are also doing it privately in their own houses. Actually, reciting the o mani mantra was meant to ensure good irrigation. After hearing many different stories about celebrating the birthday of the Dalai Lama [tib. འཁྲུང་ལྷ་དབྱར་གསོལ], and about the fifteenth day of the fourth month, the birthday, the Enlightenment Day and the Death Anniversary of the Buddha, people are a little bit afraid of doing religious practice. But the superiors haven't said that people are not allowed to do religious practices that come from the past. They [leaders] said doing chögor, divinations and going into trance are not allowed.   

**Q:**  What is the main burden for the masses?   

**A:**  In this, the upper part of the valley, people don't have any burdens. People are not afraid of doing religious practices that might cause the superiors to say something to them. I do not go outside, but some people come to my house and they are not saying anything about their fears of what will happen in the future.   

